ota i a ie OS ea 


SEVEN LECTURES 


ON THE 


SECOND COMING 


or 


THE LORD. 


DELIVERED IN TORONTO, IN 1863, 
BY 


J. N. DARBY. 
FROM REVISED NOTES. 


TORONTO : 
GOSPEL TRACT DEPOSITORY, 
870, Yonae Street, 


1863. 


. a Re At 


CONTENTS. 


LecturE I.—The Coming of the Lord the proper hope 
_of the Church. 


‘¢ IL—The purposes of God concerning the 
Church, 


‘¢ TII.—The taking up of the Church of God and 
the first Resurrection. 


‘¢ IV.—The Restoration of the Jews to their place 
as a Nation on the Earth. 


‘¢ —-'V.—The Judgement of the professing Church. 


‘¢ VI.—The Government of God on the Earth in 
3 connection with the Jews as a centre, 
and the Judgment of the Gentiles. 


‘¢ VII.—The same—Conclusion. 


LECTURES ON THE SECOND COMING, 


LECTURE 1. 


I THESSALONIANS I 


Goronte : 
GOSPEL TRACT DEPOSITORY. 
(MRS, DRE W, 370, YONGE STREET.) 


Price Four Cents. 


NOTES OF A LECTURE 


ON 


lst TuessaALonians J. 


MeeET1ING Hovse, Alexander Street, 
Toronto, March 25, 1863, 

What I would desire to bring before you is, the coming 
of the Lord as the proper hope of the Church, and to show 
you that it is constantly, increasingly brought before it as 
such hy the Spirit of God. When once the foundation 
is laid of His first coming as that which brings personally. 
peace and salvation, and even before it, so far as it is 
a means of awakening the conscience, the one thing the 
saints were taught to look for was, the coming of the 
Lord. No doubt the first thing the soul needs to know 
is the ground of its salvation. When this is known the 
Lord Himself becomes precious to the believer, and when 
the Church was in a healthy state we shall find that the 
hearts of the saints were altogether set upon Him, and 
looking for His coming. And now our hearts should un- 
derstand, as I shall show you from Scripture was the 
case then, that the coming of Christ, is not some strange 
speculation, or the advanced idea of a few, but was 
set before the Church as elementary and foundation truth, 
and formed a part of all their habits and feelings, and 
mingled itself with every thought. It was and is the key- 
stone of all that keeps up the heart in this solitary place, 


(looking at it as journeying through the wilderness), and 
with a heart full of love for God, and the desire to seo 
Christ, we can appreciate the Apostle’s prayer for us :— 
‘¢The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and 
into the patient waiting* for Christ.” We have not long 
to wait, and it is worth being patient for. We shall find 
too that the teaching of Scripture as to Christ’s second 
coming casts wonderful light on the value of his first com- 
ing. For His second coming, as regards the Saints, is to 
complete as regards their bodies, so bringing them into 
the full result of salvation, that work of life giving power 
Christ has already wrought in their souls, founded on the 
complete title in righteousness which he has effected for 
them on the cross. He comes to receive them to Him- 
self, that where he is there they may be also, to chango 
their vile bodies and fashion them like His glorious body. 
For the saints the resurrection is a resurrection of life, 
not of judgment. It is a raising in glory or changing 
into it by the Lord’s power those that are already quick- 


~ ened and justified. When people, Christian people too, 


are looking for judgment, and saying with Martha, ‘I 
know he,shall rise again in tho resurrection at the last 
day,” they forget the judgment of the quick ; that then 
is the judgment of this world, they are all caught eating 
and drinking, sudden destruction cometh upon them as 
travail upon a woman with child, and, they shall not es- 
cape. People don’t like that, they put off God’s judg- 
ment to a vague and indefinite period, when they hope 
all will be well. They think that then will be decided 
their final state, they trust, for blessing. There is surely 
a judgment, but all their thoughts about it area mistake. 
The matter is decided now. He that believeth is not | 
condemned, and he that believeth not is condemned al- 
ready. If wereceive the statements of Scripture all is 


*Properly, ‘the patience of Christ,’ who is also waiting. 


5 


as simple as possible :—That the first coming of Christ to 
do His Father’s will was so complete in its efficacy that 
thvy who belong to that first coming, who have part in 
its efficacy by faith, are cleansed, justified, forgiven by 
its virtue, and that when He comes the second time He 
comes to bring them tu glory. The moment I get hold 
of the truth that the coming is, for believers, to reveive 
them to Himself, the moment I see that His coming the 
second time is to bring in the glory, to change us into 
His own likeness and to have us with Him, it affects 
everything, instead of being an unimportant thing. I 


* believe death is the most blessed thing that can happen 


to aman, but it is not the thing I am looking for. Iam 
looking to see Him. He might come to-morrow, or to- 
night or now. Don’t you think it would spoil all your 
plans? Suppose you thought he might come, would it 
not make a difference in your thoughts? You know it 
would. Suppose a wife expects her husband to return 
from a journey, don’t you think there would be an 
effort to have everything ready? Another thing I have 
found to be specially blessed is, that it connects me with 
Christ so nearly, I do not think merely of going to heaven 
and being happy—a vague thought that, of course, I shall 
be perfectly happy. Surely we shall. The divine pres- 
ence will shed sure and endless blessing around. But one 
is coming whom I know, who loves me, who has given 
Himself for me, whom I have learned to love. I shall be 
with him for ever. Christ becomes personally more in. 
view, more the object of our thoughts. Nothing so 
powerful as that, and nothing so powerful as scripture 
for everything. It deals with the soul in the power of 
divine light. It reveals Christ, brings the heart’s judg- 
ment into His presence. It convicts every thought of 
the heart, showing what it isin truth. There are three 
ways in which Christ is pointed to in Scripture—on the 
cross at His first coming ; sitting on the right hand. of 


6 


God ; and, He is coming again. In the first he has laid 
the foundation of that which I have in Him. The foun- 
dation was on the cross, and now that he is sitting on the 
right hand of God He has sent us the Holy Ghost the 
comforter while waiting His -.curn, giving to those in 
whom He dwells the full certainty of faith as to the effi- 
cacy of His work and their own redemption, God’s love 
and their own adoption thus leading them to desire with 
ardent hope His coming again. Having thus given a 
general idea of the place Christ’s coming holds in Scrip- 
ture, I will take a few passages in different parts of the 


Word, without going fully into them now, to show that . 


it is the great truth of Scripture hope, and that all the 
thoughts, feelings, hopes, interests of God’s children are 
connected with it, That not only it is not a false, but 
that it is not a rare or strange idea, but enters into the 
whole strxcture of christian feeling. 1 Thes. i. 9, 10, 
‘* For they themselves shew of us what manner of enter- 
ing in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from 
idols to serve the living and true God: and to wait for 
His Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead, 
even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.” 
Here we find that the world was talking about this ex- 
pectation of the Christians, so sure was their expectation 
and so strong the influence which it exercised on their 
conduct, They (the disciples) were looking for God’s Son 
from Heaven, it formed a part of that: which the heathen 
were converted to ; the present waiting for God’s Son 
from Heaven so that the world took notice of it. 2nd chap. 
18, 19, ‘‘ For what is our hope, our joy, or crown of re- 
joicing ?’ Most beautiful here to see the affection of 
Paul for the saints, but to what did his heart look as the 
time when these affections would be satisfied in their bles- 
sing? The coming of Christ. Again as regards holiness 
we see exactly the same thing in the 3rd chap. 12, 13, 
‘¢ And the Lord make you increase and abound in love 


7 


one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do 
toward you : To the end he may establish your hearts un- 
blameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all His saints.” 
The coming of Christ, and His coming with all the saints 
so that it can confer but one thing, was so near to His 
spirit that He looks at their being found perfect then, 
as the object his heart desired. And in chap. iv. 13, 18, 
‘¢ But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, con- 
cerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even 
as others which have no hope. For if we believe that 
Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep 
in Jesus will God bring with Him. For this we say unto 
you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and 
remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent 
them which are asleep. For the Lord Himeelf shall des- 
cend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the 
archangel, and with the trump of God : and the dead in 
Christ shall rise first : Them which are alive and remain 
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with 
the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these 
words.” We find that, instead of the Lord’s coming be- 
ing a strange doctrine, while he could not look for the 
Christian’s dying without his going to Heaven, yet the 
comfort he gives is not that, but their return with Jesus, 
Death did not deprive them of that; God would have 
them with Him. First note, beloved friends, here the 
full assurance expressed, for living and dead saints alike, 
How do people persist in saying it is impossible to tell 
on this side the grave? The apostle dves tell for both. 
The first coming of Christ has so finished redemption and 
the putting away of sin, that His second is glory and 
being with Him for the dead and living saints. But see 
how present the coming of the Lord was to their minds. 
If I were to comfort the friends of a departed saint. by 


saying that God would bring him with Jesus when He 
came again, what would they think of me? I was mad 
or wild. Yet such is the comfort Paul gives to the Thes- 
salonians and no other, though he plainly teaches else- 
where the soul of the saint will go to heaven when he 
dies. But these examples show how the coming of the 
Lord mixed itself with every thought and feeling of chris- 
tianity then, so in his wish for christians in chap. v. 23, 
‘¢ The very God of heaven sanctify you wholly, and I pray 
God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved 
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.”— 
But the world rejects this news, and the church becomes 
worldly, has lost her value for it: not so the first disciples, 
their hearts were attached to their Master and they de- 
sired to see Him, to be like Him. They waited as a pre- 
sent condition of soul for God’s Son from Heaven. I 
have gone through these passages not merely to prove the 
doctrine but to show the way in which it connected itself 
with the whole of the christian’s life. We will turn back 
now to see the universal testimony of Scripture to the 
truth of this doctrine and the various aspects it takes, 
and first, the 24th chap. Matt. 30, 31, ‘‘ And then shall 
appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven: and then 
shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see 
the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with pow- 
er and great glory, and He shall send His angels with a 
great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together 
His elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to 
the other.’’ When the disciples ask Him the time when 
these things are to be He tells them to watch—and in 
the 44th verse, ‘‘ Therefore be ye also ready : for in such 
an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh.” But 
the Lord goes farther in the followin parables which ap- 
ply to christians. The mark of the evil servant given 
there is that he says in his heart my lord delays his com- 
ing, and thereupon Legins to eat and drink with the 


9 


drunken. They lost the expectation of the church and 
sank down into hierarchical power and into the world, 
into comfort and pleasure. But the bridegroom did tarry 
and the church lost the present expectation of Christand 
the blessed fruit of it on their souls, Mat. xxv. 1, ‘* Then 
shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, 
which tock their lamps, and went forth to meet the bride- 
groom.” There is the essence of the church’s calling.— 
They went forth, but, while the bridegroom tarried they — 
all slumbered and slept, saints as well as professors, no 
exception, they all lost the sense of what they had gone 
out to, and gave up watching. And what is it that aroused 
them from the sleepy state into which they had fallen ? 
verse 6, ‘‘ And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, 
the bridegroom cometh : go ye out to meet him.” They 
had to be called out again ; they had got into the world, 
into some place to sleep more comfortably, just where 
the professing church is now, eating and drinking with 
the drunken, and the cry is, I trust, again going forth, 
‘‘Behold, the bridegroom cometh.” And what made 
the church depart from the sense of what they had been 
called out to was saying, just what people, and christian 
people too, are saying now, ‘‘The Lord delayeth His 
coming.” They don’t say he will not come, but He 
delays it ; we are not to expect Him. I will pass over 
Mark, not that there are not plenty of passages there, 
but that what we find there is substantially the same 
as what we find in Matthew. I will go on therefore 
to the 12th chap. Luke, 35-38, ‘‘ Let your loins be girded 
about, and your lamps burning; and ye yourselves 
like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will 
return from the wedding; that when he cometh and 
knocketh, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed 
are those servants, whom the Lord when he cometh shall 
find watching ; verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird 
himself and make them sit down to meat, and will come 


OE CEE oe me we et juanbancdtas 


10 


forth to serve them. And if he shall come in the second 
watch, or come in the third, and find them go, blessed 
are those servants’”’ Remark here that the waiting for 
the coming of Christ is what characterises the christian 
according to the mind of Christ. Men speak of death, 
but death is not my Lord. We find the same truth 
pressed on men in the 17th chapter, verses 22-37, when 
this passage does not warn people as'to sin ; but as to the 
unholy thought that the world may go on indefinitely. As 
soon as Noah entered into the ark the flood came and 
destroyed them all. As soon as the Church is taken up, 
Satan having filled men’s hearts with lies, judgment will 
come, And as in the days of Noah and of Lot, they ate, 
they drank, they bought, they sold, planted and builded, 
even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of Man 
is revealed. Remark here how impossible it is to apply 
this:to the great white throne, when He sits on the great 
white throne the heavens and the earth flee away, there 
is a total destruction of everything, men will not be 
eating drinking, planting, building then. Look now at 
chap. xxi. 26 to 36, people apply this to the destruction 
of Jerusalem, that is spoken of in the 21st verse of this 
chapter : ‘‘ Then let them which are in Jerusalem flee to 
the mountains : and let them which are in the midst of 
it depart out : and let not them that are in the countries 
enter tbereinto.” But then after that Jerusalem is trodden 
down of the Gentiles till the time of the Gentiles be 
fulfilled, the time running on now till the last beast’s 
wic).edness is filled up, then come the signs and the Son 
of Man is revealed. John xiv. 1, 2,3. ‘*Let not your 
heart be troubled : ye belisve in God, believe also in me ; 
in my Father’s house are many mansions: if it were not 
‘go I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you, 
and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come 
again and receive you unto myself, that where I am there 
ye may be also.” Such is the promise left us, the comfort 


1B | 


Christ gave to his disciples when he was leaving them, 
He comes to receive them to Himself. Acts i. 9, 10, 11. 
‘¢And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he 
went up, behold, two men stood by them in white 
apparel ; which also said, ‘ye men of Galilee, why stand 
ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is 
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like 
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.” This too, 
though it be Christ coming in the clouds, is not the great 
white throne, but what is striking here is they are losing 
Christ, and what is the angels’ word to them: Why are 
ye looking up into heaven? he will come again in the 
same way. What the angels brought before them to 
comfort them when Jesus left them was that He would 
come again, and what scripture points people’s hearts to, 
to comfort and strengthen them is, that He is coming 
again. It is appointed unto man once to die and after 
that the judgment. That is the allotted portion of the 
seed of the first Adam, but as that is man’s portion, so 
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and to 
them that look for Him shail He appear the second time 
without sin unto salvation, Heb. ix. 27, 28, and Christ 
is waiting only till the fulness of the Gentiles be come 
in. We are not even all to die. We shall not all die, 
1 Cor. xv. 61.—Rom. xi. 25. : ‘‘ Por I would not, breth- 
ren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest 
ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness 
in part has happened to Israel, until the fulness of the 
Gentiles be come in.” When the Church is formed, its 
last member being brought in, when the fulness of the 
Gentiles is come in, Israel will be saved as a nation and 
the deliverer come out of Zion. Christ will appear for 
their deliverance. Again, turn to 1 Cor. hap. i, 6, 7, 
** Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in 
you: so that ye come behind in no gift: waiting for 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” All the promises 


12 


of the prophets will be fulfilled at that coming, Turn 
back to Actsiii. 19, 20, 21; ‘* Repent ye therfore, and be 
converted, that your sins may be blotted out when (read, 
so that) the times of refreshing shall come from the 
presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ, 
which before was preached unto you: whom the heavens 
must receive until the times of restitution of all things, 
which God hath spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets 
since the world began.” He had been before preached 
to them, but it is the same Jesus that had been spoken of 
to them, we can’t apply it to the Holy Ghost, for it was 
the Holy Ghost then come down who spoke by Peter and 
declared that He should come whom the heavens had 
then received. In the xvii. chap., 30, 31, the apostle is 
testifying that though God winked at the times of their 
ignorance, He now commandeth all men everywhere to 
repent ; because he hath appointed a day in the which he 
will judge the world (i.e. : this habitable earth) in right- 
eousness by that man whom he hath ordained, whereof 
he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath 
raised him from the dead. The distinctive resurrection 
of the saints will be at His coming. 1 Cor. xv. 23: 
‘¢ But every man in his own order : Christ the first fruits : 
afterward they that are Christ’s at His coming.” Ephe- 
sians and Galatians are the only two books in Scripture 
in which you do not find the coming of the Lord. The 
Galatians had got off the foundation of faith, absolute 
justification by faith in Christ, and Paul was obliged to 
return to the first principles of justification—The Epistle 
to the Ephesians takes the opposite extreme, and you see 
the Church in Christ in heaven so that it cannot speak of 
Christ coming to receive it, it is viewed as now united to 
Him there. But we shall find constant reference to it in 
the other epistles ; that it is a point kept before the mind 
for present, practical effect. Phil. iii, 19, 20, 21: 
‘¢ Whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and 


4 13 


> whose glory is itt theirshame, ‘who mind-darthly things. 
>For our-conversation is in heaven’ from whence also- we 
iiJeok-for thé Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who’ shall 
s-ghange our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto 
 +his-glorious body, according to the working’ whereby he 
‘+ is-able-even to subdue all things unto himself.” “Col. iii. 
2, 8, 4: “If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those 
“-things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right 
“hand of God. Set your‘affections on things above, not 
~-on things on the earth. For ye are dead, and your lifo 
‘ ishid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, 
~“ shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.” 
* Intho Thessalonians it is the main subject of both epistles. 
* In the firdt Epistle, oxcept the warning in the fifth chapter, 
~ it is‘ the’ blessedness of it. to the saints. In the eecond 
’ epistle the judicial character, though the glory of the eaints 
‘is included in it, for when He-executes judginent on the 
~ living we shall appear with Him in glory. 1 Tim: vi. 14. 
‘4*That thou keep this commandment without spet, unre- 
~ Bukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 
“* The apostle exhorts Timothy to go on dilizently.and fuith- 
“fully looking for the appearing. “When the word of God 
is speaking of joy to the saints, itis the coming. The 
moment he speaks af responsibility to the world.or to the 
4 saints, it is always His appearing. What, would have 
a ‘been the use of his saying to Timothy to keep the cam- 
y. “mandment until his ap, earing, if it were not practically a 
.. present expectation, and then how mighty its power on the 
~eonstience : not the very highest, motive, but one we 
“need. * And if through grace the Lord has. delayed His 
‘coming, not willing that. any shoald perish, those who 
“have acted on that expectation will have lost no fruit, of 
“their fidelity, it will find its recompense in that day. 
““2'Tim : iv.. 8. “*“Henceforth there is aid up for, mé a 
~ erown’‘of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous 
~fadge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, 
B 


14 


but unto allthem that lovo His appearing. Love! do 
you love, can you love that which will put a stop to every 
thing that is pleasant in the world? it asks the heart. 
How does this mark a spirit entirely in contrast with that 
of the world. Heb. ii. 6-0, ‘‘ For unto the angels hath 
- he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we 
speak. But one in a certain place testified, saying, what 
js man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, 
that thou visitest him ?” World to come, isthe habitablo 
‘earth. Christ is now at God’s right hand till God puts 
all things under His feet. Chap. ix. 24, ‘* For Christ is 
not entered into the holy places made with hands, which 
aro the figures of the true: but into heaven itself, now 
to appear in the presence of God for us.” There was a 
state of probation before man was turned out of paradise ; 
since then mau has indeed been tried up to the death of 
Christ, whether law or prophets or the mi sion of God’s 
Son couldiwin him back, but in vain. What man finds 
out now is, that he is lost. But then, that when man’s 
. sin was complete, God’s work began, and 1edemption is 
by the cross on which man crucified the Lord. Sin was 
complete then ;: but He appeared to put away sin by the 
sacrifice of Himself; that work is completed and thoso 
who through grace believe und have part in it, await the 
same Saviour to come agein fur their final deliverance. 
James v. 8. Be ye alse patient: stablish your hearts, 
for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. Here again 
we see how it is presented asa present motive for patience 
and to be. looked for in daily life as sustaining the soul 
in patience yet as that which was to change the whole 
state of the world. In 1 Peter we have a remarkable 
testimony to the order of Gods ways in this respect. 
First the prophets who learned, in studying their. own 
prophecies that what they testified was not to be fultilled 
in their day, next the gospel but that not the fulfilment. 
In it the things are reported with the Holy Ghost sent 


ve! do 
every 
heart. 
th that 
ls hath 
eof we 
ry, what 
f man, 
bitable 
d puts 
hrist is 
which 
f, now 
was a 
‘adise ; 
sath of 
God’s 
n finds 
man’s 
tion is 
in was 


by the © 


thoso 
uit tho 
ance. 
hearts, 
again 
stienco 
6 soul 
whole 
rkablo 
aspect. 
iY own 
ultilled 


lment. 
st sent 


15 


down from heaven. The saints are called on to be sober 
and hope to the end for the grace to be brought to them 
at the appearing of Jesus Christ, whom having not seen 
we love, The time of the saints receiving the promise is 
the appearing of Christ. 1 Pet. i. 1-13. In second 
Peter you may remark that he makes the slighting this 
promise, the calling it in question because the world was 
going on as it had, to be the sign of the scoffera of the 
last days. In 1 John it is mentioned in chapter ii. 23, 
for the conscience as ground of warning, but in the third 
chapter 1-3 we have it amply used for the heart and waik 
of the saints. Now are we sons of God, it doth not yet 
appear what we shall be: but we know that, when He 
shall appear, we shall be like Him ; for we shall see Him 
as He is: and he that hath this hope iu Him purifieth 
himself, even as He is pure. Our blessed and assured 
hope is to be like Christ Himself. That we shall bo 
when He appears. The present effect of this special hope 
is that the saint purifies himself even as He is pure, seeks 
to be as like Him now as possible, takes his part with 
Himself at His appearing as his motive and standard of 
walk. Jude 14. And Enoch also, the seventh from 
Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord 
cometh with ten thousand of His saints. The epistle is 
striking in this, it shews the decline of the church tho 
false brethren coming in unawarés who in character des- 
ignated the state of the professing church in the last days 
and the object of the judgment.of the Lord when Ho 
would appeur. The whole book of. Revelation refers to 
this, it is an account of the preparatory judgmont of God, 
on to the 19th chapter when the Lord comes forth to 
execute judgment. He has accomplished the work of 
salvation and is sitting at the right hand of God. And 
then comes to set all things right. This makes His 
coming, besides the righteous display of His own glory, 
of God’s eternal Son as man the centre of all things, of 


16 


suuchimportance:: It alone actually makes good the plans 
uvand,.counsels of God. Glory is founded. on: His first 
«@oming. ; TRhat morally speaking surpasses all glory. « It 
: da.the absolute display of what God is, when evil is come 
sdnyebut at Hissecond coming only the actual.result will 
.«: be: made: manifest..: He comes to receive the church to 
:\ Himself, the witness of sovereign grace, and to.order the 
:wworld: subject:to Him, in the power of His kingdom in 
vvblessing, and so display the government of God. TillHe 
comes neither,can take place. We enjoy the full revela- 
tion of Him from whum all that blessing flows, and enjoy 
. dt:here in a nature suited to it and flowing from it, ‘but 
«We wait for the results:for ourselves and for this burdened 
acavorld, |: We love his appearing. | How. is it: with you ? 
 @re.you. linked with the world Ho subverts when:He 
>, @omes, or with Him who brings the fulness of blessing, 
x though with judgment on what hindered it! ‘Were: Ho 
1; t0 come now. would it be your awaited joy and delight 1 
‘,Ov, does it-alarm. and try your hearts? The Loid give 
«you to.answer before His face.’ I have sought this even- 
1. ing to. shew: you how it forms the coustant.topic of Serip- 
ncture, and enters as a present. expectation into the whole 
» atructure/ of the. habits of thought of.those, who:were 
 Saught by: the apostles, by the Spirit: of God: Himeelf, 
, how: its: loss was, the.sign of the church’s decline an. 
~ Sinking, into. woxldliness and the world. LIJleave it. to:the 
wplesged: Spirit of God to bring this divine: teaching: home 
sctoacall,; our, consciences. To wait: truly: for Christjawe 
ov Taust; hhaveour:conaciences purged by His:ficat eoming, 
and ourdeerts fized:on;Him that ia:to.come. 


“To Levelb& Gibeot, PHaters, Toronto. 


=A LECTURES ON THE SECOND COMING, 
ory. : It 
is come 
sult will 
hurch to 
rder the 
ydom in 
Till-He 
1 revela- 


sor EPHESIANS I. 


urdened 
th-you ? 
hen:He: 
leasing, 
ere‘Ho 
lelight 1 
nd give 
is even- By J. N. D. 
f Serip- 
@ whole 
o--were 
limeelf, 
Ne.aL 
i to:the 
> home 
ist;: swe 


oming, 


LECTURE Il. 


ee SS 


ve e > 
Woronte : 
GOSPEL TRACT DEPOSITORY. 
as (MRS. DREW, 370, YONGE STREET.) 


Price Eight Cents. 


Se ee a. 


NOTES OF A LECTURE 


ON 


Epuesians I. 


Meerrina Hovsg, Alexander Street, 
Toronto, April 1, 1863. 


Last Wednesday night I mentioned that the two Epis- 
tles in which the second coming of the Lord is not spoken 
of, are the Galatians and the Ephesians. It may seem 
stranye that, this being the case, I should have selected 
on this occasion the chapter we have just read. But I 
have done so, and shall refer to other passages, with the 
same intention—desiring to found all I say upon Scrip- 
ture—because that chapter gives us a general view of the 
whole scheme and plan, that will be fully accomplished at 
the second coming of our Lord. It does not speak of the 
fact of Christ’s coming, but it does teil of the purpose 
which God has, and that will then be accomplished. And 
not only that, but it shows us the way in which the 
church of God—I mean all true saints gathered to Christ 
by the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven—at the com- 
ing of Christ, have a portion or part in it—-what their 
place in this great plan of God is, that plan having ne- 
cessarily for its centre the exaltation of the Son, ‘‘the 
brightness of God’s glory.” He was humbled to be ex- 
alted. The way in which God has dealt with us, beloved 


SPER 


RG aS aa REC oo ene ———— 
SS gO oem 
Seacsnentieiietntilineiaidelicaecneanindiionesdinadea ee nan 


AI EES SLRS, 


er ae os 


pepenves SE Se? a 
—— SS SE ORI ES SR eS ot ee 
SS LOE OLE IT OE LE IL LE I LE OE COI A A CR A a rt Ty 


4 


friends, is this. He has brought us completely to Him- 

self, having respect to the whole value of Christ’s work, 

and in doing that, He has given us a place with Christ, 

makes us like Christ ; and having thus made us near to 
Himself, He then unfolds to us all his plans. It is not 
merely being made safe, but, being brought as children 
to God, ‘‘all things are yours, and ye are Christ’s, and 
Christ is God’s.” But then having done that, he treats 
you—as His expression is to Abruham, and as Christ’s 
expression is to His disciples—as friends. The Lord says 
‘¢Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?” 
And what He then told Him was not merely that he per- 
sonally was in His favor. That He told him long before. 

He does not merely show him the promises which be- 
longed to him and his seed. But He told him too what 
concerned the world, and did not immediately concern 
himself. That was the special mark of friendship. If I 
am dealing with a man with whom I am on good terms, 
but not on terms of friendship, I tell him whatever is 
needed with regard to the business between us, according 
to the common courtesies of life, and there itends. But 
if I have a friend, I tell him what isin my heart. That 
is what God does with His children—as Christ said to 
His disciples, ‘‘ Henceforth I call you not servants, for 
the servant knoweth not what his Lord doeth : but I have 
called you friends ; for all things that I have heard of my 
Father I have made known unto you.” And there is not 
a greater proof of the extent to which the church has lost 
its conscious indentity with Christ, than its giving up its 
expectation of the coming of Christ. And why is that, 
but because there are so many whose hearts do not enter 
into this thought, that God has brought them so near to 
Himself that they are considered as having been taken 
into His family. ‘Sons and daughters,” the expression 
is, and sons and daughters too of full age. That was not 
their position under the law. Therefore it is said that 


oN te IO RI a ert 


ie sm 


azaeoaoeeewrrwr YT 


— 
~~ 


5 


‘* the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing from 
a servant, though he be lord of all. But when the ful- 
ness of the time was come, God sent forth His Son,made 
of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that 
were under the law, that we might receive the adoption 
of sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth 
the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying Abba Fa- 
ther.” And, because you have the Spirit, because you 
have an unction from the Holy one, you know all things, 
having the consciousness of being sons of God, sons of 
full age, so as to possess the confidence of the Father.— 
And the same Spirit, which is the Spirit of adoption, un- 
folds to us all the things-which are freely given to us of 
God. ‘It is written, eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things 
which God hath prepared for them that love Him.”” And 
there people generally stop, whereas the apostle goes on 
to say, in order to shew the difference between that and 
our state, ‘‘But God hath revealed them unto us by 
His Spirit ; for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 
deep things of God. Now we have received, not the 
spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God ; that 
we might know the things which are freely given to us of 
God.” ‘Now is it not a strange thing that people should 
quote that passage which declares that man’s heart hath 
not conceived the things which God hath prepared for 
them that love Him, aud should pass over the declar- 
ation which follows, and which contrasts the position 

of Christians, saying God hath revealed them unto 

them, and given them the Spirit to enable them to 

understand them ? And is it not a sorrowful thing, when 

the Lord hath put us in such a place that He confides to 
us, poor creatures as we are, in a certain sense the glory 
of Christ, having confided to us all His thoughts about 

Christ, that we should gay, ‘‘ Oh! we cannot pretend to 
such things as that?” I won’t say it is ingratitude—it is 


Sa er 1a AEE Th ETS 


6 


worse, it is dishonouring the love God hath shewn to us. 
Suppose a child were to say, ‘‘I do not pretend to the 
confidence of my father; I do not want that, I am 
simply willing to obey him,” I would say to such a one, 
‘‘you are a very unhappy child, extremely unhappy, 
you do not know what a child’s place is.” It is just that 
which the apostle brings out in this chapter. He first 
speaks—although I do not dwell upon that now—not 
that it is not precious, I thought, while reading, how 
sweet it was—he speaks in the early part of the chapter 
of the place in which we are set before God—‘‘ that we 
should be holy and. without blame before him in love, 
having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by 
Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good pleasure 
of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, where- 
in he hath made us accepted in the beloved ; in whom 
we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness 
of sins.” You are brought into God’s likeness of right- 
eousness and holiness before God—‘‘ holy and without 
blame before him in love.” You are brought into the 
place of sons, having the adoption of children, and you 
have got the forgiveness of your sins and are accepted in 
the beloved Himself. That is the place you are brought 
into. There is no other place for a christian. And now, 
says the Lord, having put you there, I am going to tell 
you what my plan is for Christ’s glory and your glory 
along with him. He says, wherein—that is, in ‘‘ the 
riches of his grace ”—-‘‘ he hath abounded toward us in 
all wisdom and prudence ; having made known unto us 
the mystery of his will, occording to his good pleasure ‘1 f 
which he hath purposed in Himself ; that in the dispen- 
sation of thefulness of times ”—He hath not only given 

us this redemption, so that we know where we are in our 
relationship to God, but, being in this relationship, has 

shewn us all this of his plan—‘‘ that in the dispensation 

of the fulness of times he might gather together in one | 


a REI IR Be 


7 


all things in Christ, both which are in heaver, and which 
are on earth, even in him.” Mark where we are con- 
nected with it: “in him: in whom also we have 
obtained an inheritance.” We are heirs, as the apostle 
says to the Romans, ‘‘ heirs of God, and joint heirs with 
Christ.” That is, God says, Iam going to give all to 
Christ, I am to gather together in one all things which 
are in heaven and on earth in Him’; and with Him you 
are joint heirs—with Him you have got the inheritance. 
That is the way in which the chapter presents to us the 
purpose and thought of God. Now just look at various 
passages which shew how He brings that about, and the 
way in which, beloved friends, He will take us to put us 
into the inheritance. For it is that we are waiting for. 
We are not waiting to be heirs, but we are waiting for 
the inheritance. We are not waiting to be sons—-we are 
all the children of God through faith in Christ Jesus— 
but we are waiting to get what belongs to the sons. 
Poor earthen vessels that we are here in the wilderness, 
we are waiting for that. He hath givenus ‘‘the Holy 
Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, 
until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto 
the praise of His glory.” That is : the glory of His grace 
we have got, the redemption ; but the glory we have not 
got—that we are waiting for. This is the order of his 
prayer withal: our calling, our nearness to God ; our 
inheritance, that is, everything of which we are heirs 
along with Christ, and then there is the power which 
brings us into it—that is, the very same power which 
raised Christ from the dead, has raised every believer 
out of his state of death in sin to the same place with 
Christ. And, having brought them into one, at the end 
he shews us the place to which Christ is raised—‘ at his 
own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all 
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and 
every name that is named, not only in this world, but 
in that which is to come ; and hath. put all things under 


8 LE RES ET Me ao 


Senet FLL 


a a a a 


8 


his feet, and gave him to he the head over all things to 
the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that 
filleth all in all.” This enables us to see a little of the 
way in which God accomplishes His plan, and it was to 
shew what that plan is that I read this chapter—‘ That 
in the dispensation of the fulness of times He might 
gather together in one all things in Christ, both which 
are in heaven and which are on earth”—under Christ as 
the Head. But when Christ takes this place as man— 
of course as God He is over all always—but when He 
takes this place as man, we take the inheritance along 
with Him. We are joint heirs—‘ in whom also we have 
obtained an inheritance.’’ And, again in Romans, ‘if 
children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with 
Christ.” Now the principle of that is what many Chris- 
tians are sadly unmindful of, having lost the conscious- 
ness of the way in which they have been brought by God 
into the same place as Christ, who became a man on 
purpose to bring ug into the same place with Himself. 
‘©The glory which thou gavest me I have given them.” 
If He. is a Son, so are we. He is our life, our righteous- 
ness, and we share His glory, the fruit,of righteousness. 
When He was transfigured, Moses and Elias appeared in 
the same glory, talking familiarly with Him. And we 
should consider that the Lord hath come down in lowli- 
ness and humiliation amongst us, that our hearts might 
get near enough to Him to understand that. Having 
got the plan then, we shall now go through some pass- 
ages of Scripture to shew how the Lord brings it about. 
If you will turn to the 2nd Psalm, you will see the way 
in which the Lord was first presented on earth to have 
the earthly dominion, and was rejected—the words are 
quoted in the New Testament, but do not give our por- 
tion of the inheritance at all—we shall see immediately 
how the two things are connected. ‘‘ Why do the heath- 
en rage, and the people imagine a vain thing ? The kings 


Tete 


9, 


of the earth set themselves, and the rulers. take | council . 
together, against the Lord, and against His, anointed,” 
This is quoted by Peter with reference to, Herod and’, 
Pilate, dc. ‘* He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh, - ; 
the Lord shall have them in derision”—that is, Christ 
Himself shall have them in derision—‘ Then shall he. 
speak unto them in His wrath, and vex them in His sore . 
displeasure.” That is not come yet. ‘‘Yethaye I set 
my king upon my holy hill of Zion ”—in spite of all this 
rejection—‘‘TI will declare the decree: the Lord hath 
said unto me, Thou art my son ; this day have I begot-_ 
ten thee. Ask of meand I shall give thee the heathen, 
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth. 
for thy possessions. Thou shalt break them with a rod 
of iron ; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's’. 
vessel. » These judgements of course are not come yet. 
And now, as confirmatory of what I have just said, let. 
me ask you to turn to the book of Revelation, at the end. 
of the 2nd chapter, to shew the way in which we are con- . 
nected with Christ. ‘‘He that overcometh, and keepeth. 
my works unto the end, to him will I give power over 
the nations : and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; 
as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers ; 3 
even as I received of my Father.” I refer to this now 
for the purpose of shewing that even in such things the , 


saints are connected with Christ—although these of course, 


are not the most blessed things in which they, are con- 
nected with Him. It is said immediately afterwards— 
‘and I will give him the morning star ”—Christ Himself, 
and this is infinitely more precious. But still He asso- 
ciates them with Himself in all His glory. He re- 
ceives these heathens for His inheritance and breaks them, 
in pieces, and so shall you with Him, if you are faithful, 
It is strange to see how the Church of God hag. lost. the , 
sense of all things, and I refer to these passages to shew, 
how the saints are associated with Christ, even with,re-,, 
a2 


; 


NOE ene OSHA ST WRSANA Aas race eearice di accent anh 


10 


ference.to those extreme cases. ‘*Do ye not know,” 
says Pan) to the Corinthians, ‘‘ that the saints shall judge 
the world.” He tells them just to think of that,and then 
to consider whether they were not worthy ‘‘to judg. the 
smallest matters,” speaking of saints going to law with 
one another. Are you not able, any of you, tosettle the 
commonest things between yourselves—‘‘know ye not 
that we shall judge angels?” It was necessary to tell 
them this, because they had not got hold of a right under- 
standing of the place in which Christ has put the saints, 
because they did not see their association with Christ, in 
all the fulness of its meaning. I have referred to this 
association with Christ in judgment, not at all because 
it is the most blessed part of it, but as confirmatory of 
what I have said about the association of the saints with 
Christ. Observe that the 2nd Psalm speaks of Christ’s 
coming and being rejected. Peter quotes it in that views 
and Paul also the words, ‘‘Thou art my son, this day 
have I begotten thee.” And, being rejected, the Lord, 
that is, Christ, is there represented as laughing—which 
is of course a figure—at all the raging of the nations, and 
it is said that the time will come when he will sit in Zion 
in spite of them all, and have all the world given him 
for His inheritance. That, however, does not present 
Him in the place, in which the New Testament largely 
represents Him. Here He is only connected with ths 
fate of the Jews, and the judgment of the heathen and 
rebels at the time of the end. At His first coming, He 
was rejected as Christ, the Messiah, the anointed. And 
mark what light this throws even upon the Gospel. We 
find Christ charging His disciples strictly that they should 
no more say He was the Christ, because He was to be 
rejected, for ‘‘ the Son of man,” He says, “shall suffer 
many things.” It was, as if He had said—‘‘I am not 
now to take my place as King of Zion. I come in ano- 
ther way. I come to be the suffering son of man, in or- 


ll 


der that I may afterwards take a far higher place of 
glory.” You find accordingly in Luke and the other gos- 
pels, that He strictly charges His disciples not to say that 
He was the Christ, because that was really over, in con- 
sequence of His being rejected. Now take the 8th 
Psalm—‘‘ O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name 
in all the earth ! who hast set thy glory above the hea- 
vens. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou 
ordained strength, because of thine enemiés ; that thou 
mightest still the enemy and the avenger.” This, you 
know, was fulfilled, when He rode upon the ass’s colt 
into Jerusalem. ‘‘ What is man, that thou art mindful 
of him, and the Son of man that thou visitest him ? 
For thou hast made him a little lower than the 
angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour. 
Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of 
thy hands : thou hast put all things under his feet.” It 
is there intimated that, though as Christ He was rejected, 
the consequence of His being rejected was that He takes 
His place as Son of man, in which He was to have every- 
thing put under His feet. You wili see how the apostle 
reasons on that in the New Testament. These two 
Psalms show His coming among the Jews, an@ being re- 
jected, and yet His taking His place over these rebels in 
spite of them at the end. But the present consequence 
of His rejection is that He takes the place which he al- 
ways gives Himself in the Gospels of being the Son of 
Man. Coming to the New Testament, you will find this 
8th Psalm is quoted in the chapter I have just read from 
the Ephesians, ‘‘ Hath put all things under His feet” 
and, being in that place, ‘‘ gave Him to be the head over 
all things to the church, which is His body.” The church 
is His body, making the complete man, and is therefore 
said to be ‘‘ the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.”— 
Christ is a divine person, though a man, and filleth all 
things, but it is the church which makes Him, as the 


WANN aM a ata BRT Anarchs a Ma 


PED SpA AARNE HEE 


12 


Son of man, complete, makes up what is called the 
mystical Christ of which, He is the head, all the members 
of the church making up His body. The church there- 
fore, is as closely associated with Him, as a man’s own 
flesh,is with himself, This is the comparison employed: 


in the 5th Ephesians—‘‘ No man ever yet hated his own, 
flesh ; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even asthe Lord: 
the Church ; for we are members of His body, of His, 


flesh, and of His bones.” And in this body there being 


but one Spirit, *the Church is associated with Christ as.. 
taking the headship over everything. We see Christ, the. 


Son of Man, in the counsels of God ‘set over everything. 
in| heaven and on earth, and we, as being close to Him, 


His redeemed ones, His brethren, joint heirs, and mem-: 
bers of His body, are completely identified with Him in’ 
His place of headship.. You thus see the connection of ; 


the Church with Christ’s glory at His second coming,— 


You find the same thing in the 2nd ofthe Hebrews, where.:; 


the apostle, referring to the 8th Psalm, shows how far it 
is accomplished,, ‘‘ But one, in a certain place, testified, 


saying, What is man that thou art mindful of him?. or: 
the son of Man that Thou visitest him ? Thou madest him :; 


a little lower than the angels; Thou crownedst him with 


glory and honour, and didst set him over the works :of 


thy hands,, Thou hast put all things in subjection under 
his feet.. For in that he put, all in subjection under him, 


He left nothing that is not put under: him. But now: 


we see not yet all things put under him.” ' That time 
is not yet come, ‘* But we see Jesus, who was)made 


a little lower than the angels, for the euffering. of : 


death, crowned with glory and honour.” Mark what 


we have got here. Here is God’s purpose of putting. 
everything in subjection under Christ without. any: ex- | 


ception—there is nothing excepted that is not put under 
Him: In fact He created it all; and is heir of it-all.there-: 


fore. But: the point is this, that what He. created .as,: 


oe) 


eR eeewrwr: s * 


| 


18 


God, He takes for an inheritance as man, in order that 
we: thigh? take it with Him ; but that time is not come 


yet, We do not see all thitigs put under Him, but we. 


do see Jésus who’ was madeé’a little lower than the angels, 

crowned with glory and honour—we see that half accom- 
plished, but not the other half—we do not see all things 
put under Him. That is what the apostle states, and 
thé reason of it we get i in the 110th Psalm, which the 
apostle also quotes in the Hebrews, and to’ which’ the 
Lord Himself appealed i in reasoning with the Pharisees 


on this very ‘matter. ‘‘‘The Lord said unto my Lord, sit 


thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool.” And therefore in the 10th of the Hébrews, 
thé apostle says, ‘‘ He hath perfected for ever thei that 
are sanctified ”’—that is, the work of their redemption— 
‘¢ from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his 
footstool,” till ‘they are all put under his feet by God. 
I shall have another opportunity of referring to that. 


But Iam speaking now of the blessed’ assurance it is to © 


the saints, that Christ is sitting at the right hand of God 


until; and expecting till; His enemies are made His foot- 


stool. They are not made His footstool yet. If they 


were; He'would not allow matters to go on in the world. 
as they donow. It is another thing which’ God is doing’ 
now.’ He is gathering out His joint heirs, and, having 

that purpose, He says—sit thou'at my right hand until | 


the time when thine enemies shall be made thy footstool. 
As tothe question when that time shall be, ‘‘ that day 


and hour knoweth’no man, not even the Son.” But it 


is said to the Son—sit thou at my right hand till that 
time is revealed- We have the plan then as clearly set 


forth as language can put it. We see Jesus, when’ He’ 
has by Himself purged our sins, ‘‘set on the right hand’ 


of the throne of the majesty in the heavens,” and then 


by the gospel, gathering out His joint heirs. And we’ 
are associated with Him; while He is there at the right ° 


RS OF EET TE ME EL I co 


ae peta re, Fears “ gers 
Po NRE BO A IN kee EEE a Fay Wii 


ie om pont Qe 


14 


hand of God, associated with Him as united to Him by 
the one Spirit. If you will turn now to another passage, 
the 15th of 1st Corinthians, you will see the way in 
which we get this place of glory at the resurrection, all 
things being under His feet. ‘‘ As in Adam all die, even 
so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in 
his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterwards they 
that are Christ’s at his coming ’’—those that are His 
heirs, they, and nobody else. ‘*Then cometh the end, 
when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, 
even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule 
and all authority and power. For he must reign, till he 
hath put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy 
that shall be destroyed is death. For he hath putall 
things under his feet. But when he saith, all things are 
put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which 
did put all things under him. That is, God the Father 
is not put under him, but that very exception proves in 
the strongest way that everything else is—God the 
Father being alone excepted. But it is said, we do not 
see that yet. Do you think that all the oppression and 
wars and wickedness and horrors which now mark the 
history of the earth, would go on if everything was now 
put under Him? It is Satan, and not Christ, who is now 
the prince and God of this world. It is strange huw 
many people fancy that the cross putan end to that. It 
was exactly the contrary. The cross was the one grand 
demonstration—and there never was such a demonstra- 
tion before—that Satan is the prince and God of this 
world. ‘‘The prince of this world cometh, and hath 
nothing in me,” said our Saviour. Until Christ had 
been rejected, Satan was never called the prince of this 
world, Before that, Jehovah was on the earth, and in 
the temple was the Shekinah of glory. But when at 
last He came into this world in the person of Christ, and 
the world rejected Him, then from that time Satan is the 


15 


prince of this world. And it is after that, that the 
apostle says, ‘‘In whom the God of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not.” When 
the Lord comes again, He will be the prince of the world, 
but, till He comes again, Satan is that prince. If you 
will now look to the 19th of Luke, you will see how the 
Lord Himself puts it, when He speaks of going into a 
far country to get the kingdom, and there receiving it, 
and then returning and executing the judgments to which 
he refers. ‘* As they heard these things, he added and 
spake a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and 
because they thonght that the kingdom of God should 
immediately appear.” They were looking for this, and 
fancied that, instead of His being rejected as He was, 
they would get the kingdom with Him in an earthly 
way directly. ‘‘He said therefore, a certain nobleman 
went into a far country, to receive for himself a king- 
dom, and to return. And he called his ten servants, and 
delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them, occupy 
till I come.” That is the service of christians, while 
the Lord is away. He has gone away to receive the 
kingdom, and has not returned yet. Then he judged the 
servants wheu hecame back. ‘Andit came to passs, that 
when he was returned, having received the kingdom, 
then he commanded those servants to be called unto 
him,” and begins to take account of their service. And 
then, that being finished, he suys, ‘‘ But those mine 
enemies which would not that I should reign over them, 
bring hither, and slay them before me.” This is after 
he has received the kingdom and come back again. He 
does not judge while he is away. It is said, ‘*The 
Father hath committed all judgment unto the Son; that 
all men should honour the Son even as they honour the 
Father.” But, if He was to begin to judge now, He 
would have to close the time of grace and the gathering 
in of the church. The Father judges the saints, but it 


16. 


is in the way of discipline—‘‘ If ye call on the Father, 
who, without respect of persons, judgeth according to’ 
every, man’s work.” But, as regards definite judgment, 

it is said in J ohn’ ‘“ The Father judgeth no man, but, 
hath committed all judgment unto the Son.” When the 
Son returns, He will take notice of his enemies and exe- 
cute judgment upon them. But meanwhile He has gone 
away to receive the kingdom, and has not returned. 

When he does, He will not allow all this wickedness 
which we now see, to goon. But for the present, this 
is the time when we must watch in faithfulness, occupying | 
till He come, and trading properly with those talents, the | 
spiritual gifts He has given us. You will find this re- 
markably brought out, if you turn to the 1st of Colossians. 

I wish to ‘dwell’a little on this, that we may get to as 
full an understanding as possible of the thoughis, and 
scope and plan of God, which seem to me to be very 
plainly set forth in Scripture. Begin at the 12th verse,’ 

which shows where we, I mean all believers, are | z Giving | 
thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet ?— 
hath made us meet—that is all settled—you will. always , 
find that in Scripture ; you will not find anything there. 
about growing to be meet for ; it speaks about growing 

up to Christ in everything, but that is a different thing.. 

‘¢ Which hath made us_meet to be partakers of the i in- 
heritanuce of the saints i in light. ‘Who hath delivered. us. 
from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into | 
the kingdom of his dear Son ; who i is, the i image of the: 
invisible Gad, the first, born of every, creature ; for. by. 
him, ”—this is the reason why He i is set over all things— 
e by, him were all things created that, are in heaven, and 
that are on earth, visible and invisible, whether they be. 
thrones, or apesintons, or principalities, or powers ; all 
things were created by. him and for him. ” He is to take. 
them all under ‘subjection, but not i in, this state of wick- 
edness i in which they, are. now, “We see not yet all | 


Qt 


17 


things put under him.” And how does He take them ? 
He takes them as a man—‘‘whom he hath appointed 
heir of all things,” (Hebrew i., 2,) and we are appointed 
joint heirs with Him, as the Scripture tells us. You 
will see, therefore, how the second part comes in, ‘‘ And 
he is before all things, and by him all things consist ”— 
that is, because he is a divine person—‘ And he is the 
head of the body, the church ; who is the beginning, the 
first born from the dead ; that in all things he might 
have the pre-eminence.” He has this double headship, 
which is also brought together in the chapter of Ephe- 
sians I was reading—head over all things, aud head to 
the church. ‘‘ By him to reconcile all things unto him- 
self ; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth or 
things in heaven, And you that were sometime alienat- 
ed and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now 
hath he reconciled, in the body of his flesh through 
death.” ‘* Hath reconciled,”—it is always lath, as re- 
gards the saints ; it is not said ‘*‘ He will reconcile,” but 
‘*hath reconciled.” But the reconciliation of all things 
in heaven and carth is future, because Satan is not yet 
bound, Even Christianity itself has been corrupted 
in the most awful way, because Satan is not bound, and 
the corruptest thing in the whole universe is corrupted 


‘Christianity. The apostle says—‘‘by him to reconcile 


all things unto himself, whether they be things in earth 
or things in heaven,” or, as it is in the Ephesians, ‘* to 
gather together in one all things in Christ”—but he does 
not say he has done that yet. Nor does he speak at all 
of those who are under the earth, When he talks of 
subjection, of everything towing to him, it is said, ‘* That 
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things 
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the 
earth.” Of these things he does not say ‘ reconcile” 
but ‘‘ bow ;” ‘‘ but you,” he says, ‘* hath he reconciled.” 
You thus see the truth about the double headship of 


oS 


— ee a 
EE eb POSE NOLES 5 RP ER er et 


sree 5 


ray me nn a 


i 
4 
th 
; 
: 


on sar 


<a 


| i 


18 


Christ, His being Head of the Church, and His being 
Head over all things, and then the double reconciliation, 
the present reconciliation and redemption of the Church 
through grace, and then the reconciliation of all things 
in heaver and in earth. Now we see not yet all things 
put under him, but we see Him by faith, sitting at the 
right hand of God, until His enemies are made His foot- 
stool. And when that time comes, and they are all put 
under Him, He will take possession, according to the 
character given to God, in the appelle:'on used by Mel- 
chisedek when he came out to bles’ «abraham, ‘‘ The 
most High God, possessor of heaven and earth,” and 
when Christ becomes in all its fulness the King and 
Priest upon His throne, God will have that title. We 
come then to the next thing, which I will just state—I 
do not know how far we may be able to go through it 
this evening. Taking these two statements, that He is 
to reconcile everything in heaven and earth, and again 
that He is to g:ther together, in one, all things which 
are both in heaven aud on earth, we also see in several 
of the passages which 1 have quoted, that the Church, 
or the saints who compose it, are joint heirs with Him. 
What I have been seeking to shew you, is, that the 
Church of God, all the saints whom in this present time 
God is gathesing by His grace in the Gospel, are being 
associated with Christ, as the centre of blessing, that 
they get the central place with Himself, under whom all 
possible existences are to be placed. But the time for 
this which the Scripture speaks of, is, when Christ re- 
ceives the kidgdom and returns, when the dispensation 
of the fulness of times comes. Then everything will be 
brought into order and blessedness under the authority 
of Christ. When God the Father has put everything 
under His feet, He will bring everything into order, and 
will then deliver up His kingdom. But the central 
thing during the dispensation of the fulness of times in 


19 ‘ 


the heavenly places will be the Church, and the central 
thing in earthly places will be the Jews. This brings in 
what are the two great subjects of Holy Scripture, after 
personal redemption. The Church is that in which He 


‘displays sovereign grace, bringing its members to share 


the glory of Christ. The Jews are those in whom He 
reveals, as a centre, the government of this world. 
These are the two great ‘subjects in Scripture after per- 
sonal salvation. The Scripture speaks of the Church of 
God, as those who are associated with Christ, who are 
the heirs of Christ’s glory. But the moment we say 
that, we cannot but think how wondrous it is that 
poor wretched creatures like us should be brought 
into the same glory with Christ, should be brought 
into the same place with Himself. And the work 
of reconciliation is to embrace all things in heaven and 
or earth. This world is not to remain forever the 
sporting place and play-ground of the devil. That will 
not be allowed forever. The Son of David will yet have 
His place in it, and His glory too, as its ruler, and the 
world will then be altered. ‘‘ None shall hurt or destroy 
in all my holy mountain.” There is a time coming when 
Christ will be the Prince of Peace. He has declared 
positively that that is not at the present time. ‘‘ Sup- 
pose ye that I am come to give peace on earth ? I tell you 
nay ; but rather division. For from henceforth there 
shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and 
two against three. The father shall be divided against 
the son, and the sun against the father; the mother 
against the daughter, and the daughter against the mo- 
ther, &c.” That is, this is the time when the bringing 
in the light awakens the passions of men, and, uutil 
Christ’s second coming puts them down, they continue 
their raging. And christians now have to take up the 
cross and follow Him. Do you think if Christ was reign- 
ing, His followers would only have the cross ? Why, they 


20 


would have the crown. We are positively told that our 
part is the cross. We must now take it up every day.— 
But, when Christ reigns, that will not be the part of 
His people. He will ‘‘come to be glorified in His 
saints,” and a glorious place they will get, when He 
comes to reign. When this time comes, to gather toge- 
ther all things in one, the Church of God will be the cen- 
tre of all things in heavenly places, and the Jews the cen- 
tre of all things on earth, Christ being the head over all. 
That is what we find stated in the chapter of Ephesians 
which we have read—‘‘ That ye may know what is the 
exceeding greatness of His power to us-ward, who be- 
lieve, according to the working of His mighty power, 
which He wrought in Christ, when He raised him from 
the dead, and set Him at His own right hand in the 
heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, 
and might, and dominion, and every name that is named 
not only in this world but in that which is to come ”— 
the time namely of which we are speaking—‘‘ And hath 
put all things under His feet, and gave Him to be the 
head over all things to the Church, which is His body.” 
It is the same power which raises the saints, and so, in 
the next chapter, he says, speaking of it now as already 
got spiritually—‘‘ and hath raised up together, and made 
us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus ; that 
in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches 
of His grace, in His kindness toward us through Christ 
Jesus ”-—God, in setting us over angels and principalities 
and powers in the world to come, shewing the exceeding 
riches of his grace in the place he has giverr to us, in His 
kindness toward us. This, beloved friends, is what I 
have been anxious to shew you, by bringing before you 
these various passages, that thus in the ages to come God 
is going to shew the exceeding riches of His grace, in 
His kindness toward you. Angels are going to learn the 
immense riches of God’s grace—and how? By our be. 


21 


ing made partakers of the glory of Christ, in God’s kind- 
ness to us through Christ Jesus—so that, when they see 
Mary Magdalen, the thief on the cross, the woman of the 
city that was a sinner, any one of us, in the same place 
of glory with Christ, .they may admire the exceeding 
riches of His grace. Laying hold of this even now by 
faith in the teaching of God’s Spirit although we have 
not got all the fruits of it as yet, we may find our present 
place very profitable in the way of discipline, and exer- 
cise, and spiritual education, still its full development is 
in the future, when God’s kindness to us shall be shewn 
to the angels. And now let me try to shew you a little 
the way in which the Lord brings us into this place of 
association with Himself. And first I will refer you to 
the passage in the 17th of John’s Gospel, where the Sa- 
viour states the fact, that the saints share with Him His 
glory, and the love of the Father. A wonderful passage 
it is, as shewing that love of Christ which passeth know- 
ledge. ‘‘ Neither pray I for these alone, but for them 
also which shall believe on me through their word ; that 
they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, anc Tin 
thee, that they also may be one in us; that the world 
may believe that thou hast sent me.” This refers to the 
present time, or at least to what ought to be the case in the 
present time. And then He goes on to the time to come, 
‘¢ And the glory which thou gavest me, I have given 
them ; that they may be one, even as we are one; I in 
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in 
one, and that the world may not believe, but may know 
that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them,as thou hast 
loved me.”’ All the glory thou hast given me, He says 
-—that is, the glory he takes as man, for as a divine per- 
son, His glory was eternal—I have given them, and this 
that the world, when they see my people like me, and 
having the same glory as myself, may know that Thou 


hast sent me, Not believe ; that is spoken with reference | 


LAIR IE Re OL NO ALOR CRN A PRB EO AU BIR il Nace a TB CAR ERS peop po: MISE 


oom et Sein teeta, 


22 


to the present time. Saints should he one now, as a tes- 
timony that there is a power in the Spirit of God which 
overcomes all fleshly differences. Alas that it is not so. 
This too is a precious subject, but I must pass it over 
just now, confining myself to the one Iam more imme- 
diately dealing with. Of the present time it is said, 
‘‘that the world may believe ;” of the future, ‘‘ that the 
world may know.” ‘‘ The glory which thou gavest me, I 
have given them, that the world may know that Thou 
hast sent me.” They will know it plainly enough for 
their condemnation, for the condemnation of those, who 
are rebels, when they see those whom they have been ac- 
customed to despise, coming with Christ in glory. Now 
do you believe this, beloved friends? Our hearts ought 
to know and recognize that love. Not fathom it, for that 
they cannot do, but confide in it, and to that extent know 
it, although it passes knowledge. And, as you see, the 
time is coming when the world too will know that love 
of God to us. We pass on to the 25th verse—‘‘ O right- 
eous Father, the world hath not known thee ; but [have 
snown thee, and these have known that Thou hast sent 
me. And I have declared unto them thy name, and will © 
declare it ; that the love wherewith thou hast loved me 
may be in them, and Iinthem.” ‘That is the present 
good we enjoy—that the love wherewith Christ is loved 
should be in us—that we should have it in our souls. No 
one can fathom it—it passes knowledge—but still we are 
to have it and to know it, and that by Christ being in us. 
I am not to wait till the world sees I am with Christ in 
glory, to know it myself ; for the Father now loves me 
as He has loved Christ. If you turn again to the 15th 
of Ist Corinthians, vou will see this same truth brought 
out, in its relation to the resurrection. The point I am 
now to impress upon you is, that Scripture shows us 
these two things— that we are to be like Him,completely 
like Him, save that He is a divine person—and that the 


ra rican 


23 


time we shall be like Him is when we shall be raised 
from the dead. _It is then we shall appear with Him.— 
We are not of the world now, but it is said that the 
world will only know that we have been loved as Christ 
was loved, when they see us in the same place of glory 
with Him, when the Lord takes us up to be with Him 
and to put us in this glory, so that when He appears to 
the world we shall appear along with Him in the same 
glory. The fact that it is so, that we shall so appear with 
Him in the same glory, we have seen already from vari- 
ous passages which I quoted last Wednesday, but I shall 
refer you to some more particularly. At the 47th verse 
of the 15th of Ist Corinthians, it is said, ‘‘ the first man is 
‘of the earth, eartliy ; the second man is the Lord from 
heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are 
earthy ”’—all like to their father Adan—‘‘ and, as is the 
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly ”’—that is 
like what Christ is, not speaking of His divinity—‘‘And 
as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also 
bear the image of the heavenly.” We shall be like 
Him, we shall be just the same as Himself. He does not 
say merely that we shall be there, in heaven, but like 
Him. But first, ‘‘asis the earthy,such are they also that 
are earthy ”—that is, like Adam, poor, wretched sin- 
ners, mortal creatures, like him, whereas, ‘‘as is the 
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.” This is 
the full absolnte statement of the fact ; then he adds, with 
respect to the fact of the glory—puting it of course as in 
the future not having yet come—‘“‘ as we have borne the 
image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the 
heavenly ”—and he goes on, ‘‘ Now this I say, brethren, 
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God ; 
neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.” As it is 
said before, ‘‘ it is sown in corruption, it is raised in in- 
corruption. It issown in dishonour,it is raised in glory.” 
Now let us refer to some of the passages which shew how 


24 


Christ receives usto himself, I follow theteachings of scrip- 
ture throughout,that we may get solidly grounded in what 
Christ communicates to us. He says; ‘¢In my Father’s 
house ave many mansions ; if it were not so I would have ~ 
told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go 
and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive 
you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be 
also.” e has gone into His Father’s house, but He will 
come again and receive us to Himself, that where He is 
there we may be also. He was going up then witha 
body, going up glorious, not as yet having all things 
under His feet, but crowned with glory and honour, and 
He says to His disciples—you must wait and occupy till 
I come again. But now, before He comes, we see what : 
he is to do with us who are in the same glory—‘“ I will 
come again and receive you unto myself,” as He said 
in the previous chapter, ‘*If I wash thee not, thou hast 
no part with me.” It was asif he had said—I cannot 
stay with you, as King and Messiah now, but Iam 
washing you that you may be fit to reign with me when 
I come again. Iam, therefore still your servant in the 
sense of intercession and the like, and, by my all-prevail- 
ing intercession, I will wash you daily, because, if you 
are to have a part with me in my kingdoin, you must be 
made like myself. In like manner, we get what may be 
called the public announcement of this in the 4th chapter 
of 1st Thessalonians—‘* Them also which sleep in Jesus 
will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by 
the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and re- 
main unto the coming of the Lord”—see how the xpostle 
constantly expected the coming of the Lord. Some 
people have boldly dared to say that Paul made a mistake 
in expecting the coming of the Lord in his day. It is 
they who are making an awful mistake. It was never 
revealed when Christ would come, and Paul did not pre- 
tend to know it. But he knew that that time had come 


25 


when we should be always expecting Him, instead of 
saying my Lord delayeth His coming, and beginning 
therefore to eat and drink with the drunken, and to beat 
the men-servants and the maid servants. It was, there- 
fore, that Paul put himself in this class, ‘‘ we which are 
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord.” And 
what was the effect of that? He lived like a man who 
expected Christ every day, and when Christ comes, he 
will get the fruit of that, while those people who put off 
the expectation of Christ’s coming, and do not wait for 
it, allowing their hearts to go out after covetousness and 
such like things, will also get the fruit of their so doing. 
The time of the second coming of Christ is declared not 
to be revealed. Paul got a revelation that he should 
soon die, and he knewit. Peter also got a revelation 
that he must shortly -put off this tabernacle, and of 
course knew it. But it was not revealed to them when 
Christ should come. Therefore Paul says, ‘‘ we shall 
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,” Christ having 
overcome death. We may all die before Christ’s coming 
—no one knows the moment of it—still we may use the 
language—‘‘ we who are alive and remain at the coming 
of the Lord. It is said of the man who thinks Christ is 
delaying his coming, that he turns to what is bad, smit- 
ing his fellow servants, and eating and drinking with the 
drunken. -And it is said, that while the bridegroom 
tarried, they all slumbered and slept, the wise virgins as 
well as the foolish ; that is, the Church lost a sense of 
the present expectation of Christ. Even the wise ser- 
vants had to be waked up again, and it was a mercy to 
them to rouse them up in time, because to His people 
Christ is ever faithful. But it is the characteristic of 
the faithful servant that he is expecting. The church of 
Philadelphia was expecting the coming of Christ, and it 
is called the word of His patience—‘‘ Because thou hast 
B 


iii: iid is aici ts latsp saat Se 
Pie DESL asia aa A ines emia SRE: Sa 


Qagi hie Pieler Ba he 


Fit ia Se LR Rciseene FS 


et APS ML PRs SRNR AOC eb 5 ca 


26 
kept the word of my patience.” The passage in Thessa- 
lonians goes on—‘‘ We which are alive and remain unto 
the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which 
are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with 'a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of God, and the dead in’ Christ shall 
risé first,;”—nobody’ else—I shall dwell upon that at’ 
another time, but I just notice it now in passing. Thé 
shout, the voite of the archangel, and the trump of God, 
afe not to be taken as the voice of God to all the world, 
to raise the righteous and the wicked. ‘‘ The shout” is 
a military term, whatever the precise term now equivalent 
to it, itis that which follows ‘‘stand at ease.” It was’ 
first ‘used ‘with reference to calling rowers in the triteme, 
and afterwards as a military term. When soldiers are 
léft to go about at their ease, and are then all suddenly 
called back into the ranks, it is the command given 
them for that purpose, to which the word ‘‘ shout” here 
used is equivalent. But the only pérsons who hear it 
are ‘‘the dead in Christ,” Christ being represented as in 
this way gathering together His own troops. ‘The 
dead in Christ shall rise first. Thén we which are alive 
and remain, shall be caught up together with them in 
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the ait, and so shall we 
ever be with the Lord: Wherefore comfort one another’ 
with these words.” Here then we have the details of ‘it. 
The Lord hath déclared that He will come and receive 
us unto Himself and now the apostle, by the revelation 
given unto him, explains how it will be. He will come 
and ‘call us‘up to meet the Lord in the air. The passage 
if 1st Corinthians; which I’ have already réad, réfers'td 
the same thing, when it says, ‘“‘afterward they that'‘are’ 
Christ’s'at His coming.” ‘But’ every man in his own 
ordér, Christ the fitst fruits.” The specific thing’here 
is; that it’ is not’a‘resurrection of the dead, but'a résuirréc- 
tion from among the dead, The raising of Christ was 


27 
not a resurrection of the dead, simply, but a resurrection 
from among thedead. That wasits wholecharacter, a tak- 
ing up from among the dead, and why ? because the Father’s 
delight was in Him. And why are we in like manner 
taken up from among the dead? because His delight is 
in us. And therefore at the proper time the Lord comes, 
—it is not said appeavs—and calls us up to be for ever 
with the Lord, to take our place associated with Christ, 
partaking of that glory which you have already seen 
referred to in the words, ‘‘as we have borne the 
image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image 
of the heavenly.” But what we are called to expect 
is not to die—we may die, and a blessed thing it is too, 
to die—but what we are to look for and expect, is, 
as it is expressed in the 5th of 2nd Corinthians, ‘“not 
for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that 
mortality might be swallowed up of life.” That Christ’s 
power over death may be fully shewn, He takes to Him- 
self mortal men, whether alive or dead—if alive, He 
changes them into glory without dying—if they ae 
dead, He raises them. This is'the first thing He does. 
He raises the dead first, and then the living are changed, 
and they go to meet the Lord in the air. He hath pre. 
destinated us ‘to be conformed to the image of his:Son, 
that he might be the first born among many brethren.” 
And, as we have seen, ‘‘ the glory which thou gavest 
me, have given them.” This then is our portion of 
heavenly things. And, if you turn to:the 3rd of Col- 
ossians, you will see that, when Christ appears, we shall 
appear in this glory along with Himself and like Him. 
He has already come and taken us up to Himself, and 
now He comes manifesting Himself to the world, and 
we appear with Him. You will remember what I have 
before quoted, that the glory which was given Him, .He 
hath given to us, that the world might know, &. Now 
turn to the 3rd of Colossians, and you will see how 


CEL AS EY RS EAR RR PT LE A Ce ee I Se on 


Rite aR NEE ns 


PRS a a eRe. NET 


So ae eee 


SERENA MNS SS EEE 


Lab SE tna DL 


EGE ———— = — —————— =—— 


SSS sar eee ee ee _ 


28 

thoroughly the apostle identifies us with Christ. Look 
first at the 20th verse of the 2nd chapter, ‘‘If ye be 
dead with Christ.” Then, at the beginning of the 3rd 


chapter, ‘‘If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those 
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the 


‘right hand of God, Set your affection on things above, 


not on things on the earth. ‘vcr ye are dead and your 
life is hid with Christ in God.” He is hid in God; He 
is your life, and your life therefore is hid there. ‘‘ When 
Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also 
appear with Him in glory.” When He appears, we 
shall appear with-Him. There can be no separation. If 
He is hid in God, our life is hid in God. If he appears, 
we appear. If He appears in glory, we must appear in 
glory with Him. Weare heirs of God, joint heirs with 
Christ. You will see the same thing in the 1st Epistle of 
John—only the same truth comes out in different shapes 
—‘* Behold what manner of love the Father hath be- 
stowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God ” 
—getting Christ’s own name—what wonder of love is 
this, that we should get Christ’s own title of relationship 
‘‘therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew 
him not ”—shewing that we have got the same place 
with Him. He says, ‘‘I go to my Father, and your 
Father, to my God and your God ”—I have accomplished 
your redemption and the effect of that is, that I have 
put you in the same place with Myself. ‘‘I will declare 
thy name unto my brethren ; in the midst of the church 
will I sing praise unto thee.” ‘‘ Therefore the world 
knoweth us not, because it knew him not.” It is no 
wonder that it does not recognise us, if it did not recog- 
nise Him. ‘‘ Beloved, now are we the sons of God ”— 
that is the present time—‘‘ and it doth not yet appear 
what we shall be; but we know that, when He shall 
appear, we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as 
He is.” Further as to this appearing with Him, I shall 


Te 


29 


now refer to the Book of Revelation, but, before doing 
that, you may turn for a moment to the 14th of Zecha- 
riah, where it is said the Lord shall come and all His 
saints with Him, and his feet shall stand in that day 
upon the Mount of Olives. This is referred to by the 
angel, when, after Christ’s ascension from Mount Olivet, 
he said to the desciples, ‘‘ Why stand ye gazing up into 
heaven ? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you 
into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have 
seen him go into heaven.” Again, in the 14th verse of 
the epistle of Jude, you find—‘‘ And Enoch also, the 
seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, 
the Lord cometh with myriads of his saints, to execute 
judgment upon all.” Here they are associated with 
Christ in the executing of judgments. ‘* The Lord 
cometh with ten thousands ”—properly myriads, an im- 
mense number, that is—‘‘ of his saints to execute judg- 
ment.” This shews how entirely we are associated with 
Christ. And what a place does not that put usin! Yet 
Scripture is so simple and plain upon the point, that it 
cannot be misinterpreted. You will find the same truth 
in the Ist of 2nd Thessalonians. I prefer quoting many 
passages to enlarging upon them, that our faith may 
stand, not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of 
God. The Thessalonians were suffering dreadful per- 


secutions, and the apostle told them—‘‘ we glory in you 


in the churches of God, for your patience and faith in all 
your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure ; which 
is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, 
that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, 
for which ye also suffer ; seeing it is a righteous thing 
with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble 
you. And to you who are troubled, rest with us ; when 
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with His 
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them 
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our 


TEI IPN Ee a FNL Se RE TT ELE OE CEES ORE IT AE IOS ST 


3 ae 


KGS 


SiS sha Eas aR 


Til ceaipecunaoascaake 


RS SSS De AES Re SR = 


30* 


Lovd) Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlast- 
ing. destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from 
the glory of His power ; when He'shall come to be glo- 
rified in His saints, and to be admired in all them that: 
believe,” He comes with these ten thousands or myriads 
of, His saints. You find a distinct statement of their 
coming given in figure in the Revelation. At the 14th. 
verse of the 17th chapter, it is said—‘‘ These shall make 
war, with the Lamb.” ll the kings of the earth shall be. , 
found, notin blessing, joined with Christ, but. in open 
war with, the Lamb, joined with the beast, ‘¢ These, 
shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall over- 
come them ; for He is the Lord of lords, and the King , 
of kings ; and they that, are with Him are called, .and 
chosen, and faithful.” Other passages shew us that an- 
gels will be with Him, but it is not angels that are here ., 
spoken of as being with Him. The angels maybe des- 
cribed as ‘‘ faithful,” and ‘‘chosen,” because the Scrip-, 
ture speaks of the ‘elect ” angels, but these that are 
with, Him are the “called,” and it is the saints who are 
‘‘called by the grace of God.” These ‘ called” persons 
then who are with Him are thesaints,, Having seen who 
they are, turn now to the 19th chapter—‘‘ And I saw 
heaven opened, and behold, a white horse ; and he that 
sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in right- 
eousness He doth judge and make war.” You have seen 
all through that He is coming to judge the wicked on the 
earth—a thing greatly forgotten, that there is a judg- 
ment of the quick as well as the dead. ‘‘ Asin the days 
before, the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying 
and iving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered 
into t e ark, and knew not, until the flood came, and 
took them all away ; so shall also the coming of the Son 
of ¥ n, be. »” <¢ Fis eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his 
head were many crowns ; and he had a name written that 
no man knew but he himsel. _ And he was clothed in a 


ge Fey 


—s eA 2eSsr FF Se Ee LT er OULTehlC OCU ESEllUhOUh 


SE 


31° 


of God.’ And ‘the armies which ‘were in heaven followed’ 
him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and 
clean”’—which, he says elsewhere, is the righteousness 
of the saints. I close now, as regards tho quotation of 
passages: Last Wednesday we found, running through’ 
the’ whole ‘series: of passages quoted, that’ the Lord’s 
coming was’the one ‘thing kept before the church as its 
hope inthe. Scripture, and that it connected itself with ' 
every: kind of thought and feeling: the saints had, that 
they were even:looked upon ‘as being converted to wait: 
for the Son of God). that every other doctrine of Scrip-: 
ture:was connected’ with it—that' what marked a decay- 
ing church was the thought that ‘‘the Lord delayeth His 
coming,’ and that. what woke-them up was’ the ory; 


“ Behold, the bridegroom cometh.” Then to-night we: 


have found that the Lord reveals 'to us with: wisdom and 
prudence : His ' plan, namely, ‘‘ that he might gather 


together in one all things:in Christ, both whieh ‘are in| 


heaven, and. which are:on earth”—reconciling: them all 


in Christ—not merely for their own selfish good; but as | 


a plan,for Christ’s glory ; that with that view: He has 
associated.us with Christ in the place He takes as head 
over all, so that being associated with Him as heirs of 
God, joint: heirs with Christ, we have the ‘inheritance 
with him ; that, when He takes it, we shall: have it with 
Him); that, when He comes, we shall come: with Him); 


that, whereas He was: presented :to the earth ‘among the 


Jews, according. to the promise:of God, and:they would 
not, have::Him, He then took: another: ‘place,’ that. of 
Son,of Man, that place He will'take in His resurrection: 
and in His glory; and will ‘raise us up to have it with 
Him ' when. the time comes—-and not we alone, but all 
saints will have it with Him :—that we see not yet all 


things put under Him, but we do see Jesus crowned 
with: glory and honour, and are waiting, as He is, till | 
His enemies are made : His footstool :—that when: that: 
time comes—when::it will be, nobody: knows; "God: has: 


Si ee a a = EE = 


<= 


ik stale. aks = ares £35 4 


32 


not revealed it—the first thing He will do wil! be to have 
His body. _ He is not to be head without the body, but 
will catch us up to meet Him in the air :—that, if dead, 
He will raise us ; if alive, he will change us, and take us 
up to meet the Lord in the air :—that He will come and 
take us to His Fathez’s house ; that that is our place, 
and that He will have everything there in order for us— 
only He must have His heirs with him ; that He cannot 
take a step in entering on the possession of His inheri- 
tance, without having His heirs, Hie body, His bride 
with Him. Inthe Revelation, you first have the mar- 
riage of the Lamb, and then you see the Lamb coming 
out with his armies following Him. ‘They are the bride 
—that is what they are—for the Lamb must have an 
associate with Him, a help-meet to share His inheritance. 
He has not yet taken to Himself His great power and 
reigned. We see not yet all things put under him. But 
when He comes, he will take us up to be with Him, 
because we ‘are perfectly associated with Him. When 
He appears, we shall appear with Him. When He exe- 
cutes judgment, we shall accompany him—that is, when 
he executes judgment on the world, breaking them with 
a rod of iron, and dashing them in pieces like a potter’s 
vessel, That is anything but the blessedest part of our 
sharing His inheritance. The blessedest part is being 
with Him. But, when He does appear, the world will 
see us with Him. He comes to raise the dead Saints, 
and take them up to be with Himself, then, when He 
appears, we shall all appear with Him, and shall bear 
the image of the heavenly, as we have borne the image 
of the earthy.” But meantime, while Christ is sitting 
at the right hand of God, He hath sent down the Holy 
Ghost to gather his heirs together. They must now 
‘carry the cross—when the kingdom comes they will have 
the kingdom and the glory. But, until that time, while 
He is sitting at the right hand of God, His people must 
bear the -ross, and it is only by the power of the Spirit 


33 


of God that any one will follow Him. Whatever glory 
He has, in the time of glory He asssociates us in it with 
Himself, and, as a consequence, we shall reign with Him, 


“we who are now reconciled in Him. And whenhe comes 


again, He comes, not to judgment as regards us. ‘‘ As 
it is apppointed unto men once to die, but after this the 
judgment ; so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of 
many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear 
the second time, without sin, unto salvation.” And 
now, beloved friends, I would only ask, With whom are 
you associated ? Are you associated -with Christ, reject- 
ed by the world, and now sitting at the right hand of 
God? Are you by the Holy Ghost in spirit associated 
with Christ ? or are you associated with the world which 
he is coming again to judge, and all His saints with 
Him? With which are you associated, while Christ is 
away, having been rejected, and says occupy till I come, 
having gone to receive a kingdom and a glory far better 
than that from which he was rejected? With whom are 
you associated ? You have to go through the world, you 
must go through it—do you really believe that Satan is 
the prince and god of this world, which has rejected 
Christ, and do you really live as if you believed this? 
Do you believe that Christ sitteth at the right hand of 
God, and that He will come again to receive you to 
Himself, to share with Him the same blessings as Him- 
self in His Father’s house, and to witness His Father’s 
glory and share Hislove? Are we doing anything to 
recommend Him? Is there that in our hearts, which is 
like the confiding love of a child to his father, that which 
shews we are sons by adoption? Is there anything in 
us which identifies us with those who are the heirs of 
that blessedness and glory ? The world knew Him not ; 
the world knows us not. Can we say that? Are we like 
Him in our place in the world? When Christ was in 
the world, they saw no beauty in Him that they should 
desire Him. How is it with us? Is it the things that 


DLAC LEAR RES SADIE ABLE RAGA Dir 2S GLB MADRE GNI 


$4 


7are not, seen, or the things that are.seen, that: have power 
‘in.our hearts:? Christ .is;not,seen—does He dwell.in our 
hearts by faith, so.as to, be our portion ?. If he does, then 
when He.appears, we .sha!] appear with Him in glory, 
and, better than that, shall-be taken up to bejfor.ever 
with Him. Lord give us to be able to wait for,Him, 
_gndito, be.ever saying, ‘Even so come, Lord Jesus.” 
May. we) have.a]l our treasure, ,and heart, and portion, 
associated, and identified with Himself. A ‘ittle while, 
yet,a little while, and-He that shall.come will come, and 
will,not ‘tarry. He only knows how long will. last-the 
gathering of the saints to, be with Him. 


Lovell and Gibson, Printers, Toronto. 


LEOTURES ON THE SECOND OOMING. 


LECTURE Ill. 


REVELATION XIL 


Goronto : 
GOSPEL TRACT DEPOSITORY. 
(MRS, DREW, 370, YONGE STREET.) 


Priee Hight Cents, 


NOTES OF A LECTURE 


ON 


REVELATION XII. 


Mzetine Hovsez, Alexander Street 
Toronto, April 8, 1863. 


What I intend speaking of this evening, and the idea 
of which is given in this chapter in allegorical expressions, 
is first, the gathering up of the Church of God, the 
heavenly saints, to be with Christ, and then, secondly, 
if the time allows, the promises which we have and 
thereby the infallible certainty of the restoration of the 
Jews to their place as a nation upon the earth. Both 
connect themselves—otherwise it would be impossible to 
go into the whole subject this evening—with the mani- 
festation of judgments in this world—only that the 
taking up of the saints is the taking them out of the way 
of those judgments, whereas the Jews who are to remain 
on the earth, and other Gentiles also, when they come to 
those judgments, must pass through them, as Lot passed 
through and above all that happened to Sodom, making 
his escape, yet though as by fire, while Abraham looked 
on upon the judgments that fell on the guilty cities of 
the plain—and just as Noah was saved, passing through 
the flood, while Enoch was taken up to heaven. Those 
two cases are spoken of as analogous to what shall be at 
the coming of the Son of Man. We have in these two 
cases the two things of which I have spoken—the one 


: Se — s . 


4 


class of persons out of the reach and out of the way 
altogether of the judgments that are coming, and the other 
class passing through those judgments which destroyed 
the great body of men, and thus escaping them. I have 
said that that class consists of the Jews and some Gentiles 
also, but I do not enter into details on that point at 
present—I wish now merely to present the general 
thought. We saw last evening that the Church forms 
the centre of the heavenly glory—under Christ, of course, 
who is the centre of everything—and that the Jews are 
the centre of the earthly dominion, the earthly blessings. 
This is what gi.es their importance to the two points on 
which, if time allows, I shall dwell this evening—thatis, the 
taking the saints in the last time to be with the Lord 
Himself in heaven, and their sharing His own glory and 
blessedness—and then the Jews brought into blessing 
with this earth, as reigned over by Christ, and not reign- 
ing with Him, but still a great nation on the earth. 
These two facts are the two great centres of God’s ways. 
In the chapter we have read you have first Christ Him- 
self and the Church, figured in the man-child, and then 
in the woman which flees from persecution for 1260 days 
you have the Jewish remnant, those who are spared in 
the time of judgment but are not yet brought into glory 

It thus brings before you the two subjects of which I 
have spoken, and I add this that the consideration of the 
blessing of the Church will lead us necessarily to another 
point, and that is, that what is called a general resurrec- 
tion, common to all together—and I state it now that we 
may get fast hold of the idea at once—is a thing entirely 
unknown to Scripture. I do not deny that it was the 
notion entertained among the Jews, at least by the 
Pharisees, that all Jews at all events—as for the Gentiles 
they looked upon them as dogs—would rise again together 
—but our Lord corrected this notion. A right conception 
on this point is necessarily connected with our under- 
standing the taking up of the Church to heaven, because 


§ 


those saints who are dead must be raised for that. 
When f say “‘saints” I mean all the saints, those of 
the Old Testament, as well as those under the New 
Testament dispensation. And 1 mention another point 
for those persons who are not familiar with these subjects, 
and that is, that God now is not dealing with this world 
—providentially of course He governs all—but that He 
is not dealing with this world as he afterwards will, at 
this time while Christ is sitting at His right hand in 
heaven, and while he is gathering the joint heirs of 
Christ to reign with Him when He takes the inheritance. 
He alone knows at what moment that will be fulfilled. . 
Then, when He hath put Christ’s foes under His foot- 
stool, Christ will rise up from His Father’s throne, and 
take his own throne. But, while Christ sits on His 
Father’s throne, the Holy Ghost having been sent down, 
consequent on his ascension, He is gathering out of the 
world a people for His name, to be heirs of God and 
joint heirs with Christ. This lapse of time, this parenthe- 
sis in the ways of God, is brought in, in the most dis- 
tinct way, at the end of the 9th chapter of Daniel, and 
I refer to it, because we should never understand God’s 
dealings with mankind, unless we get hold of this. At 
the end of the 9th of Daniel, you find the Spirit of God, 
shewing a certain period which was to elapse before Jeru- 


. salem got its full blessing, and you will see the reference 


that is made to what Iwas calling the parenthesis or 
lapse of time, during which the Jews were all set aside. 
At the 24th verse it is said—‘‘ Seventy weeks are deter- 
mined upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish 
the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to 
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlast- 
ing righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophe- 
cy, and to anoint the most Holy. Know, therefore, and 
understand, that from the going forth of the command- 
ment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the 
Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks and threescore 


and two weeks ; the street shall be built again, and the 
walls, even in troublous times,”—that took place—you 
know it was forty and six years going on—‘‘ And after 
threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off ’—the 
threescore and two weeks, with the other seven, making 
sixty-nine,—‘‘ but not for himself,” or rather, instead of 
this, take what is in the margin, which is undoubtedly 
the true sense, ‘‘and shall have nothing.” He did not 
take the kingdom at all, He was cut off and got nothing 
—in heaven He got all the glory, but He got nothing as 
regards what we are speaking of—‘‘and the people of 
the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the 
sanctuary ; and the end thereof shall be with a flood, 
and unto the end of the war desolations are determined,” 
—that is, what every one almost is familiar with, Titus 
coming and destroying the city, until there was not left 
one stone upon another, that was not thrown down. 
But there is still a week left—we have only had sixty- 
nine weeks—and here, without entering into detail, is 
the great principle I want you to get hold of, We have 
the sixty-nine weeks, and then there is a lapse. Messiah 
comes, is rejected, and is cut off, does not get the king- 
dom at all, gets nothing—He gets the cross, it is true, 
but that is all He gets. He ascends to heaven, and 
therefore our hearts must follow Him up to heaven, 
while He is there. Then comes the time of the end. 
‘¢ And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one 
week.” For remark what was said before, ‘‘unto the 
end of the war desolations are determined,”—as to the 
time all is left vague, these desolations are to go on for 
no one knows how long after the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem, the Messiah having gone and taken nothing. ‘And 
he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week ; 
and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice 
and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of 
abominations,” —that is idolatry, ‘‘abominations” means 


7 


idolatry in the Old Testament—‘‘ He shall make it deso- 
late, even until the consummation, and that determined 
shall be poured upon the desolate.” There then we get 
this simple but very important fact as to the interpreta- 
tion of prophecy—that there was a term of seventy 
weeks, which would come upon the Holy City,—upon 
the Gentiles too, but specially the Jews—until all pro- 
phecy was to be accomplished about them ; but, when 
the sixty-nine weeks had elapsed, Messiah comes, is cut 
off—that is actually fulfilled—and takes nothing, and 
there go on wars, &c., and the city is destroyed—and 
then there run on the times of the Gentiles, and blind- 
ness in part, according to the 11th of the Romans, is 
happened unto Israel, until the times of the Gentiles are 
fulfilled. So again our Saviour, in Luke’s gospel, after 
speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, says 
that Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles 
nntil the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. Now that 
is what is still going on. Jerusalem is still trodden 
down. Christ has not taken to Him His great power 
and reign, spoken of in a chapter of the Revelation, 
following that which we have read. Jerusalem is still 
desolate, and the times of the Gentiles are still running 
on—I doubt not, running close unto their completion, 
but still running on—and Christ is sitting at the right 
hand of God the Father, according to that word, ‘‘ Sit 
Thou at my right hand, until I make thy foes thy foot- 
stool.” But while He sits there, the Holy Ghost comes 
down from heaven to declare that, if man had rejected 
Him, heaven had accepted Him, and that, redemption 
having been accomplished, and the grace that bringeth 
salvation, He sits there, to associate with Himself the 
joint heirs of whom we have been speaking. But in the 
meantime the Jews are set aside, and the times of the 
Gentiles are running on, and nothing is fulfilled, brought 
to an accomplishment, because what He is doing is gath- 


a aE a er PE ee ag a 
i SCE Sn A Ache BS Mog ae sap Se oe SSR ERE at Sn Pm” TTS 


Seen ee 


Wt 


ering the heavenly saints. Now those heavenly saints, 
as we saw last Wednesday, are completely identified 
with Christ Himself. He is not ashamed to call them 
brethren. He is the first-born among many brethren, 
who have been conformed to the image of God’s Son, and 
are ‘‘members of His body, of His flesh, and of His 
bones.” ‘‘ For,” it is said, ‘‘no man ever yet hated his 
own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even 
as the Lord the Church, for we are members of 
His body, of His flesh, and of His bones.” And the 
saints, too, are the bride of Christ. What Eve was to 
Adam, that is the place the Church of God fills in refer- 
ence to Christ. And what He is doing now, is gathering 
the saints to fill this place. It is not the fulfilling of 
God’s dealing with the earth, but the gathering of saints 
for heaven ; and, while He is gathering saints for heaven, 
Christ sits at His right hand until His enemies be made 
His footstool, As the apostle expresses it in the 2nd 
chapter of the Hebrews, referring to the 8th Psalm, ‘‘but 
now we see not yet all things put under Him ; but we see 
Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for 
the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour.” 
There is an extremely beautiful thought connected with ~ 
this, which we cannot dwell on now, and that is, that if 
you look for the church in the Old Testament, you can 
only find Christ, but when you find the blessedness and 
glory which belongs to Christ, the church is the sharer of 
it. So that what we have to see, in connection with the 
fulfilment of the prophecies of God, is, that previous to 
that the church is to be taken out of the scene altogether, 
because he cannot begin these dealings with the Gentiles 
in the last week, until the gathering of the saints to b 
heirs with Christ is over. Until He has got tho he! 
Christ cannot take the inheritance; and, there , ai 
these dealings of God—or of Christ, if you please, who is 
the power of God~all these dealings of God with the 


~~ 


i] 


world—we do not speak of His Providence, of course, for 
not a sparrow falleth to the ground without Him—but all 
the direct dealings of God with the world through the 
Jews are suspended until the Church is taken up. But 
you never find in prophecy, until the end of Revelation, 
—you never find the Church revealed in prophecy, except 
in connection with Christ. I may give you some instan.. 
ces of this. For example, I have no doubt that the 
‘¢man child ” spoken of in the chapter that we have been 
reading, includes the Church as well as Christ. But itis 
Christ that is principally meant, for the Church would be 
nothing without Christ, it would be a body without a 
head. It is Christ,who has been caught up, but the 
Church is included, for whenever He begins to act pub- 
licly—even as regards Satan being cast down—He must 
have His body, His bride with Him ; He must have His 
brethren, His joint-heirs. If you examine what we find 
here, you will see that the Church is certainly included. 
You read—‘‘And she brought forth a man child, who was 
to rule all nations with a rod of iron; and her child was 
caught up unto God and to HisThrone.” The man child 
is to rule all nations with a rod of iron, but there is an 
interruption. And as we have seen that Christ came 
to this earth, was cut off, and took nothing, we get the 
other side of the picture here. He takes nothing, but is 
caught up to God and His Throne, and sits at the right 
hand of the Majesty in the heavens. ‘This sitting at the 
right hand of the Majesty in the heavens, belongs person- 
ally to Christ, but when it comes to ruling the nations 
with a rod of ivon, the saints are associated with Him. 
The quotation is from the second Psalm, where it is said, 
‘* Ask of me, and I shall give Thee the heathen for Thine 
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for ‘Thy 
possession : Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron ; 
Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” 
That is not asked yet, And He has prayed for the saints, 
A 2 


10 


not for the world— I pray for ‘them, ; 131 ‘pray not for the 
world, but for them which Thou hast yen Me.” He 
only intercedes for the world, when He, aks : for dominion 
over them, and of course it will be given ‘Him—it j is in 
God's counsels that it will ; and He will take judgment in 
hand, the rod of inon—hnt, then the sainta will judge the 
world too ; that is positively revealed—‘‘ Know ye not that 
we shall judge angels ? Do ye not know, that the saints 
shall judge the world?” And not only i is this stated i in 
the general, but in the detail, eapecially as to the rod. of 
iron, . At the end of the 2nd chapter, of Revelation, you 
will fnd that this is given to the Church, exactly as it 
is given to Christ—‘ He that overcometh, and keepeth 
my words unto the end, to him will I give power | over 
the nations ; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron ; ; 
as the vessels of a potter shall they. be brokén to shivers ; 3 
even as I have received of My Father.” And the same 
thing is said in the 7th chapter of Daniel, «“ Until the 
Ancient of Days came, and judgment 1 was given to the 
snints of the Most High, the saints who will be in the 
heavenly places with Christ, when Christ comes—the 
‘rod of iron” being, there spoken of as ‘ judgment,” a4 
That is not the most blessed. part, the blessed part is to be 
with Him ; but it is true, and it is part of what we have 
to look to, And so in the 20th chapter of Revelation, 

where this time is spoken of—‘ And I saw thrones, and 
the sitters on them, and judgment was given unto them.” 
How sadly has the sense of this plessedness and glory « of 
the saints being lost—I was speaking of, it last Wednes- 
day—their identification with Christ, their being joint- 
heirs, members of His body, His bride ; the sense of all 
this has dropped away from the Church. It is common 

te say that it is enough to lie at the foot of the Crosa. 

Now to me it is a blessed thing to see & person coming to 

the foot of the Cross, but it is dreadful to stay there, he- 
cause for a person to do so is the same as saying that he 


11 


does not own that the whole thing is accomplished. It 
is a want of boldness ‘‘ to enter into the holiest, through 
the veil, that is to say, Christ’s flesh.” It is the same as 
saying that he is unfit to pass through the rent veil to be 
a priest in the holy place. He says, ‘‘No; I must stay 
outside.” I say that is a very wretched Saudi biel to be in. 
He must come to the Cross in order to get in ; that is per- 
fectly true ; and it is blessed to see a person who has been 
careless so coming ; he can never get in any other way. 
But always to stay outside—alwaystosay, ‘‘I amstaying 
at the foot of the Cross, and do not know whether I have 
the right to enter in or not ;” that is a great mistake. 
If you say you cannot tell whether you are redeemed or 
not, how then can you call yourself a Christian? Chris- 
tians are redeemed of course. Why then do you take the 
name of Christians, and yet remain unable to say whether 
you are redeemed. In this chapter of Revelation which 
we have read, you have it positively revealed that it is 
finished with the saints, as regards all their trials and all 
their accusations, before the time that the trial of the Jew- 
ish people begins in the last half week of Daniel. In the 
first six verses of the chapter, you have the statement of 
those who are concerned in these last days. First, you 
have the ‘“‘woman clothed with the sun, and the moon 
under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve 
stars.” This, I have no doubt, is the Jewish people, 
nothing else — because Christ is not born of the 
Church, but looked at as reigning and glorious in 
the world, was born of the Jews, ‘‘of whom, as 
concerning the flesh, Christ came.” There is no kind 
of sense in the idea of Christ’s being born of the church. 
Being ‘‘clothed with the sun,” is being clothed with 
supreme authority. She has the moon—all her previous 
reflected state—under her feet. ‘‘ And upon her head a 
crown of twelve stars.” Twelve is the number always 
used to indicate power—the power of God’s administra- 


ee DE SRNR aR i ate 


Soe ag RS ROAR ttngimentens: oneerpenet rie 


12 


tion among men. You have the twelve apostles sitting 
on twelve thrones—the city built on twelve foundations, 
and having twelve gates, d&c.—the number being used to, 
express administrative power, God’s administrative 
_ power over man. Well, Christ was to be born.. ‘* And 
she being with child, cried, travailing in birth, and 
pained to be delivered.” And so the Jews say, in the 
9th of Isaiah, ‘*To us ason is born.” The church can- 
not say that at all, We can say that we believe He is 
the Son of God ; but we do not say He is born to us. 
As concerning the flesh, he was born into Israel. Then 
you come to the opposing power—the power of Satan— 
exercised through the Roman Empire. ‘And there 
appeared another wonder in heaven ; and behold a great 
red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven 
crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the third part 
of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth ; 
and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready 
to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was 
born.”” That is the power of Satan resisting Christ, 
and seeking to put an end to His power. He could not, 
of course, but he seemed to have done it for a while. 
‘¢ And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule 
all nations with a rod of iron”—clearly Christ—‘‘ and 
her child was caught up unto God, and to His throne.” 
He did not take the power—He took nothing, but was 
caught up to God. Then, having seen who are the per- 
sons engaged, you get the woman’s place—‘‘ And the 
woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place 
prepared of God, that they should feed her there a 
thousand, two hundred and three-score days.” You will 
see now the reason why I referred to the gap, with 
regard to all God’s dealings with the world, which there 
always is in prophecy—without, however, giving any dates 
at all—between the time that Christ is taken up, and 
the time that the “rch is taken up, and they are both 


= @2 Oo - 


18 


united together. As I have said, it is not merely a 
notion of men, but it is positively revealed as God’s own 
order in the 9th of Daniel—that Messiah was to be re- 
vealed and cut off and take nothing—that blindness in 
part happens to Israel till the times of the Gentiles are 
fulfilled, and that then the Jews would be brought to 
repentance, as Jesus Christ says in the Gospel of Mat- 
thew, ‘‘ Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, 
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.” 
Thus we get the church, urited with Christ, taken up to 
God, and the woman fled into the wilderness. Now we 
come to the progress of events, not as regards the 
church at all, but as regards Israel and the world. ‘‘ And 
there was war in heaven : Michael and his angels fought 
against the dragon ; and the dragon fought and his 
angels, and prevailed not ; neither was their place found 
any more in heaven.” The whole power of Satan will 
then be cast out. That is in direct contrast with the 
result of the church’s warfare. ‘‘We wrestle not 
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against 
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against spiritual wickedness in high places.” This is the 
conflict we have to wage as to our title to sit in heavenly 
places with Christ ; and the result of this spiritual con- 
flict is, that the power of Satan is cast out. In the pro- 
phecy we are considering, this is all over, and you see 
the joy there is in consequence among the dwellers in 
heaven, the heavenly saints. ‘‘ And the great dragon 
was cast out—that old serpent called the Devil, and 
Satan, which deceiveth the whole world ; he was cast out 
into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. 
And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come 
salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, 
and the power of His Christ, for the accuser of our 
brethren is cast down, which accused them before our 
God day and night. And they overcame him by the 


merge nn ere mse en ne en a AN Pt ET ee I ASSIS Haan ai ah Fay as en ee AST 


—rsezvacesresteceniessoeitiesni sites inci asian en renee 


14 


blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their teatim mony $ 

and they loved not their lives unto. the death. there 3 
fore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye. that dwell in them, 
Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea.” ” 
We find here, that while all the heavenly people, | that i is, 

the Church of God— because our conversation is in 
heaven and we are one with Christ in heaven — 
are called upon to rejoice that the accuser of the’ bre- 
thren is cast down—that they have. overcome ‘him—" 
at this very moment when these heavenly saints have 
overcome, it is just the time when Satan comes down to 
earth, having great wrath, knowing that he has but a 
short time. Thus we get entire rejoicing in what is 
heavenly, and, at the same time, most desperate : woe in 
what is earttity. This makes the contrast very distinct 
and definite between these heavenly ones and the dwel- 
lers on earth, who, all through the Revelation, are. con- 
trasted with those persons who are heirs of heaven, 
whose citizenship is in heaven. “Therefore rejoice, ye 
heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inha- 
biters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil i is come 
down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth 
that he hath but a short time. And when the dragon 


woman which brought forth the man child. » Wesee here 
very clearly that by the woman it is not the Church of 
God that is meant, because the Church of God is called 
upon to rejoice on account of all their afflictions being 
over, and the accusations against them past. They are 
called upon to rejoice because they have overcome the 
accuser by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of 
their testimony. But this woman is in a ‘different posi- 
tion, allthe rage of Satan being now directed against 
her. The Church of God has been taken out of the 
way, and Satan has another object for his great wrath, 
namely, the Jewish people. This i is for them the time 


15 


at pest tribulation that is elsewhere spoken of. Christ 
the Jews, ‘‘I am come in my Father's name, i 


ye receive me not ; if another shall come in his 


the true Christ, they must have a false Christ. 
read this chapter of the Revelation, in order to show 
that while one class of persons—those associated wit 
Christ—are caught up to God, and there is ‘triumph and, 
rejoicing and gladness amongst them when Satan is cast 
down, that is the very time when tribulation begins on 
the earth. * And when the dragon saw that he was cast 
unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought 
forth the man child. And to the woman were given two 
wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wil- 
derness, into her place, where she is nourished for a 
time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the 
serpent.” There in the wilderness, in this time of tribu- 
lation, God takes care of her. She makes her escape 
from the tribulation, the figure being employed that 
she receives this great power of flight, as if the wings 
of an eagle ; and God secures her, not as He did Abraham, 
who saw the destruction of Sodom from the top of the 
mount, but as He secured Lot, who was saved by flight. 
The peoplein heaven rejoicing are like Abraham on the top 
of the mount ; while the woman upon the earth is like 
Lot, saved by God giving her the great wings of an 
eagle to escape, while all this great rage and power of 
Satan is being displayed. ‘‘ And the serpent cast out of 
his mouth water as a flood, after the woman, that he 
might cause her to be carried away by the flood. And 
the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her 
mouth, and swallowed the flood which the dragon cast 
out of his mouth.” That is, providential means were 
used for the purpose.of saving the Jews from the violent 
assaults made upon them, ‘‘ And the dragon was wroth 
with the woman, and went to make war with the rem- 


16 


nant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, 
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.” I shall now 
refer to a more literal prophecy, which will help us to 
understand this same interval, these times of the Gen- 
tiles, so far as they are going on now—because I have 
no doubt that they began in the days of Nebuchad- 
nezzar. Turn to the 8th of Isaiah, where, after the 
circumstances of the moment having been spoken of as 
leading to it, it is said, ‘‘Sanctify the Lord of Hosts 
himself”—a blessed testimony to the divinity of the 
Lord Jesus as Jehovah—‘‘ and let Him be your fear, and 
let Him be your dread. And He shall be for a sanctuary ; 
but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offence, 
to both the houses of Israel ; for a gin and for a snare 
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among 
them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be 
snared, and be taken.” The Lord, you know, spoke of 
His being a stumbling-stone, and said that whoever 
should fall on that stone should be broken. ‘‘ Bind up 
the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. And I 
will wait upon the Lord that hideth his face from the 
house of Jacob, and I will look for Him. Behold I and 
the children whom God hath given me.” This, you 
remember, is quoted in the second of Hebrews. Al- 
though God is hiding His face from the house of Jacob, 
Christ says, ‘‘I will wait upon the Lord;” or, as the 
Septuagint has it, ‘‘I have put my trust in the Lord.” 
And again—‘‘ Behold I and the children whom the Lord 
hath given me.” These are the disciples of Christ in all 
ages. And then, in the 9th chapter, you have the close 
of all ;that—‘‘ For thou hast broken the yoke of his bur- 
den, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppres- 
sor, a8 in the day of Midian. For every battle of the 
warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in 
blood ; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire. 
For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and 


qi 64s, mm aa 


17 


the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his 
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty 
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Of 
the increase of His government and peace there shall be 
no end, upon the throne of David, and upon His king- 
dom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and 
with justice, from henceforth, even for ever.” Here, 
then, we have the fact of Christ’s coming and being a 
stone of stumbling, and He says, ‘I will wait upon the 
Lord jthat hideth his face from the house of Jacob.” 
Then follows a period of dreadful sorrow for Israel— 
‘¢'They shall look unto the earth, and behold trouble and 
darkness, dimness of anguish ; and they shall be driven 
to darkness.” And then comes—what? A dreadful 
battle ; only it has the fire of God’s judgment in it— 
‘* this shall be with*burning and fuel of fire”—which is a 
figure of God’s judgment. And then it is said, ‘‘ Unto 
usachildis born.” Christ is this child that was born’; but 
when he comes back, it shall be said of Him, as in the 
53rd of Isaiah, ‘‘we did esteem Him stricken, smitten 
of God, and afflicted.” What I refer to the passage 
now for, is the revelation it gives of the same fact 
of Christ’s coming and being rejected, His waiting 
upon the Lord that hides His face from the house of 
Jacob—and of the fact that at last He goes forth 
in glorious power, in this terrible battle of God’s 
judgment—‘“‘ in righteousness doth He judge and make 
war.””? And then it is said—unto us a child is born, the 
wonderful, the counsellor, the mighty God, and the like, 
and He sits upon the throne of David to give peace upon 
the earth. All this comes after the time that He had 
been waiting. His waiting was consequent on His 
rejection, while God was hiding His face from the house 
of Jacob, as He is doing now. But that is not for ever. 
I refer to it, that if possible our souls may get hold of 
the ways of God, the frame-work, as it were, of his 


ER ee ae ee oh. 


~ ee ea ernie ms 8 


a ae a 
cmmaeniatie wet AE EEE 
A TE SAFARI OLED 8 


202 ee EE Soe 


18 


plan—-that is, that Christ comes, is rejected, and is 
caught up to God—and then He sits on His Father’s 
throne, but He does not yet take to Him His great 
power and reign. Meanwhile the times of the Gentiles 
are running on, God hath hidden His face from the 
house of Jacob, and Jerusalem is trodden down of the 
Gentiles till the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. And, 
while that is going on, while there is this parenthesis in 
God’s ways as regards the government of the world, 
Christ, having sent down the Holy Ghost, is gathering 
His joint heirs to be associated with Him when he does 
take His great power. Now let us turn to the accom- 
plishment of this, as regards the Church, that is, its 
being taken up to be associated with Christ, and then, if 
time permits, we shall turn to the other part, the 
accomplishment as regards the Jews. My object will be 
to shew that the resurrection of the saints is a thing in 
nature, time, and character, entirely apart from, and— 
except in the fact of its being a resurrection—in every 
particular the opposite of the resurrection of the wicked 
—that the resurrection of the saints is a special favor of 
God, such as was manifested in Christ’s own resurrection, 
because they are saved already, because they have got 
eternal life, because they are the delight of God, not as 
they are in themselves, but as they are in Christ—that 
they are taken up and dealt with apart by themselves, as 
not belonging to ‘his world’s government, except in so 
far as they are kings of it—whereas the wicked, while it is 
quite true that they are raised—Christ will raise everybody 
—are raised, however, not because they are the delight 
of God, but because the contrary is the case—not 
because they have life in Christ, for they have not—but 
they are raised for judgment, which is nothing but con- 
demnation. That is another part of the subject, and a 
very solemn part of it, which I cannot dwell upon now, 
that the judgment of the nations and of the earth is for 


19 


condemnation. I purpose now to go through all the 
passages which speak of the resurrection, and to shew 
you that the resurrection of the saints is an entirely dis- 
tinct thing in nature, time, character, and everything 
else—that it is the consequence of redemption so that 
now we can look for it, because we are saved—that it 
will happen when Christ comes, whereas, when the 
wicked are raised, Christ won’t come at all, but that 
when He comes He will raise the saints and the saints 
only to be with Him in blessedness and glory. Mark, 
beloved friends, how solemn and practical that is for all 
of us—that the distinction is so clearly made, that,. 
where the life of Christ is, where we have a part in the 
redemption of Christ, when Christ comes, He will take us 
up into glory with Himself—that we who are redeemed 
and have eternal life shall appear with Him in glory— 
whereas, where there is not repentance and a receiving 
of Christ into the heart, that will not be the case, but, 
when the time comes, those who are in that condition 
will be raised solely for judgment, and that, while all are 
to appear before Christ, wherever a person has to do with 
judgment, he is infallibly condemned. Hence you find 
the words which are familiar to all of you—‘‘ Enter not 
into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy 
sight shall no flesh living be justified.” Beloved friends, 
you can feel how important this is. It applies the sub- 
ect we are now considering directly to the state.of our 
souls, There is no judgment without condemnation. 
No man with whom God enters into judgment can be 
saved, for sentence has been pronounced already as 
plainly as God can pronounce it—‘‘ There is none right- 
eous, no, not one.” I do not know what the great 
white throne can say plainer than that. Such is the 
declaration which is brought home to our hearts, but, 
before the day of judgment which shall execute that 
wrath, the wrath to come, Christ comes to deliver us 


from it, and wherever He is received into the heart, we 
are delivered from it and are placed with Himself—He is 
our righteousness, our life, everything. Before referring 
to the passages which speak of the resurrection, I will 
only add in passing that in the very nature of things the 
judgment of God can never be anything else than con- 
demnation—I speak of the judgment upon men, not the 
rebel angels, although it is true of them also. We have 
made a Judge of God—and how? Bysin. God could 
not judge Adam, if he remained as God created him— 
for, if He judged the things that He created He would 
be judging Himself. He could not judge him unless he 
sinned. Suppose I made this desk, and I began to 
judge it, I should be judging myself, the workman who 
made it. God made Adam such as he was, and saw him 
to be very good, and while Adam remained such, God 
could not judgehim, What brought him into judgment was 
that Adam left God, listened to the devil, and turned to 
sin, What then can judgment be but condemnation ? 
God may save us out of it through Christ—that is 
another thing—but our prayer must be, Enter not into 
judgment with us, for there is none righteous, no, not 
one. Now the resurrection of the saints is the fruit and 
final power of Christ’s deliverance, whereas the other 
resurrection is the righteous execution of judgment 
against those who have hardened their necks against 
God’s mercy in Christ, treasuring up unto themselves 
wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the right- 
eous judgment of God. First, then, as to the nature and 
character of the resurrection of the saints, turn to the 8th 
of the Romans, at the 11th verse—‘‘If the Spirit ef Him 
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you”—that is, 
if you are Christians, for if any man has not the spirit of 
Christ, he is none of His—“‘ He that raised up Christ 
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by 
His spirit that dwelleth in you.” That is not true of the 


21 


wicked. The reasons why they and we, if we are sainta, 
are raised, are totally different ; for we are raised in 
virtue of the Holy Ghost dwelling in us—that is, be- 
cause we are saved and sealed by the spirit of God 
already. There, then, we get the principle. Now turn 
to the 5th of John, and see how strongly it brings this 
out. It says nothing as to time, which is comparatively 
immaterial ; but it is a most solemn and instructive pas- 
sage with regard to the point we are considering. Christ 
says at the 21st verse—‘ For as the Father raiseth up the 
dead, and quickeneth them ; so the Son quickeneth whom 
he will. Forthe Fatherjudgethnoman, but hath committed 
all judgment unto the Son.” They both quicken ; but the 
Father does not judge : all judgment is committed to the 
Son, “That all men should honour the Son, even as 
they honour the Father ”—even the wicked themselves, 
they cannot help doing so—‘‘ He that honoureth not the 
Son, honoureth not the Father which hath sent him. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, 
and believeth in Him that sent me, hath everlasting 
life.” You see that, after he had said the Father and 
Son quicken, but judgment is given to the Son, He 
puts it to us which we are to have—am I to be the sub- 
ject of this life-giving power with Him, or shall I be the 
subject of judgment—that is what He is asking us here 
—‘* He that heareth my word, and believeth on Him 
that sent me, hath everlasting life ”—it is given to him— 
‘Sand shall not come into condemnation ”—the same 
word in the Greek as stands for judgment—‘‘ but is 
passed from death unto life.” Christ hath exercised His 
life-giving power, and is not going to deny it, by bringing 
into judgment those upon whom it has been exercised. 
‘* Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming and 
now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of 
God ; and they that hear shall live”—by which, ‘no 
doubt, is meant ‘spiritual quickening—‘“‘ For as ‘the 


Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the 
Son to have life in Himself ; and hath given Him autho- 
rity to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of 
man. Marvel not at this ; for the hour is coming, in 
which all that are in their graves shall hear His voice, 
and shall come forth, they that have done good, unto 
the resurrection of life ; and they that have done evil, 
unto the resurrection of damnation ”—which is the same 
word (‘‘ judgment ”) again. I do not want to insist on 
the word damnation ; itis damnation no doubt, but I 
do not insist upon that word, because the point all 
through is that it is ‘‘ judgment ”—it is a resurrection 
of life, and a resurrection of judgment. How far they 
may be apart is another point, which has nothing to do 
with this fact, that there is a resurrection of life, and 
a resurrection of judgment. Where there has been 
spiritual quickening, where they have everlasting life, 
they shall not come into judgment, but have passed from 
death unto life ; but then, if dead as to their bodies, 
they must be raised up to make that life complete, be- 
cause they must have bodies in unison and in harmony 
with the state into which they enter ; and on the other 
hand, they that have done evil, shall come forth unto 
the resurrection of judgment. It is said, ‘‘The hour 
is coming, in the which,” &c., but this is really nothing 
as to the two things being at the same time. It is no 
more than if I were to say, ‘‘the hour of Napoleon’s 
greatness,” meaning the period during which he was 
great, as contrasted with the period of his fall and little- 
ness. So here, when it is said—‘‘the hour is coming 
and now is ”—we know that it has already lasted, since 
Christ spoke of it, for more than eighteen hundred years. 
The real intention of the expression is to contrast the 
time of Christ’s life with the time since; it is the same 
as saying there is a time for quickening and a time for 
judgment, and therefore a time for raising up. Here, 


> of te sw eee sw’. 


then, are two distinct characters of Christ’s power—His 
giving life, and His executing judgment ; those to whom 
life is given, gracious, spiritual life, have part in the 
resurrection of life ; those to whom it is not given, have 
part in the resurrection of judgment or condemnation. 
You thus have the great principle that is involved, and I 
now turn to other passages which illustrate other parts of 
the subject. In the 20th of Luke, the Sadducees put the 
case that, according to the law of Moses, if a man, hav- 
ing a wife, died without children, his brother should take 
the wife, and they supposed the case of seven brethren 
marrying her, and asked whose wife should she be in the 
resurrection. It was a quibble they raised, tempting the 
Lord, and Jesus answered them, ‘‘ The children of this 
world marry and are given in marriage. But they 
which shall be aceounted worthy to obtain that world, 
and the resurrection from the dead, &c.” Now what is 
the meaning of this, ‘‘ Accounted worthy to obtain the 
resurrection from the dead?’ You see it is accounted 
a special favor. If you only get the resurrection from 
the dead, you will be ‘‘ equal unto the angels.” It can- 
not be meant that, if people are raised to be condemned, 


they are equal to the angels. But it is said—if you get 


the resurrection, you will be equal to the angels, ‘‘ And 
are the children of God, being the children of the resur- 
rection.” It is quite impossible that that can be said of 
those who are raised only to condemnation. If you turn 
again to the 15th of 1st Corinthians, you will find that 
nothing can be more plainly set forth than this is. At 
the 22nd verse, it is said, ‘‘ For as in Adam all die, even 
so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in 
his owr order.” Then we get the order of the resurrec- 
tion, and that is just what we want. Let us see then if 
it is to be a common thing, in which all classes are to go 
up together. ‘‘ Every man in his own order ; Christ the 
first fruits ; afterward they that are Christ’s at His com- 


24 


ing.” Nothing can be more plain. ‘Then cometh 
be raised, but it is they who are Christ’s at his coming. 

And what I affirm is, that not merely can this be proved 
from Scripture, but that there never is the slightest 
appearance of anything else, that this fact I am speaking 
about is linked up with the very foundation truths of 
redemption. Many have redemption who do not see it 
—TI admit that fully—but nevertheless it is the effect of 
redemption, and you can see the light that is thus thrown 
on the fact of my not coming into judgment, because I 
have passed from death unto life, as stated in the 5th of 
John, and what the Church has lost, by losing sight of 
that. Again in the 3rd of Philippians, at the 9th verse, 
the apostle speaks of it as his own hope, ‘‘ And be found 
in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of 
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the 
righteousness which is of God by faith, that I may know 
Him, and the power of His resurrection,”—that is a 
present thing, yon see—‘‘ And the fellowship of His 
sufferings being made conformable unto his death ; if by 
any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the 
dead.” Now what is it to which so much importance is 
attached, that the apostle desires to be made like Christ, 
if by any means he may attain something very special, 
the resurrection of the dead? When the apostle uses 
such language, is iv possible that alJ, both the wicked and 
the righteous, should be jostled up together in the resur- 
rection, leaving it to be found out afterwards which are 
the righteous and which are the wicked? The truth is 
it isa new word which the apostle invented, which is not 
found ix classical Greek, to express a being raised up 
from among the dead, on purpose to distinguish from the 
raising of the wicked the raising of the saints from out 
among the dead. I do not like to deal in critical points, 
but the fact is that in a number of passages the power is 


the end.” There cometh another time when others shall . :, 


lost, because the word is translated ‘‘ resurrection of the 
dead,” instead of ‘‘ resurrection from among the dead.” 
That wasthe character of Christ’s resurrection, when He was 
declared to be the Son of God with power by being raised 
from among the dead. And we will be like Christ in 
that He will raise us up from among the dead, because 
we have got the Spirit of Christ, and life from Christ. 
The reason why I dwell on this is because it goes right to 
the root of the question.cf our redemption. Nothing 
can be so absurd—forgive me for saying so—than the 
idea of what is called the general judgment—not that we 
shall not all appear before Christ—that of course is true. 
Take Paul himself—he has been in heaven one thousand 
eight hundred yéars, absent from the body and present 
with the Lord-~are you going to judge him after that? 
He is in heaver. because he was entitled to go there, and 
to speak of judgment after that is absurd on the face of 
it. Todo so only shews that the Church of God, even 
true saints, have lost the sense of being redeemed already. 
If Christ’s dying has put away my sins, and given me a 
place with Himself ; if, having received the Holy Ghost, 
IT am joined to the Lord as one spirit, am I, thus joined 
to Christ, still to be judged? To say so, is to forget the 
true place which we hold. I turn now to the proof of 
this. Look back for a moment to the 15th of 1st Cor- 
inthians, where, having got the order, to shew further 
how entirely and distinctly it is saints and none else who 
are raised, we find—‘‘ So also is the resurrection of 
the dead ”—or from the dead—‘‘ It is sown in corrup- 
tion ; it is raised in incorruption ; it is sown in dishonor, 
it is raised in glory.” How can you apply that to a 
general resurrection ? ‘‘ Raised in glory ”—can you apply 
that to the wicked? It is impossible to read one sentence 
about the resurrection, without seeing—not that the others 
will not be raised, but that it is distinctly and definitely 
the resurrection of the saints that is spoken of, because 
z 


tg te 
PELL PRAT IO ESTEE A SaaS 2 


iy RR 


26 


they are redeemed and have life in Christ. Take again 
the 4th of 1st Thessalonians, which we quoted anvther 
evening with reference to the Lord’s coming, and now 
with reference to which we have already seen, that it is 
‘*they who are Christ’s, at His coming.” At the 16th 
verse, it is said—‘‘ For the Lord himself shall descend 
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall 
rise first”—and no one else. This is the plain language 
uniformly held. It is indeed the capital truth of the New 
Testament, that as Christ by being raised from the dead 
was declared to be the Son of God with power, according 
to the Spirit of holiness, so we through grace are, not 
like Christ in person but vy being adopted—also declared 
to be the Sons of God, by attaining the resurrection, 
when the time comes, of the body. The only point that 
I refer to the Revelation for, is that there will be a 
thousand years between the two resurrections, But, 
whether it be a thousand years or thousand days, the 
point which I feel it to be important to insist upon, is 
that they are two totally distinct things—that the resur- 
rection of the saints is God’s taking those He delights 
in, who are already redeemed and quickened by the 
Spirit, because His Spirit dwells in them, Hig taking 
them to be with Christ in glory—whereas the other, 
whether a thousand days or a thousand years after, is the 
resurrection to judgment, quite a different thing. There 
is one passage more I will refer you to, in order to shew 
how the same truth is every where affirmed, to the 14th 
of John—‘‘I go to prepare a place for you. And if I 
go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and 
receive you with myself, that where I am there ye may 
be also.” That is the way in which Christ te! 23 us up. 
He will take us up to be with Himself, at His coming. 
He comes again, and receives us'to Himself, that where 
He is there we may be also. There is one passage which 
people quote to prove the erroneous notion about a gene- 


Ss Le — 1 Ral, et a NE EES Ce TRI 


Sa te OR Re SU eee ee Set OF 


— 
2 


27, 


ral resurrection—they cannot apply to that purpose any 
of the passages which speak of the resurrection—but they 
qnote the 25th of Matthew, where the division between 
the sheep and the goats is spoken of. Now there is not 
a single syllable there about the resurrection. In the 
24th chapter, our Lord has been speaking of the dealings 
with the Jewish people until Christ comes, and then in 
three parables he describes His doalings with the saints, 
and then He describes His dealings with the nations, and 
then He speaks of the time when He comes in His glory 
to sit upon the throne of His glory, and to gather 
all nations—the Gentiles, if you please, for it is 
the same word—before Him to judge them. And 
this is the judgment, whose existence people have 
strangely forgotten—that there is a judgment of the 
quick as well as of the dead—a judgment of the living, 
and a terrible judgment it is too. I now refer to the 
passage which speaks of the thousand years. I went 
over the other passage first, because people are apt to 
think that this “‘ first resurrection ” is merely the expla- 
nation of some symbolical ideas which we found in the 
Revelation ; but, as I have shewn you, there is no pas- 
sage in Scripture referring to the resurrection, which 
does not shew that there is a first resurrection of the 
saints. Turn, then, now to the 20th of Revelation. 
But remark that in the preceding chapters you find that 
Babylon has been destroyed—she in whom ‘‘was found 
the blood of prophets and of saints.’ Then you have 
the judgment of the wicked on the earth, which I do not 


- enter into now—and then the marriage of the saints and 


the Lamb, and their coming with Him when He comes 
to destroy the beast—‘‘the armies which were in heaven 
followed Him ”—whenever Christ comes, His heavenly 
saints will come along with Him, as it is said, ‘‘the 
Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with Thee,” 
and ‘‘the Lord cometh with ten thousand of His saints,” 
and ‘‘ when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, we also 


28 


shall appear with Him in glory.” Here, in Revelation, 
they are seen in figurative language, coming forth, 
clothed in white garments, which is the righteousness of 
the saints. I refer to this merely to shew the place they 
hold. Then Christ comes forth as King of Kings, and 
‘Lord of Lords, with His saints, and the beast and the 
false prophet are taken and destroyed. Then Satan is 
bound, and then John says—‘‘I saw thrones, and they 
sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them ; 
and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the 
witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which 
had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither 
had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their 
’ hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thou- 
sand years.” There we find the saints, those to whom 
judgment is given, and not only so, but who execute 
judgment, sitting on thrones, and reigning with Christ 
a thousand years—‘‘ but the rest of the dead lived not 
again until the thousand years were finished ; this is the 
first resurrection.” Mark how the whole statement 
shews the perfect absurdity—and it is a sad and solemn 
thing, the influence which this delusion exercises on 
people’s minds—the perfect absurdity of what is called 
the spiritual millennium—not that the Holy Ghost will 
not be there, for He will—but you see now before all 
this, the marriage of the Lamb is come with the Church, 
the bride of Christ ; the whole as regards the Church is 
complete, and Christ comes forth to execnte judgment 
on the beast and the false prophet, accompanied by the 
armies of the saints, the bride having made herself ready, 
and the marriage of the Lamb having taken place be- 
fore that. And yet people are looking for the millen- 
nium as a state of the Church down hore! I admit that 
it is presented in a figure, but this is certain, that if the 
bride is gone up, and the marriage of the Lamb has 
eome, it is not the state of the Church down here that 


29 


is meant. For we read also that Satan is to be bound 
then, whereas the character given to us while down here 
is that we are to overcome Satan. ‘‘ Satan will be 
bruised under your feet shortly.” Our place here is that 
we have to wrestle, not with flesh and blood, but with 
spiritual wickedness in heavenly places ; whereas when 
the Lamb comes out with His saints, Satan is bound, 
and then begins the period of a thousand years. I wish 
to refer you to the connection of the passage in the 15th 
of 1st Corinthians with the 25th of Isaiah, because the 
connection of these two things—the resurrection of the 
saints, and the restoration of Israel—will thereby be 
strongly brought out. The apostle says that ‘‘ when this 
corruptible shall ‘have put on incorruption, and this 
mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be 
brought to pass the saying that is written, ‘‘ Death is 
swallowed up in victory.” If you turn to the 25th of 
Isaiah, you will see that that takes place at taois time 
which we call the millennium, when the Jews being 
restored to their place on the earth, there is that era of 
blessedness among the nations which is commonly called 
the millennium. It is there said—‘‘ Thou shalt bring 
down the noise of strangers, as the heat in a dry place ;. 
even the heat with the shadow of a cloud; the branch 
of the terrible ones shall be brought low. And 
in this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto alk 
people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, 
of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refiu- 
ed. And He will destroy in this mountain the face of the 
covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread 
over all nations. He will swallow up death in victory,” 
That is at the time the resurrection takes place, for it 
is said in Corinthians, ‘‘Then shall come to pass the 
saying which is written, death is swallowed up in vic- 
tory.” And thus it appears that the time when this 
resurrection takes place is the time when the Lord 


30 


restores Israel, when He establishes Israel’s place in Zion, 
and takes away the vail from off the face of all nations. 
It is said—‘‘ Behold,{is it not of the Lord of hosts that 
the people shall labour in the very fire, and the people 
shall weary themselves for very vanity? For the earth 
shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the 
Lord, as the waters cover the sea.” This is the condition 
of the earth when this time of which 1 am speaking 
comes—‘‘ They shall labour in the very fire and shall 
weary themselves for very vanity.” Again it is said— 
let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn 
righteousness ; in the land of uprightness will he deal 
unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord. 
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but 
they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the 
people ; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour 
them.” We thus see that, though favour is shewn to 
the wicked, they will not learn righteousness—but - 
When thy judgments are abroad on the earth, then 
the inhabitants of the world will learn pichtsoubiben pr 
I am adding these few texts to shew that the millennium 
is not spiritual, in the sense in which it is often under- 
stood. Whenever God speaks of the earth being full of 
the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, and the like, 
it is always in connection with judgment. You find this 
in Numbers, when God said He would destroy Israel, 
that in connection with that it is written, ‘‘ All the 
earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord,” and 
you find the same things in the passage from Habakkuk, 
which I have quoted. Younever find the idea presented 
of the gospel going forth and bringing all nations under 
its influence. In the 11th of the Romans, the apostle 
puts it in this way, ‘‘For I would not, brethren, that ye 
‘should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be 
wise in your own conceits ; that blindness in part is hap- 
pened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come 


a oe 6(COUlUCS SS Se —e 


$1 


in. And so all Israel shall be saved,” That is, he treats 
that expectation of the Church not being cut off, az 
being wise in their own conceit. Again, in another pas- 
sage it is declared that what gathers together to battle 
the kings of the earth and of the;whole world, are three 
unclean apirits that come out of the mouth of the dragon, 
and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the 
mouth of the false prophet. I do not now go inte the 
details of that, but this must be evident to you that, 
when itis:stated that these three unclean spirits go forth 
+o guther the earth and the whole world to the Dattle of 
that great day of God Almighty, it cannot be the'gather- 
ing of the saints that is spoken of~it‘is a gathering of 
the powers of Satan. I have now gone through all the 
passages in the New Testament, which, so far as I am 
aware, speak of the resurrection, and I think it must be 
as plain to you, as anything could] possibly be, that all 
those passages shew very distinctly that the resurrection 
of the saints is an entirely distinct thing from the resur- 
rection of the wicked, being founded§on their redemption 
and their having received life from Christ, the power of 
which is shewn by the resurrection of their bodies—that 
that resurrection of life is definitely distinguished from 
the resurrection of judgment by a thousand years elaps- 
ing between the two—and that while the first is the fruit 
of redemption, the other is the fruit of the rejection of 
redemption. Time will not allow me to enter on the 
subject of the restoration of the Jews. But let me just 
return, in a few words of application, to these solemn 
truths, that, before judgment comes, Christ has come to 
save, that, if He enters into judgment, nobody could be 
saved—that, whenever He enters into judgment, no flesh 
living can be justified, because there is none righteous, 
no, not one—but that, because that is{true, ‘the 
Lord has sent a perfect salvation in order that 


‘we might escape the judgment, a salvation that {deli- 


32 


vers ws from the wrath to come—that there is 
_wrath coming, but that there is deliverance from it— 
and that when God interferes in this way to deliver us 
from that wrath to come, He does not merely save us 
from wrath, but gives us a place with H‘s cwn Son—that 
not merely are our sins forgiven, but that we are united 
to Christ by the one Spirit, Christ being the first born 
among many brethren, who are the members of His body, 
of His flesh, and of His bones, so that He nourisheth the 
Church as a man nourisheth and cherisheth his own flesh, 
and prays, ‘‘ Father I will that they also whom Thou hast 
given me, be with me where I am,” so that when he ap- 
pears, we also shall appear with Him, and that if He is 
the judge, the saints too shall sit with Him on thrones, 
and judgment shall be given to them, for, says the apostle, 
‘¢ Know ye not that the saints shall judge the world!” 
Now is that the thought, beloved friends, which you have 
of redemption? Have your souls believed that this world 
is a condemned world? I know that the world will not 
bear to hear that, but it must bear it when it rises to 
judgment—that it is a condemned world. Individual 
souls are tried, but it is not true that the world is in a 
state of probation, Christ came to seek and to save that 
which is lost, and a man that is lost is not in a state of 
probation. When we are judged, we are judged of the 
Lerd that we should not be condemned with the world. 
That is all a settled thing with the world. How do your 
hearts take this up that all this busy scene which you 
live in the midst of, is a condemned world, that this is 
the world which said, ‘‘ This is the heir, come, let us kill 
him”—that this world has rejected Christ, and that 
Christ has said, ‘‘ now is the judgment of this world,” 
He says, ‘‘ The world seeth me no more; ” and ‘‘ when 
the Comforter is come, he will reproye the world 
of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment—of 
righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me 


33 


no more, But, because the world is thus condemned, 
there is offered to us redemption, a new life, a second 
Adam instead of the first—and all the promises of God 
are in Him—there are no promises to men, but all the 
promises of God are in Him, Yea, and in Him, Amen. 
When Adam sinned, the promise was not given to Adam 
—there was no promise given to Adam—it was to the 
seed of the woman, that the seed of the woman should 
bruise the serpent’s head. That is, the promise was 
given to the second Adam, not to the first. And, then, 
in Christ we have not merely forgiveness, but glory. 
We are one with Christ, the bride of Christ, and have 
our place, not according to the demerits of the first 
Adam, but according to the merits of the second Adam. 
Do you take hold of that blessed truth ! The Lord give 
you to feel more deeply than you have ever felt before 
what it is to be in a world which has‘ rejected the Lord, 
and then to know, with joyful hearts, that you yourselves 
have bowed and received Him as your Saviour, who, in 
unspeakable love,.suffered and died for us. 


PEIGES 


Lovell and Gibson, Printers, Toronto. 


v. 
09 


- 


. 
nS 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


6” 


y 


ie 


pographic 


Ph 


ciences 
Corporation 


LECTURES ON THE SECOND COMING. 


LECTURE Iv. 


ROMANS XI 


By J. N. D. 


Coronte : 


GOSPEL TRAOT DEPOSITORY. 
(MRS, DREW, 870, YONGE STRERT,) 


ee 


Price Five Oents, 


SUBSTANCE OF A LECTURE 


ROMANS XI. 


Mezerrina Hovse, Alexander Street, 
Toronto, April 15, 1863. 

Of the two great subjects besides our individual salva- 
tion, of which the Scriptures treat, as already stated, 
namely, the Church and the government of the world, 
the latter leads us at once to the Jews as its centre, as 
the Church is of the heavenly glory under Christ ; under 
whom as their head all things in heaven and earth are to 
be gathered together in one. That government will ex- 
tend over the whole earth, but the royal nation and seat 
and centre of government will be the Jewish people. To 
Jerusalem, as the centre alike of worship and govern- 
ment, all nations will flow. So it was ordained from the 
beginning, as we learn from the remarkable passage, 
Deut. xxxii. 8., ‘“When the Most High divided to:the 
nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of 
Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the 
number of the children of Israel. For the Lorn’s por- 
tion is His people ; Jacob is the lot of His inheritance:” 
The difficulty we shave to meet in men’s minds:on this 
point is:this : that that.people having been set aside. for 
théir sins, first of idolatry, secondly the xajection..of 


ewes AO RE AT 


4 


the Lcrd Jesus,—and the Church and kingdom of heaven 
having been established, it is supposed they will not be 
restored, but merge in the profession of christianity. 
But this sets aside like the prophecies of the Old and 
the declarations of the New Testament. I will refer to 
this last first, as correcting this very mistake, and this 
will make way for the direct and positive testimonies of 
the Old which concern this people of God’s election. In 
the 11th of Romans this question is treated : ‘* I say then, 
is the question with which it begins, hath God cast 
away His people? God forbid. . . . God hath not 
cast away His people whom he foreknew.” Then the 
case is put of their rejection, and the apostle argues : 
the casting of them away was the reconciling of the 
world, and proceeds: for if the casting of them away 
be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving 
of them be but life from the dead? And if some of the 
branches were broken off, and thou, being a wild olive 
tree, were graffed in among them, and with them par- 
takest of the root and fatness of the olive tree ; boast 
not against the branches ; but if thou boast, thou bearest 
not the root, but the root thee. Thou wilt say then, the 
branches were broken off that I might be graffed in, 
Well ; because of unbelief they were broken off, and 
thou standest by faith. Be not high minded, but fear ; 
for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed 
lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the good- 
ness and severity of God: on them which fell, severity ; 
but towards thee goodness, if thou continue in his good- 
ness ; Otherwise thou also shalt be cut off. And they 
also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed 
in: for God is able to graff them in again. For if thou 
were cut out of the olive tree, which is wild by nature, 
and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive 
tree, dc.” Then he warns the Gentile christians against 
the yery notion to which I refer, assuring them that they 


ise 


5 


are in danger of being cut off in their turn, as we shall 
see more fully when we treat that subject. In the 25th 
verse he adds, For I would not have you ignorant of 
this mystery, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, 
until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in. And so all 
Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come 
out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodli- 
ness from Jacob. They are partially set aside till the 
Church be called, and thena deliverer, Christ, shall, after 
all the Church is brought in, come out of Sion and turn 
away their ungodliness. This is not by the gospel as 
now preached, for he adds : ‘* As touching the gospel they 
are enemies for your sakes,” the Gentiles being thus let 
in, ‘‘ but as touching the election they are beloved for the 
fathers’ sakes. For the gifts and calling of God are 
without repentance.” Here we have God’s ways towards 
them clearly set forth. Partial blindness for a time, 
during which the Church the fulness of she Gentiles is 
called ; when that is closed their deliverer comes out of 
Sion. Our gospel is not the means, they are as a nation 
enemies as respects that, but they have not ceased to be 
beloved for the fathers’ sake. That is a matter of God’s 
election, and as to His gifts and dealings He does not 
change His mind.* 

Thus it is certain that God maintains His purpose as 
to them as a people, and that it is not by the gcspe! as 
now preached they will be called in. As to taat they 
are enemies. So the Lord at the close of Matt. xxiv., 
when declaring the judgment coming upon them, says, 
Their honse should be desolate till they say, accomplish- 


* The 31st verse should be translated: even so these have 
now not believed in your mercy that they might be objects of 
mercy. The Gentiles clearly were, but the Jews had promises; 
but having rejected the grace of the gospel they became ob- 
jects of mere mercy like the Gentiles, ‘This calls forth the 
Apostle’s admiration of God’s ways. 


= so rar el aR Aer =e mera ws ee 


é 


-ing tlie oxviii: Psalm, ‘‘ Blessed be he: that cometh in the 
name of the Lorp.” And he carries.on their history till 
His coming again, consequent on which, He will gather 
together the elect among them from the four winds ; nor 
should ‘they cease to subsist as a distinct class till all was 
fulfilled. Compare Dout. xxxii., 5-20. Then the Lord 
gives His ways with His servants meanwhile, and after- 
wards with the Gentile nations when he returns. 

Thus we learn distinctly the teaching of the New 
‘Testament, of the Lord, and the apostle, as to the plan 
and ways of God in respect of his ancient and elect 
people. If we compare Deut. xxxii. 26-27, and what 
‘follows, -we shall find this abundantly confirmed. In the 
end the ‘Lord will judge His people, and repent Himself 
concerning His servants, and the nations be called to 
rejoice with them,* and Jehovah will be merciful to His 
‘land and to His people. 

I may now turn to the direct declarations of the 
prophets, which leave no shadow of doubt on their resto- 
ration and blessing, and that, as a people with Jerusalem 
for the centre of their dominion and glory. ‘That these 
prophecies have neyer been accomplished the passages 
themselves ‘will prove; but there are certain general 
considerations which affect this quostion, which I will 
here notice. That Israel as a people were not brought 
into their promised blessings, when Christ first came, is 
evident. ‘It was the time of their casting away, and 
the grafting in of the Gentiles, the reconciling the world, 
and ‘their receiving again is set.in contrast withit. Jeru- 
‘salem was destroyed, not rebuilt; the people scattered, 
not gathered. But their restoration after the Babylonish 


.* Phe Apostle Paul quotes this to prove as.a principle that 
-God will:bless:the: Gentiles. But the accomplishment is clearly 
cyet 40,come ;.:the smallest attention to the. passage makes: this 
clear. ; 


7 


éaptivity is sometimes alleged to be the fulfilment of 
these ptomises; but this was far indeed from aceom- 
plishing them. Their blessings are to be under the new 
covenant; but the new covenant was not established 
then. They are to be under Messiah, but Messiah was 
not then. The Jews were still in captivity, so that 
Neliemiah speaks thus: ‘‘ Behold we are servants this 
day, and for the land that thou gavest unto our fathers 
to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof, behold we 
are servants in it. And it yieldeth much increase to the 
kings which thou hast set over us because of our sins. 
Also they have dominion over our bodies and over our 
cattle at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.” 
Further, when christianity was introduced, not only was 
Jerusalem destroyed in judgment, but the Gentiles were 
in full glory and triumph. When the Jews are re- 
established according to prophecy, they are judged ana 
brought under. I will now quote the prophecies which 
predict this establishment of the people. You will see 
its connection with Christ, with the judgment of the 
Gentiles, with the new covenant, and even with the 
resurrection. It will be the sparing of a remnant, in the 
first instance, which will become a great nation. I first 
quote Isaiah, who furnishes us with some very remark- 
able prophecies on this subject. After describing the 
universal evil and the judgment of this nation, he closes 
his introductory prophecy thus, chap. iv. 2-6. ‘‘In that 
day shall the branch of the Lorp be beautiful and glori- 
ous, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and 
comely for them that are escaped of Israel. And it 
shall come to pass that, he that is left in Zion, and he 
that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even 
every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem. 
When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the 
daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of 
Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judg- 
a2 


ment, and by the spirit of burning. And the Lorp will 
create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and 
upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the 
shining of a flaming fire by night : for upon all the glory 
shall be a defence. And there shall be a tabernacle 
for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a 
place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from 
rain.” Thus the glory will be restored to Zion when the 
Lord shall have purged away her guilt by judgment. 
Two causes of judgment are there stated: the unfaith- 
fulness of Israel to her first calling; and their unfitness 
to meet the glory of the Lord when He appears. In 
this last (chap. vi.) that judgment which the Lord re- 
calls is pronounced, ‘‘ Make the heart of this people fat, 
and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest 
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and 
understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.” 
The prophet then enquires, ‘‘ How long?” The answer 
is, ‘* Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and 
the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, 
and the Lord hag removed men far away, and there be a 
great forsaking in the midst of the land.” Then it is 
added, ‘‘ But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall re- 
turn, and shall be eaten, asa teil tree, and as an oak, 
whose substance is in them, when they have cast their 
leaves, so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.” 
Nothing could more strikingly depict the long winter of 
Israel’s desolation ; but here God would in the remnant 
give a principle of restoration and blessing, as Paul in 
Rom. xi. This point is more historically prophesied of 
in viii. and ix., where the rejection of Christ is definitely 
spoken of, 14-18; and His manifestation in glory in 
favour of Israel, yet in judgment, in ix. 5-7.* Chap- 
ters xi. and xii., the closing ones of this series, largely 


* The third verse should be read ag in the margin, to him, 
(or it) the people. 


declare the restoration of Israel, terminating thus, xii. 6: 
6 Ory out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great 
is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.” In the 
24th and 25th, which form the close of the next series of 
prophecies, the testimony of God is carried on to the 
utter desolation of the earth. ‘‘ It shall reel to and fro 
like a drunken man, and the transgression thereof is 
heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again,” that 
is, it is its definite and final judgment as the earth of 
man’s power. It is added, ‘‘ And it shall come to pass 
in that day, that the Lorp shall punish the host of the 
high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth 
upon the earth. . . . Then the moon shall be con- 
founded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lorp of hosts 
shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before 
his ancients gloriously.” Here, therefore, again we find 
judgment on the earth, and the Jewish people brought 
to the enjoyment of Jehovah’s presence and blessing. 
But there is more than this. In the 25th, universal 
blessing comes on the Gentiles then: ‘And in this 
mountain shall the Lorp of hosts make unto all people 
a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat 
things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. 
And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the 
covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread 
over all nations.” At this time also it is that the resur- 
rection takes place, verse 8; ‘* He will swallow up death 
in victory : and the Lorp Gop will wipe away tears from 
off all faces ; and the rebuke of His people shall He take 
away from all the earth: for the Lorp hath spoken it.” 
In the mountain of Zion is the awaited blessing and 
power that sets aside all that is hostile. In chap. xxvi., 
all is celebrated in a prophetic song. In the 27th, 
Satan’s power is destroyed, and God’s dealings with 
Israel reviewed. In taking up these closing chapters 
of the two series of prophecies (v.<xii. and xxiv.xxvii.) 


i 
| 
if 
e 


10 


the fitet, God's dedlings with Israel as in thé land, thd 
aédond, with the Gentiles, I have padsed over + remark- 
able thapter in the midat of the Gentile series to which 
I mitist now return, the xy, difficult in expression, bit 
véry plain in its purpose. Messengers are sent by 4 
mighity protecting power, to a nation scattered and feeble, 
a nation wonderful from the beginning. The Lord sum- 
thiohs all the inhabitants of the world to attend. He holds 
himself aloof in his dwelling. The Jews come back, look- 
ing for full national blessing in a carnal way ; just as it 
seemed blooming they are cut down again, and the 
beasts of the field, the Gentiles, summer and winter on 
them. Still at that time a present is brought of this 
people to the Lord, and then from them to Him in the 
mount of Zion. We lcarn thus their return by some poli- 
tical movemerit, their subsequent desolation in their 
land ; yet they are brought to the Lord, and they them- 
selves bring their offering to Jehovah in Zion. You will 
- find in chap. xxix., and remarkably in xxxii., and largely 
iti xxxiv. and xxxv., the Spirit’s testimony to the final 
restoration of Israel. You may compare liv., Ixii., Ixv., 
and Ixvi., for enlarged testimonies of the restoration of 
Jerusalem in the glory. The prophecies of Isaiah have 
the character of a general revelation of the ways of God, 
having the Jews for their centre, including their guilt in 
séparating from Jehovah, and in rejecting Christ ; Ba- 
bylon, their scourge when disowned, and the Assyrian 
when they were owned. But Jeremiah lived when the 
houss of David had completed its guilt, and Jerusalem 
was about to be given up to the captivity of Babylon: 
Hence, while pleading with them as to their sins, He 
enters into specific detail as to the restoration of the 
Jews arid Jerusalem, annnouncing, as the other prophets, 
the judginent of the haughty Gentiles. To his prophe- 
cies I will now turn. The whole of the chapters from 
xxx, to xxxiv. are worthy of your fullest attention. I 


rte rae oes a ens weer nce nae vm on 5 ena comes 


11 


éan only quote the most striking pasdages. In thé 30th, 
the prophet speaks of that day of Jacob’s trouble which 
there is none like, of which the Lord speaks in Matt. 
xxiv., but declares he shall be delivered out of it, a de- 
claration which, as we know, was not accomplished at 
the first destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, and adds that 
in that day the Lord of hosts would break the yoke from 
off his néck, and strangers should no niore serve them- 
selves of him, takes notice of the utter desolation of 
Jerusalem, but declares he would bring back the cap- 
tivity, and the city should be built on its own heap, and 
the palace remain after the manner thereof; and then 
announces the utter judgment of the wicked when Israel 
should be His people: it would be in the latter days. 
Both families (xxxi.) would be his people. This shows at 
once it was not the restoration from Babylon merely. It 
is declared that His love is an everlasting love. Jacob was 
redeemed (v. 11) they would come and sing in the height 
of Zion. This (27) is declared to be founded in estab- 
lishing the new covenant, and the chapter closes with 
these remarkable words. ‘‘ Thus saith the Lorp, which 
giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of 
the moon and of the stars for alight by night, which 
divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar ; the Lorp 
of hosts is his name: if those ordinances depart from 
before me, saith the Lorp, then the seed of Israel also 
shall cease from being a nation before me for ever. 
Thus saith the Lorp, if heaven ahove can be measured, ° 
and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I 
will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they 
have done, saith the Lorp. Behold the days come, saith 
the Lorp, that the city shall be built to the Lorp from 
the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner. And 
the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon 
the hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath. And 
thé whole valley of the déad bodies, and of the ashes, 


12 


and all the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the 
corner of the horse gate toward the east, shall be holy 
unto the Lorp ; it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown 
down any more forever.” In the xxxii. Jeremiah is 
commanded to redeem land at Anathoth and the chapter 
closes thus. The Lord declares, He will gather them 
and they shall be His people, and He will be their God. 
‘And I will give them one heart, and one way, that 
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and 
their children after them : and I will make an everlasting 
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from 
them, to do them good ; but I will put my fear in their 
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Yea, I will 
rejaice over them to do them good, and I will plant 
them in this land assuredly with my whole heart, and 
with my whole soul. For thus saith the Lorp, like as I 
have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will 
I bring upon them all this good that I have promised 
them,” and returning to the occasion of the prophecy, 
‘¢ Behold, Hananeel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall 
come {unto thee, saying, buy thee my field that is at 
Anathoth for the right of redemption is thine to buy it. 
So Hananeel mine uncle’s son came to me in the court 
of the prison according to the word of the Lorp, and 
said unto me, buy my field, I pray thee, that is in 
Anathoth, which is in the country of Benjamin : for the 
right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is 
thine, buy it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the 
word of the Lorp. And I bought the field of Hananeel 
my uncle’s son, that was in Anathoth, and weighed him 
the money, even seventeen shekels of silver.” The pro- 
mises are renewed in xxxiii, and God declares, David 
shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the 
house of Israel. ‘‘If ye can break my covenant of the 
day and my covenant of the night, and that there should 
not be day and night in their season. Then may also 


18 
my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he 
should not have ason to reign upon his throne; and 
with the Levites the priests, my ministers. As the host 
of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the 
sea measured ; so will I multiply the seed of David my 
servant, and the Levites that minister unto me. More- 
over the word of the Lorp came to Jeremiah saying, 
considerest thou not what this people have spoken, 
saying, the two families which the Lorp hath chosen, he 
hath even cast them off: thus they have despised my 
people, that they should be no more a nation before 
them. Thus saith the Lord: if my covenant be not 
with day and night, and if I have not appointed the 
ordinances of heaven and earth; then will I cast away the 
seed of Jacob, and David my servant, so that I will not 
take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abra- 
ham, Isaac and Jacob : for I Will cause their captivity to 
return, and have mercy on them:” Nothing can be more 
positive than these promises, the Lord takes the ground 
of His unchangeable faithfulness, refers to all the evil 
man has been guilty of, and declares He will not cast him 
off for it, but put the law in his heart, gives local details 
as to the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and says that as he 
had pulled down and destroyed them Be would build 
them up again so that it is impossible to apply it to any 
others. We get details as to their restoration which 
passing on to Ezekiel leads us to. In the 20th chapter of 
that prophet we are told that, as regards the ten tribes, 
they will be brought out of the countries, and as in the 
days of leaving Egypt the rebels fell in the wilderness, 
so now they would pass under the rod like a flock told 
by the shepherd and the rebels would not enter into the 
land, verses 34-38, This is not so with the two tribes, 
they will return in unbelief, a remnant only being faith- 
ful, Daniel’s ‘* wise ones,” ‘‘and two thirds will be cut 
off in the land and the third part pass through the fire 


14 


and be refindd as silver is refined,” seé Zech. xiii. 8, 9. 
But I must quote some other passagés of Ezekiel. In 
the 34th chapter, God judges the shephérds. He there 
declares He will take the flotk into His own care 
(verse 11-22), He then in the 23rd verse passes on in un- 
symbolical language to say what He will do in thé 
latter days. ‘‘And I will set up one shepherd over - 
them, and he shall feed them, éven my servant David ; 
he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. 
And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant 
Dav.d a prince among them ; I the Lorp have spoken it. 
And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and 
will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land, and 
they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, arid sleep in the 
woods, And I will make them and the places round 
about my hill a blessing ; and I will cause the shower to 
come down ‘in his season; there shall be showers of 
blessing. And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, 
and the earth shall yield her increase, and they shall be 
safe in their land, and shall know that I am the Lorp, 
when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and deliv- 
ered them out of the hand of those that served them- 
selves of them. And they shall no more bea prey to 
the heathen, neither shall the beast of the land devour 
tlem ; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make 
them afraid. And I will raise up for them a plant of 
renown, and they shall be no more consumed with 
hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of the 
heathen any more. Thus shall they know that I the 
Lorp their God am with them, and that they, even the 
house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord God. 
And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and 
I am your God, saith the Lord God.” In the 36th, 
we have the well known passage in which being born 
again is declared to be the work which God will accom- 
plish in them that they may enjoy their land before Him, 


oO ww @©@ ee ewe Cre we Te lM 


=h 


° 4b 


¢For oI will take -you from -among the heathen, ‘and 
gather you out of all countries, and will bring you into 
your own land. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon 
‘you, and ye shall be-clean : from all your filthiness, and 
from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new ‘heart 
also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within 
you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your 
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will - 
put my spirit within you and cause you to walk in 
my statutes, and -ye shall keep my judgments, and 
do them. And ye shall dwell in the land that 1 gave 
to .your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and I 
will be your God. I will also save you from all your 
‘uncleanesses ; and I will call for the corn, and will in- 
crease it, and lay no famine upon you. And I will 
multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the 
field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine 
among the :heathen.” Then the theathen would iknaw 
‘that this restoration was Jehovah’s doing. This ‘last 
point, which we find more than once in (Hzékiel, :is an 
important element in the re-establishment of Israel, and 
like the others, and especially their occurrence at the 
same time, has never yet:been fulfilled. In'the xxrvii. 
we see a further point ’insisted on. The dry bones of 
Israel would be clothed with flesh, and the people brought 
‘to life again, and placed (verse 14) in their own land. 
‘But when this takes place in the last days, the long- 
separated ten tribes will be reunited to Judah and have 
one head never to be divided again (19, 20). David, (the 
beloved) that is ‘*Christ,” is to be king over them ; God’s 
tabernacle will be amongst them; He, Jehovah, will be 
their God, and they His people ; and the heathen will 
know that Jehovah sanctifies Israel when His sanctuary 
is in the:midst of ‘them forever more. This.dwelling of 
Jehovah in their midst has never ‘been, if not by the 
presence of Obrist:whom they-rejected, since :the>Baby- 


16 ; 


lonish captivity. Ezekiel wholly passes over the times 
of the Gentiles, and introduces Jehovah again in their 
midst in the land. Connected with this is the account of 
the inroad of Gog, in the two following chapters. When 
restored to the land, and appearing outwardly to be re- 
stored to blessing, Gog comes up against them ; God pleads 
against him, and sanctifies Himself in this judgment. Gog 
falls on the mountains of Israel, and God makes His holy 
name known in the midst of Israel ; He allows them no 
more to pollute His name : and the heathen shall know 
that He, Jehovah, is the holy one in Israel. ‘‘ Behold,” 
it is added in remarkable language, ‘it is come and it is 
done, saith the Lord God. This is the day whereof I 
have spoken.” The prophecy is closed by these words : 
**Then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, 
which caused them to be led into captivity among the 
heathen, but I have gathered them unto their own land, 
and have left none of them any more there. Neither 
will I hide my face any more from them: for I have 
poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the 
Lord God.” Thus the revelation of the full restoration 
of Israel in both parts of the divided kingdom, reunited 
in one under Christ and the new covenant, connected 
with the judgment of the heathen, and their learning 
that Jehovah is in the midst of Israel, Jerusalem 
being rebuilt and glorified, as in Isaiah lx., is made as 
clear as words can well make it.. I will confirm this, 
however, by some remarkable testimonies of the minor 
prophets. Turn to Hosea iii. 4, 5, ‘For the children 
of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and 
without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an 
image, and without an ephod, and without a teraphim : 
Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek 
the Lord their God, and David their king; and shall 
fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days.” You 
will remark that the blessing of Jehovah and the often- 


17 


mentioned David are spoken of in the latter days; 
meanwhile, they have not the true God, and they have 
not false gods, no sacrifice, but no image either. Thus 
they abide many days, and thus they have abode. In 
the latter days ‘t shall be otherwise. In Joel iii. we 
have again the judgment of the Gentiles summoned to 
awake up and come to the great day of God to the valley 
of Jehosaphat {the judgment of God). There, says Jeho- 
vah, will I sit to judge all the heathen round about, and 
the harvest, separating judgment, and the vintage, judg- 
ment of pure vengeance, arrive. Of the Jews it is said, 
20, 21, ‘‘But Judah shall dwell forever, and Jerusalem 
from generation to generation, for I will cleanse their 
blood that I have not cleansed, for the Lord dwelleth in 
Zion.” Amos ix. 14,15. Here we get what has clearly 
never yet been fulfilled, while it applies to temporal 
blessings in the land; ‘‘ They shall no more be plucked 
up out of their land which I have given them, saith 
Jehovah thy God.” It is here a question, which is not 
one for faith, whether God’s word will be fulfilled, In 
Micah we have a beautiful description of what Israel 
will be in the world in that day under Christ. They 
will not be added to the Church one by one, and, lost 
though blessed in it, they will be gathered as Israel, v. 3. 
Then Christ will be their strength against the Assyrian 
their foe, when owned in the land. Then they become 
as dew in the world, the freely flowing blessing of God, 
but as a lion among the beasts of the forest to all that 
oppose them and the counsels of God in them, verse 7 
while all evil is purged out from them and the heathen 
judged, as we have never seen, 9-15. In Zephaniah iii. 
we have another passage full of instruction as to the 
Lord’s ways with this people. First, Jehovah’s long 
and gracious, but useless, patience (7). So the godly 
ones had to wait till judgment came, judgments on the 
nations would subdue them and bring in blessing. In 


18 


‘Israel there would be a poor.and afflicted :and .sgnotified 
remnant, (12, 13) but peace should he their portion, 
Then Zion, Israel, and Jerusalem are called to.rejoice 
with all their heart ; Jehovah was in their midst, they 
would not see evil any more, God would rest.in His 
love. The blessing so great that His love would he 
satisfied and in repose. Blessed thought! -still more 
blessedly true of us when Jesus shall see the travail 
of ‘His soul and shall be satisfied. Then all that afflict 
Israel will be undone, and the people made a praise 
among all people of the earth (14-20). In Zechariah, 
the whole of chapter x. describes the restoration of 
‘Israel in the latter days, speaking of each division of the 
people, Judah and Ephraim ; then xi. tells of Christ’s 
rejection ; and in xii. all the nations gathered against 
Jerusalem are judged, and she becomes a burdensome 
stone for them, (so that it has no application to past events) 
and there is a detailed account of how Jehovah will: save 
the people: ‘‘In that day will I-make the governors of 
Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a 
torch of fire in a sheaf; and ‘they shall devour all'the 
people round about, on the right hand and on the left : 
and Jerusalem shall'be inhabited again in her own: place, 
even in Jerusalem. The Lord also shall save the tents 
of Judah first, that the glory of ‘the house of ‘David.and 
the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify 
themselves against Judah.” ‘Then there isthe mourning 
over Christ’s rejection, and they look.on Him-whom: they 
have pierced. They are sifted, -xiii. 9, and ‘two-thirds 
cut off, and the third part pass through ‘the fire. ‘The 
last chapter (xiv.) closes this striking history -with full 
details of what shall-take place. The Lord comes. His 
feet shall stand on the Mount of Olives. At evening 
time, when-men:would expect darkness it -willbe:light. 
‘Living waters shall ‘flow out from Jerusalem. Jehovah 
‘shall -be-king over-all-the earth; Heealone shall be ewnéd. 


19 


Jerusalem shall be inhabited in her place ; there shall be 
no more utter destruction, but Jerusalem shall be safely 
inhabited. 

The testimonies I have cited are amply sufficient to 
shew to every one who receives the testimony of God’s. 
word as true, the certainty of the restoration of Israel 
to their own land to be blessed under Christ and the new 
covenant. The circumstances of the return of Israel 
and Judah are distinguished. Of the former, the rebels 
are cut off outside the land, which they never enter ; of 
the latter, in the land: the residue of these last pass 
through the fire. This involves the history of Anti- 
christ and the Gentiles, which will be spoken of when 
the prophecies as to them are considered. But Israel and 
Judah are united under one head. Further, inthe series of 
events which usher in the blessing, the Gentiles are 
gathered against Israel and are judged, and afterwards 
blessed in connection with, and subordinate to, that peo- 
ple. Jehovah is king over all the earth. It is noticed, 
_ too, that these events take place at the epoch at which 
the resurrection does.” Peace reigns, and the curse is 
removed ; Jerusalem is never defiled any more, nor does 
Israel lose its blessing. 

Such is the establishment of the divine government of 
the world at the close. Of this government Israel is the 
centre, according to the fixed purpose and unchangeable 
calling of God ; they reject now the gospel, but are be- 
loved for the father’s sake : they will believe when they 
see. We have brighter blessings, because we believe 
without seeing ; and this is one thing which renders the 
understanding of the prophecies, as to the Jews, impor- 
tant. Not only is it precious to us as a part of Christ’s 
glory, but our ‘clear apprehension of the application of 
prophecy to them, hinders our misapplying it to the 
Church. This takes its own heavenly character. It is 
witness of sovereign grace, giving it a place with Christ 


where: no, promise was, Israel the testimony to Gad's 
faithfulness to his promises, Jehovah who was and is to 
come. Israel will, indeed, be the royal people, the 
centre of Christ’s earthly power and dominion, but they 
will be reigned over. We, by pure grace, shall-reign 
with Him, suffering first with Him. The Church has its 
place with Him, Israel its own blessing under Him ac- 
cording to His promises of old. 


LECTURES ON THE SECOND COMING. 


LECTURE Vv. 


MATTHEW XIIL 


By J. N. D. 


Goronto : 


GOSPEL TRAOT DEPOSITORY. 
(MRS, DREW, 370, YONGE STRERT.) 


Price Hight Cente, 


NOTES OF A LECTURE 


MATTHEW XIII. 


Meetine Hovusg, Alexander Street, 
Toronto, Wednesday, May, 27, 1863. 


The part of the subject which will occupy us this 
evening, beloved friends, in treating of the coming again 
of our beloved Lord, is the sorrowful side of it. What 
we had before us in the previous lectures was the bles- 
sings and joys of the Saints, founded on the sure promise 
of Christ Himself that He would come again; and we 
found that their looking for the fulfilment of that promise 
was connected with their every thought and action. But 
it is of the greatest importance that we should look at 
this sorrowful side as well as the other, that man may 
see the consequence and effect of his responsibility. The 
coming of Christ has a double aspect. As regards the 
professing church, and the world at large too, Scripture 
speaks of His appearing ; because then it is that the 
result of their responsibility is manifested. As regards 
the body of Christ, it speaks of His coming, and our taking 
up to Himself. It is one thing to own the church as a 
responsible body i in the world—another thing looking at 
it as one with Him, When we turn to that which has 


SS SS ENTE NE a TS DNR OR REI a DAR Pd 


4 


been set by God as a system down here, and see the 
failure of it, it is to be judged in respect of that failure 
as every system set up by God has been—each having 
been first established on the footing of man’s responsi- 
bility. There is never any thing else but failure exhibi- 
ted in man. Look all through the Scriptures, where we 
have man’s history from the very beginning of creation, 
and we find nothing but failure. Adam most signally 
failed in what God had entrusted him with ; and then 
when law was given, even before Moses came down from 
the mount, man had made the golden calf to worship it. 
So when Aaron and his sons were consecrated, on the 
eighth day, the first day of their service they offered 
strange fire: and, as a consequence, the free and con- 
stant entrance of Aaron into the holy place was stopped. 
Solomon, as son of David, was given glory and riches 
by God, but his heart was turned from Him by strange 
wives, and he fell into idolatry, and the kingdom was 
divided. God trusts Nebuchadnezzar with power, 4nd 
he is the head of Gold among the Gentiles: he gets 
into pride, and throws the Saints into the fire ; loses his 
reason and senses for seven years (a figure of the Gentile 
empires), and eats grass like an ox. So with everything. 
So it is with the church, and man cannot mend it. 
Grievous wolves, says Paul, will come in after my de- 
cease, and there will be a falling away, and then Anti- 
christ be fully revealed. The church itself as a system, 
trusted to man’s responsibility, has been all a failure: 
All was set up in the first Adam, who has failed. All 
will be made good in the second Adam, who is perfect, 
and has overcome. But it is hard to get saints to lay hold 
of the entirely new position in which all is set by re- 
demption, and by the resurrection of Christ. The first 
Adam failed, and was cast out. The second Adam, per- 
fect, is come in to a better paradise. So of every thing. 
In the same way, law, which man broke, will be written 


) 
) 
; 


5 


on his heart. Christ will be the true son of David. 
Christ will rise to reign over the Gentiles. So, as the 
church has failed, He will yet be glorified in His Saints, 
and admired in all them that believe. In each position 
in which God has tried man what Scripture teaches us 
is, that man has failed in his responsibility, and that 
God’s plans will go on in His patient mercy till all is ful- 
filled in Christ. If we now turn to this responsibility, 
we shall find there are two subjects before us as engaged 
in it: the professing church is one—power in the earth, 
shown in the beasts, is the other. Both are found cor- 
rupt, or at open enmity with God ; that which is called 
the church will be utterly rejected of God—spued out. 
The thing which Scripture teaches us is not that we shall 
fill the world with blessing, but entirely the contrary. 
The evil introduced by Satan where Christianity had been 
planted, will never be remedied until the harvest. Such 


a thought is humbling, but gives no ground for discour- 


agement, for Christ is ever faithful. It is the occasion, 
dear friends, for those who have the grace of God to 
walk more in accordance with it. But it is a solemn 
thing, if what we have to look forward to is the cutting 
off of the professing church. Geographically speaking, 
Christianity was more widely spread in the sixth century 
than now ; the world as then known was more acquainted 
with the Gospel than it is now. Whatever man may say 
about progress and the like, a great part of what was 
then the Christian world, and had heard of Christ, is 
now overrun by Mohammedanism or Popery; and, 
where that is not so, how far has infidelity and puyseism 
prevailed! But itis this very thing that calls for ear- 
nestness in those who have the Spirit of God. He is 
surely working very specially in these days ; and in the 
tide of evil we have the strongest possible motive for 
energy and activity. It is always right, but the inroad 
of evil specially calls for it, as in the days of Noah, ip 


6 


‘thé ‘denite of approaching Judginent. The false idea of 
converting the world may give a stimulus for a time, but 
it déstroys the solemn sense of what God is, and enfeebles 
the authority of God’s word, which gives no such hope. 
When it is gradually found, too, that evil is growing up, 
and that the world is not Soniarted, the reaction tends 
to subvert the faith, and cast into infidelity. The evil 
which works now was declared from the beginning, nnd 
will continue its course—such is the declaration of 
Scripture—till God interferes, will not be remedied until 
the harvest. Such is the clear teaching of the parable I 
have read to you. Itis a similitude of the kingdom of 
heaven. People very often take the kingdom of heaven 
as if it was the same thing as the church of God; but 
this is in no way the case, though those who compose the 
church are in the kingdom. Supposing for a moment 
that Christ hnd not been rejected, the kingdom woulll 
have been set up on earth. It could not beso, no doubt, 
but it shows the difference between the kingdom and the 
church. As it was, the kingdom of God was there in 
the person of Christ, the king. Only as He was on earth, 
it was not the kingdom of heaven. But Christ being 
rejected, He could not take it outwardly then, but 
ascended on high. Thus the sphere of the rule of Christ 
is in heaven. The heavens rule, and the kingdom is ) 
always the kingdom of heaven, because the king is in | 
heaven ; only at the end it will be subdivided, so to 
speak, into the kingdom of our Father, the heavenly 
part, and the kingdom of the Son of Man, the earthly 
part. If we understand the kingdom of heaven as the 
rule of Christ, when the king is in heaven, it is very 
simple. If Christ had set up a kingdom when he was 
with the Jews, it would not have been the kingdom of 
heaven, because he was not in heaven. Hence, itissaid, 
the kingdom of God is among you, but the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. The gospel is the only means we 


- @& & 


7 


have of gathering souls into the kingdom, and such are 
properly the children of the kingdom; but, within its 
limits, Satan works and sows tares, and they are in the 
kingdom. Take Popery, Mohammedanism, all manner 
of heretics—these are tares which have been sown where 
the good seed had been. Church means, or is rather, 
simply an assembly—an idea which has nothing to do 
with the thought of a kingdom. The parable I did not 
read, where we have Christ sowing the good seed, is not 
a similitude of the kingdom of heaven. A kingdom isa 
sphere where one rules as king. Christ is simply there 
sowing the word in men’s hearts. It does not describe 
the kingdom of heaven, nor even the kingdom begun by 
the king being on earth ; it is individual in its character. 
The moment He comes to this and the two following 
parables, we have a similitude of the kingdom of heaven. 
They describe the outward result in this world of the 
fact of Christ the king’s being in heaven. You will 
remark that these are spoken to the multitude—the 
three last—and the explanation of the tares and wheat, to 
the disciples, shewing the mind and purpose of God: 
what divine intelligence knows and does: not the mere 
public result in the world. The tares and wheat show 
the outward result, in the world, of the Gospel, In the 
next, it becomes a great tree—a great tree, in Scripture, 
signifying great power. That is what Christianity be- 
came in the world from a little seed. A great political 
power, like the kingdoms of the world. The next shows 
it as a doctrine pervading a mass of measured extent, as 
@ little leaven penetrates through the lump of dough. 
Then the Lord goes into the house, and explains 
God’s mind about these things.—36 verse. ‘‘ Then 
Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the 
house, and his disciples came unto him, saying, De- 
clare unto us the parable of the tares of the field.” 
The servants enquire si.ould they gather the tares up. 


8 


They are forbidden to do it. Our part is not judgment 
or excision in this world. We have not to root out evil 
out of the world by persecution. We have seen often 
that the wheat was rooted up. They must grow in 
field, that is the world, till Larvest. ‘‘ But he said, 
nay ; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up 
also the wheat with them. Let both grow together 
until the harvest.” We learn from this, not only that 
christianity does not spread every where, but that where 
it does spread it becomes corrupted. And, if we look 
at the state of Christendom, we cannot but see that 
this is the case. We see how the tares have been sown 
and sprung up, how false doctrines have crept in, Popery, 
and all kinds of errors. Then our Lord, having sent the 
multitude away, and gone into the house, explained the 
parable to his disciples. You will now remark thai, as I 
have said, in these parables, with the explanation of the 
first, you have two distinct things—the outward result, 
and the unfolding of God’s design in it. Thus, with 
regard to the grain of mustard seed, you have the out- 
ward result—it becomes a great tree, which, in Scripture, 
is simply a great public power. The king of Assyria is 
represented as a great tree. So Pharaoh is represented 
as a great tree. And Nebuchadnezzar was a great tree, 
which was hewn down, but whose stump and roots were 
left in the earth. In a word, it means simply a great 
power. And that was what christianity became in the 
world—the greatest power in it. The figure in the para- 
ble does not raise the question whether it was good or 
bad, but simply represents that it was a great public 
power in the world. The little seed of the truth, sown 
at the first, took root, and grew up to be a great tree. 
So in the case of the leaven, working within a certain 
sphere, represented by three measures of meal—it worked 
there until the whole was leavened. The doctrines of 
christianity penetrate through the whole, But no refer- 


9 


ence is there made to godliness or sanctity—christianity 
is represented as a public, outward thing, making its 
way in the world. But, having sent the multitude away, 
the Lord takes up an entirely different thing, and ex- 
plains, not the outward effect, but God’s mind in the 
transactions represented by these parables. And He 
begins by explaining the parable of the tares of the field. 
Verse 34, ‘‘ All these things spake Jesus unto the multi- 
tude in parables, . . . Then Jesussent the multitude 
away, and went into the house: and his disciples came 
unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the 
tares of the field. He answered and said unto them, He 
that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man: the field 
is the world.” Mark how perfectly absurd it is to think, 
as some do, that it is the Church which is here spoken 
of. The Son of Man comes to sow the gospel, the 
Word of God, in the world—not in the Church. The 
Church has received it already. The Church is composed 
of those who professedly or really, as the case may be, 
have already received the good seed. He does not sow 
it in the Church, which would be repeating what had 
been dune before, but in the world; the field is the 
world, and nothing can be more absurd than to apply 
this to the Church, or to bring it up in connection with 
any Church question. ‘‘ The field is the world; the 
good seed are the children of the kingdom ; but the tares 
are the children of the wicked one.” It is not that the 
wheat is spoiled. The Lord will gather thai and have 
it in His garner. But the crop is spoiled. Christianity, 
as an outward thing in the world, has become corrupted, 
through the prevalence of all kinds of error and wicked- 
ness. ‘*The enemy that sowed them is the devil: the 
harvest is the end of the world,” that is, ‘‘ of the age,” 
It is not the end of the world, in the ordinary sense, 
that is spoken of ; it is ‘‘the end of the age,” there is 
no dispute about that for any one acquainted with the 
A2 : 


EE Danae LAL SOLO CTT pa I a 


ee rear re 
Wanda Sen Ssr tk. 
2 eM en io 


ONE SIR RTS SOTA OREN EE S 


wee Otani. <a 


10 


original ; And the reepew are the-avgels Ax, thete 
fore, the tares are gathered and: burned in the’fire ; se 
shall it be in the end of this world,” (‘of this age.”) 
‘The: Son of Man shall send forth his angels, and: they 
shall: gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, 
and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a 
furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of 
teeth.” That. is, the mischief which Satan hath done 
will goon, until the Lord executes righteous judgment 
on the world. The corruption of christianity, the spoil- 
ing of the crop—not of the wheat, because God takes 
care uf that, and gathers it into his garner—but of the 
crop, the public, outward thing, which Satan has set 
himself to corrupt and spoil, will go on until the harvest. 
And indeed on this point we get a little more precise in- 
formation. The first thing, we learn, will be the gather- 
ing together of the tares (those who have grown up as 
the fruit of the corrupt principles, sown by Satan where 
the Gospel had been. planted,) in bundles to be burned. 
And then He gathers His wheat into His garner, takes 
His saints to be with Himself. This is all the parable 
states. The explanation goes further, and gives the 
manifested result when Jesus shall appear. ‘‘ Then shall 
the righteous shine forth,”—they have been gathered 
already—‘‘ then shall the righteous shine forth as the 
sun in the kingdom of their Father,” as the wicked are 
cast into a furnace of fire, where there is wailing and 
gnashing of teeth. We have first, then, the tares 
growing till harvest, and then the Lord gathers out 
of His kingdom all things that offend, and them which 
do iniquity. There is much instruction here, but I will 
not detain you now with entering into more than the 
general idea. We have this, however, very distinctly 
brought before us, that while the Lord geis His own 
wheat in the garner, yet the crop sown in the world is 
spoiled ; while men slept, the devil comes and spoils the 


| 
| 
| 


ae ve 2" Fw ™! 


et CO @ tt. 


_— 
e 


1! 


pian’ by sowing false principles of Judaism, arid’ legaliati, 
and immorality, or Antinomignism, and "fale! doctrines 
about Christ. By all these things the crop is spoiléd, 
avid vhat'is never mended in the world until judgment 
domes. You will now see, by comparing other passayes, 
that the Church, having a certain responsibility entrusted 
to her in the earth, has not fulfilled what that’ responsi- 
bility made incumbent upon her, and comes under’ judg- 
ment, Turn to the llth of the Romans, and you will 
see distinctly this principle laid down. As to the facts, 
we shall refer to other passages. There, after speaking 
of the cutting off of the Jews, the Apostle says: ‘‘ Boast 
not against the branches. But if thou boast, thou 
bearest not the root, but the root thee. Thou wilt say 
then, the branches were broken off, that I might be 
graffed in. Well, because of unbelief they were broken 
off ; and thou standest by faith. Be not high-minded, 
but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches, 
take heed lest He also spare not thee. Behold, therefore, 
the goodness and severity of God : on them which fell, 
severity ; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue 
in his goodness : otherwise thou also shalt be cut off. 
* * * For I would not, brethren, that ye should be 
ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your 
own conceits; that blindness in part is happened to 
Israel, until the fulness of the Gen‘iles be comein.” It 
is exactly through being wise in its own conceit, that the 
professing Church has fallen. It has looked on the Jews 
as entirely set aside, forgetting that ‘‘the gifts and cal- 
ling of God are without repentance ;” that He: never 
changes his mind ; that though He can create, and then 
destroy, He never sets aside His own design and pur- 
pose ; and that God having called the Jews as a nation, 
He never will lay aside that purpose. But the Church 
has been wise in their own conceits, thinking that the 
Jews are set aside; and that the Church never can be 


arn narra te a eases 


nena 


RPE AO NO - 


12 


But we shall find exactly fulfilled, as regards the Church 
as an outward thing in the world, what is stated in this 
chapter, that, if it continue not in God’s goodness, it 
will be cut off. This is the specific instruction contained 
in this passage, with reference to those brought in by 
faith, after the natural branches were broken off, that is, 
Christendom, that they are placed on this ground ; that, 
if they do not continue in God’s goodness, they will be 
cut off like the Jews. The only question is, how long 
forbearance may be extended to them. ‘Thou wilt say 
then, The branches were broken off that I might be 
graffed in.” Quite true, the Apostle replies, but ‘‘ be- 
cause of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand- 
est by faith. Be not high-minded, but fear. Forif God 
spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also 
spare not thee. Behold, therefore, the goodness and 
severity of God,” &c, Now, what I ask is this: has the 
professing Church continued in God’s goodness? Do we 
not see Popery and Mahommedanism prevalent where 
Christianity was originally planted? Have they con- 
tinued, then, in God’s goodness? There is nothing said 
about being restored. That won’t do ; what is required 
is to ‘‘continue.” It is the same as when a man who 
has broken law, says, ‘‘I will do right for the future.” 
That does not meetthe law’s claims, he has not ‘‘continued 
in all things which are written in the book of the law to do 
them.” And I ask, has the Church continued in God’s 
goodness? Is that which we now see in Christendom 
what God set up in His Church in the beginning, or any- 
thing like it? Has not the professing Church turned to 
ceremonies and sacraments, and all kinds of things other 
than Christ, in order to be saved by them! They have 
not continued in God’s goodness. You can see that 
most plainly. Our own consciousness testifies to it. 
But, if they continue not in God’s goodness, the whole 
of Christendom, the Apostle says, will be cut off, and 


ersuiicsSLGISSaEn WES a ie abi as. 
| 18 


the Jews will be graffed in again. There cannot be the 
least doubt of that. ‘* And they also, if they abide not 
in unbelief, shall be graffed in ; for God is able to graff 
them in again.” * * * ‘'ForI would not, brethren, 
that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should 
be wise in your own conceits ; that blindness in part is 
happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be 
come in.” As soon as the Lord has gathered the real 
Church of God, and taken them tp to heaven, He sets 
up the Jews again. Turn now to the positive testimony. 
What I have been reading is conditional ; it shews what 
will take place if they continue not in God’s goodness. 
We shall see now if they have continued. You will find 
that Jude brings it out in a very striking way, because 
he takes up the whole history of Christianity from 
beginning to end. ‘‘Jude, the servant of Jesus 
Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanc- 
tified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus 
Christ, and called ”—that is, the true saints— ‘‘ Mercy 
unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied. Be- 
loved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you i 
of the common salvation, it was needful for me: to f 
write unto you, and exhort you that ye should ear- 
nestly contend for the faith which was once delivered 
unto the saints.” That is, I would have written in order i 
that ye may be built up in the truth, but through the | 
| coming in of evil I am obliged to exhort you that ye 

should earnestly contend for the faith which was once 

delivered unto the saints. ‘‘ For there are certain men 

crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to 

this condemnation ; ungodly men, turning the grace of 

our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord 

God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.” We see, then, the 

cause of the falling away—that already in Jude’s time tk 

these men had crept in unawares into the Church of God, it 

and were bringing in corruption. And he warns them 


SSS RR aS A <== 


pe eRe ec ene 


etn a ney cape eS 


1a 


that the same: thing had happened in the'case of Israel, 
when brought out of Egypt, and had caused them to fall 
in the wilderness, they had not maintained faithfulness. 
He refers them also to the case of the angels who kept 
not their first estate, because the principle of apostacy 
crept in. And mark the way in which he speaks of these 
men that had crept in unawares, of these tares that 
Satan had sown. Look at verse 14 ‘‘ And Enoch also, 
the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, 
Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his 
saints to execute judgment upon all ; and to convince all 
that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds 
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their 
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against 
him.” That is, under the inspiration of the prophetic 
Spirit of God, he sees the mischief and evil done by 
these persons, and sees that it was to grow and ripen up 
to judgment,:as we shall soon see appears elsewhere ; 
and he tells the saints that the mischief has begun, and 
therefore he warns them that they ‘‘should earnestly 
contend for the faith which was once delivered unto tne 
saints.” And the Lord executes judgment, because, 
instead of ‘the world becoming filled with the blessedness 
of the gospel, the Church has got corrupted. That it is 
prophesied that the filling the world with blessedness is 
to be brought about by Israel and not by the Church, | 
you will see, and that very distinctly indeed, when we 
come to other passages. But here we get a remarkable 
prophecy, shewing that, as in the 11th of the Romans it 
was declared that, if they did not continue in God’s 
goodness, they should be cut of, they will not continue 
in God’s goodness, and it gives us the history of the 
Church in the world from the beginning to the end of it, 
when the Lord shall come with ten thousands of. his 
saints to execute judgment. It is as plain and distinct a 
deelaration as iti possibly could be, and you will find that 


18 


the whole testintony of Scripture concurs, as of course it 
miust concur, in the same truth: Turn now to other 
passages, where it is not stated conditionally, or in a 
general prophetic manner, but where distinct details are 
given of that which would come about. Turn to 2nd 
Thessalonians, and you: will. find there the connected 
details of the course of that of which Jude has already 
given us the beginning. But the general fact we also 
have stated in the Philippians, where the apostle says, 
**T have no man like-minded ; for all seek their own, not 
the things which are Jesus Christ’s.” That surely was 
an early period in the history of the Church, to say that 
christians were ina state of such decline and decay that 
they were not seeking the things of Jesus Christ, but 
their own interest. When we turn to 2nd Thessalonians 
we get this very distinctly brought out. ‘‘ Now we 
beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and by our gathering together unto Him, that ye 
be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither’ by 
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as that the day of 
Christ is,”—not ‘‘at hand,”—but ‘‘that the day of Christ 
ishere.” The expression ‘‘at hand” makes it almost im- 
possible to get at the sense of the passage ; it means ‘‘ here,” 
the same word being used as when things “‘present” are 
contrasted with things “‘to come.” The whole point of 
the apostle’s statement rests on this, that the Thessalo- 
nians thought that the day of the Lord was “‘ here,” that 
it had already come, that their having got into so much 
dreadful tribulation and persecution, proved that it had 
come. The expression ‘the day of the Lord at hand” 
is often made use of as occurring in this passage, while 
in fact there is nothing of the kind init. The Thessa- 
lonians thought, not that it was at hand, but that it had 
cotne, and therefore the apostle says, ‘‘ Let no man de- 
ceive you by any mearis, for’ that day shall not come; 
except there come'a falling away first”—that is, a not 


16 


continuing in God’s goodness. Therefore, as the apostle 
had stated that, if they did not continue in God’s good- 
ness, they would be cut off, we have here the positive 
revelation or prophecy, that they would not continue in 
God’s goodness, that there would come a falling away, 
and that the day of the Lord cannot come, until that 
falling away or apostasy takes place. So it is plain on 
the face of it, that, in place of the church continuing in 
God’s goodness the directly opposite is the case. The 
apostle shews how the declension goes on :—‘‘ Let no 
man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not 
come, except there come a falling away first, and that 
man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, who oppo- 
seth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or 
that is worshipped, so that he sitteth in the temple of 
God, shewing himself that he isGod. Remember ye not 
that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things ? 
And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be 
revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth 
already work.” That is the important point here, that 
already, as to its general principles, it was going on in 
the apostle’s days. Even then the enemy was at work, sow- 
ing tares. Only it was a mystery—it was going on secretly, 
ina hidden way. There was Judaism, and Antinomian- 
ism, making high professions of grace with a corrupt 
practice, and various other forms of heresy, as the denial 
that Christ was a real man, d&c., all of which are men- 
tioned in Scripture—we do not require to go to church 
history at all to find them. They denied the humanity, 
quite as soon as they did the divinity of the Lord. We 
find then thai this mystery of iniquity was already at 
work, in the time of the apostle, and it was then only 
hindered from going on, it was not to be set aside. ‘The 
time will come when it will be set aside, when Babylon 
will be destroyed, but not by the word. I may first 
refer for a moment to this point. In the 17th of Reve- 


17 


lation, you find that it is the ten horns of the beast which 
shall destroy the great whore, and burn her with fire, and 
then men will be given up to even still greater evils. 
Giving their power to the beast, and then judgment, 
Returning to the passage in Thessalonians, we find the 
apostle’ says :—‘‘The mystery of iniquity doth already 
work ; only he who now letteth will let, until he be 
taken out of the way. And then shall that wicked be 
revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit 
of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of 
his coming.” We get here this very important truth, as 
regards the responsibility of the church that what was 
working to corrupt it in the time of the apostle himself, 
would go on, until what hindered the full development 
of iniquity was removed, and then that wicked would be 
revealed, &c. That, as I have said, is the very opposite 
of continuing in God’s goodness. It is intimated to us, 
that what was mysteriously working then, would ripen 
and mature up to the open revelation of the man of sin, 
whom the Lord will consume and destroy—‘‘ Even him, 
whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all 
power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceiva- 
bleness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because 
they received not the love of the truth, that they might 
be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong 
delusion, that they should believe a lie.” That is the 
way in which the professing church will be dealt with. 
Having refused to retain the truth, the real truth of God, 
God will send them strong delusion, that they should 
believe a lie. ‘* That they all might be damned, who 
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteous- 
ness.” The Lord then comes and destroys the wicked, 
the evil being open and evident ; it is no longer a mys- 
tery. This is for us a very solemn view of God’s deal- 
ings. It is not the pleasant and bright side. The plea- 
sant bright side is the blessedness the saints will have at 


18 


the coming of the Lord Jesus, in being gathered together 
tohim. The apostle says to the saints—you will all be 
taken up to meet the Lord in the air, and therefore you 
cannot think that the day of the Lord is here, for that 
day will not find you here at all. That day is the execu- 
tion of judgment on ungodly men. It is as if a rebellion 
were going on at Toronto, and the Queen were to say—I 
will have all my loyal subjects with me at Montreal first, 
and then judgment will be executed. And so long as 
you were not at Montreal it would be evident that that 
day of judgment had not arrived yet. That is the reason 
why, when it is said, Lo, here, and Lo, there, we know 
it does not apply to us. Toa Jew it is different. If you 
say to the Jew, who is expecting Christ, Lo, here, or Lo, 
there, it isa snare tohim. But, if it is said to us, we 
can only answer—it is impossible, for we are going up to 
meet the Lord in the air, not to find him here, and I am 
not there yet. So he beseeches them by our gathering 
together to him not to be troubled as if the day was come. 
In this passage then which I have read, you have the 
positive declaration, that what had begun in the apostle’s 
” time, goes on, until Christ comes to execute judgment 
and you find another distinct and definite declaration of 
this kind in the 4th of first Timothy. ‘‘ Now the Spirit 
speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall 
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, 
and doctrines of devils ; speaking lies in hypocrisy, hav- 
ing their conscience seared with a hot iron.” Then in 
the 8rd chapter of Second Timothy we have very defi- 
nitely and distinctly stated what the last days will be. 
‘¢ This know also that in the last days perilous times shall 
come ”’—not that the earth will be full of the knowledge 
of the Lord, that is a blessed time—but that ‘‘ in the last 
days perilous times shall come.” ‘‘ For men shall be 
Iovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, 
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 


19 


Without ‘natural affection, truce-breakets, falée accudie, 
{ncontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, 
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures ‘more 
than lovers of God ; having a form of godliness, but 
denying the power thereof.” That is the character of 
the last days. There will be a great form of godliness, 
much superstitious worship, but a denial of the power of 
godliness. That is not a continuing in God’s goodness, 
when the professing church in the last days, with a great 
form of godliness, denies the power thereof. It is a 
remarkable proof of the power of Satan, that, in the 
face of these passages, men, wise in their own conceits, 
will bring reasoning to prove, that they are to go on and 
fill the whole world with the gospel. That at the very 
time that judgments are hastening upon them, men will 
cherish the expectation of the earth being filled wich a 
widespread blessedness, is the strongest possible evidence 
of the power of that delusion, of which the apostle speaks. 
It is not that God is not working, and turning men from 
darkness to light. It was the same before the destruction 
of Jerusalem; three thousand were converted in a day. 
If we had three thousand converted in a day now, would 
it be a proof that the millennium was coming? no, but 
rather that it was judgment which was coming. It was 
because the judgment was coming, that that happened. 
It was the Lord’s gathering out His saints before the 
judgment, and adding to the church such as should be 
saved. And, if He is now working in a special manner 
to gather out souls, it is not kecause the gospel is to 
fill the world, but because judgment is coming upon 
the professing churches. The apostle shews that the 
declension will go on, that it will not be set aside. For 
‘Cevil men and seducers,” he says, ‘‘shall wax worse 
and worse, deceiving and being deceived.” And then 
hie gives the resource under such circumstances. ‘But 
continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and 


20 


hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned 
them ; and that from a child thou hast known the holy 
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salva- 
tion, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.”—As much 
as to say, you cannot trust the Church, which will have 
but a form of godliness, denying the power—your re- 
source must be the holy scriptures of truth. You will 
find agai. how this mystery of iniquity began to work at 
the ver’ -utset, by turning to the second chapter of the 
first epistle of John, where this very question is treated 
of. ** Little children, it is the last time.” It seems a 
remarkable thing for the apostle to speak of the very 
time when Christianity commenced to be diffused as the 
last time. God’s patience was nevertheless continued to 
go on from that time to this day, for with Him one day 
is at a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. 
‘¢ And as yé have heard that Antichrist shall come, even 
now are there many Antichrists.” It is not the Anti- 
christ whom he speaks of, but he says that already there 
were many Antichrists, already the mystery of iniquity, 
the spirit of evil, was working. ‘‘ Whereby we know 
that it is the last time.” We have seen that the last days 
are a perilous time, and here we see that the apostle 
knows it to be the last time, because there are many 
Antichrists, Is it possible then that the last time will 
be a time when the whole world Wii be filled with such 
blessedness as some speak of ? The whole testimony of 
Scripture is as plain ascan be to the contrary. ‘‘ Whereby 
we know that it is the last time. They went out from 
us, but they were not of us ; fur if they had been of us, 
they would no doubt have continued with us; but they 
went out, that they might be made manifest that they 
were not all of us.” They adopt false principles, their 
Christianity becomes corrupted, and they go out. Turn 
now to the eighteenth of Luke, which recurs to my mind 
in connection with this, showing how far the professing 


21 


church is frown continuing in God’s goodness, verse 6th, 
‘¢ And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith. 
And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day 
and night unto him, though he bear long with them ? 
I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Neverthe- 
less, when the Son of Man cometh shall he find faith on 
the earth ?’ That is not like having the world full of the 
gospel. He puts the question—will there be some indi- 
viduals still expecting His interference and intervention ? 
but He does not say there will be. The Church will be 
gone, and the question is—will there be any looking for 
His interference, will there be any one expecting the Lord 
to descend on the earth? It may be well now perhaps 
to turn to a few passages—because they rest in people’s 
minds, in looking at this subject—about the Gospel being 
preached to all nations and the like. I believe that this 
ought to have been done from the beginning by those to 
whom God hath given grace. But that is not the question. 
The question is, whether there has not been a failure on 
the part of the Church, as to the discharge of its respon- 
sibility. It is not a question whether they ought to 
diffuse the gospel—of course they ought. In the sixth 
century, Christianity was the all but national religion of 
China, and there are fragments of it there still. The limits 
of nominal Christendom are now very much contracted 
from what they were in former times, Formerly, they 
embraced all the north of Africa, and, in a measure, all 
Asia. Now they are almost confined to Europe, except 
that in these modern times they include also the scattered 
populations in America. Let us turn then to the pas. 
sages which speak of the prevalence of the gospel. That 
in the 24th of Matthew is one of them. ‘‘ And because 
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. 
But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shail be 
saved. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached 
in all the world for a witness unto all nations, and then 


22 


—not the millenium, but—shall the end come.” There 

is nothing here about ‘illing the world with blessednegs, 

But the gospel of the kingdom will be preached for a 
witness to all nations, and then will come the end—the 
judgment, the end of this age. It is not said that the, 
world i is to be filled with blessing. To suppose so is being 
wise in your own conceits, It is said that the knowledge 
of the glory of the Lord will fill the world, but it is not 
said that the gospel will, although men, fancying that 
they have the power to bring it about, speak as if it were 
the gospel that was to do this. If you look at the 14th 
of Revelation, you will find this brought out still more 
distinctly and clearly, that the end comes when the gos- 
pel is sent for a witness to all nations. You often hear 
the passage quoted, to shew that the gospel is to be 
preached to all nations, which is no doubt a blessed truth 
in its place, but, to see the effect of it, we must take the 
whole passage, verse 6th, ‘‘ And I saw another angel fly in 

the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach 

unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation 
and kindred and tongue and people. Saying, with a loud 
voice, Fear God, and give glory to him ; for the hour of 
his judgment iscome.” Itis almost a miracle how people 
read Scripture without understanding it. Whoever has 
been in the habit of frequenting public meetings, and lis- 
tening to speakers from public platforms, must have heard 
that passage quoted hundreds of times, as if it meant that 
the Gospel is so to be preached to all nations, that it is to 
fill the whole world with light, while a moment’s con- 
sideration would shew that this preaching of the Gospel 
is a precursor of judgment. I shall now refer to the 
passages which speak of the knowledge of the Lord 

covering the earth, as the waters cover the sea. But 


before doing that, let me just quote one passage in 
Isaiah, in the 26th chapter, where you will see that this 


is brought about, not by the Gospel, but by judgments. 


23 


Verse 9th : ‘‘ With my soul have I desired thee in the 
night ; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee 
early ; for, when thy judgments are in the earth” (not 
the Gospel, but judgments) ‘the inhabitants of the 
world will leary righteousness. Let favour” (that is, 
grac>, or the Gospel) ‘be shewed to the wicked, yet 
will he not learn righteousness.” There must be judg- 
ment ; the time of harvest must come, as in the parable 
of the tares. ‘*In the land of uprightness will he deal 
unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord. 
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up” (when he is just 
going to strike), ‘they will not see ; but they shall see, 
and be ashamed for their envy at the people ; yea, the 
fire of thine enemies shall devour them.” Turn now to 
Habakkuk, where you have one of these passages which 
are constantly in people’s minds, as shewing that the 
Gospel is to go on and spread until it fills the world. I 
refer to them merely for the negative purpose of pointing 
out that they shew nothing of the kind. WHab., chap. 
ii, verse 12: ‘‘Wee to him that buildeth a town with 
blood, and establisheth a city by iniquity. Behold, is it 
not of the Lord of hosts that the people shall labour in 
the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for 
very vanity? For the earth shall be filled with the 
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover 
the sea.” The people are all labouring in the fire, and 
wearying themselves for very vanity, and then the glory 
comes and fills the earth. Turn now to Numbers—ano- 
ther of the only three passages in which what I am now 
referring to is spoken of in that way—and, in the 14th 
chapter, you will find what the Lord means by filling the 
earth with His glory. When the people had sinned 
against the Lord, and murmured against Moses, God 
said he would destroy them, and Moses then interceded 
for them. ‘‘ Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this 
people, according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and 


34 


as thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until 
now. And the Lord said; I have pardoned according to 
thy word : But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be 
filled with the glory of the Lord. Because all these men 
which have seen my glory, and my miracles which I did 
in Egypt and in the wilderness, have tempted me now 
these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice. 
Surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto 
their fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me 
see it.” That, of course, is judgment; and the filling of 
the earth with God’s glory here, has nothing to do with 
the Gospel. The Lord will have the whole earth full of 
His glory, but He does not use the Gospel for that pur- 
pose. He does send the Gospel, and urges it upon men 
with infinite patience and goodness, but they reject it, 
and then comes judgment. In one other passage, the 
expression occurs ; you will find it in the 11th of Isaiah : 
‘* But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and 
reprove with equity for the meek of the earth ; and he 
shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and 
with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And 
righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faith- 
fulness the girdle of his reins. The wolf also shall dwell 
withthelamb. . . . They shall not hurt nor destroy 
in all my. holy mountain ; for the earth shall be full of 
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.” 
That is, when God smites the earth, and slays the 
wicked. ‘* And,” the prophecy goes on, ‘‘in that day 
there shall be a root of Jesse, which shal! stand for an 
eusign of the people ; to it shall the Gentiles seek ; and 
his rest shall be glorious, And it shall come to pass in 
that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the 
second time to recover the remnant of his people, from As- 
syria and from Egypt,” &c. That is, the Lord gathers the 
Jews, and slays the wicked ; and it is then the earth is full 
of the knowledge of Jehovah. ‘‘ And the adversaries of 


25 


Judah shall be cut off. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, 
and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. But they shall fly 
upon the shoulders of the Philistines towards the west ; 
they shall spoil them of the east together,” and so on— 
shewing that there is to be an execution of judgment 
in the earth. Turn now to the 66th of Isaiah, where 
the glory of the Lord is also spoken of. And, in 
referring to these passages which are so constantly 
quoted, it is always an excellent plan to read the con- 
text. In this passage the glory of the Lord is brought 
in by fire and by sword. Verse 15th, ‘‘ For, behold, the 
Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a 
whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke 
with flames of fire. For by fire and by his sword will 
the Lord plead with all flesh: and the slain of tho Lord 
shall be many. . . . For I know their works and their 
thoughts: it shall come, that I will gather all nations 
and tongues, and they shall come and see my glory.” 
The glory of the Lord here; comes with the execution of 
judgment ; there is nothing of the gospel at all. You 
see, then, these three points. First, you have the state- 
ment that after God had sown the good seed the enemy 
came and sowed the evil. Then you have the conditional 
declaration, that the professing Church, if it did not 
continue in God’s goodness, would, as an outward thing, 
be cut off. Then further, you have the declaration that 
that evil. which had begun in the time of the apostles, 
would go on to the end, the Lord only restraining the 
public manifestation of it until the time of judgment 
approached at Christ’s coming, the fulness of the Gen- 
tiles being come in, and then that wicked would be cut 
off ; also, that.in the last days perilous times would come, 
and Antichrist would come.‘ We have seen also that the 
passages referring to the earth being filled with the 
knowledge of the glory of the Lord,. and the like, are: - 
‘ all connected with judgment, and that when’ favour: is 
B 


26 


shewed to the wicked, as in the gospel, he will not learn 
righteousness. If you turn to the Revelation, you will 
get a little more of detail about the falling away, and 
about what the character of that evil is which is at work. 
But before we quote from the Revelation, let me remark 
that the two great characters of evil from the beginning 
have been corruption and violence. Before the deluge, 
the earth was corrupt before God, and filled with violence. 
And in the Revelation, ‘‘ Babylon ’’ is the expression of 
corruption, while the ‘‘ beast” is the expression of vio- 
lence. I cannot, this evening, enter into details as to 
this part of the subject, but I wish to shew you how the 
one runs into the other. In the 17th verse, the ex- 
pression, ‘‘the great whore,” indicates the power of 
corruption. At the 15th verse, it is said, ‘‘ The waters 
which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, 


<and multitudes, and nations, and tongues,”—the refer- 


ence here is to the influence over the nations which a 


- gorrupt christianity has exercised,—‘‘ And the ten horns 


which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the 
whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall 
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.” Of course, that is 
not the gospel; it is violence putting an end to cor- 
ruption. ‘*For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil 
His will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the 
beast.” It is not when Babylon is destroyed that the 
kingdom is given to the Son of Man. It is given then 
to the beast. ‘The effect of the destruction of all this 
corrupt influence of outward, nominal christianity, of 
the awful corruption of the Papal system, which was the 
centre of it all, that ‘‘ Mother of abominations of the 
earth,”—the effect of the destruction of that, through 
the ‘hatred and disgust of those connected with it, and 
disgusted and wearied with it, will be to put the power 
of the world into the hands of the beast. There is 
nothing at all here about the gospel. It is the violence 


27 


of man refusing longer to submit to priestly power. 
When one reads Scripture, simply desiring to learn what 
it teaches, he cannot but be surprised how people form 
from it the systems they do. They take hold of some 
abstract principle, and, following it out, succeed in find- 
ing it in Scripture according to their expectations. In 
studying the Scriptures, they settle first what the Scrip- 
tures should teach, instead of being content to take 
simply what they do actually state. Turn now to the 
16th chapter, and you will find more about the time when 
judgment shall be executed upon Babylon, although we 
cannot now enter into the various details of it. ‘‘ And 
I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the 
mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, 
and out of the mouth of the false prophet.” These are 
.the powers of evil. ‘‘ For they are the spirits of devils, 
working miracles which go forth unto the kings of the 
earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the 
battle of that great day of God Almighty. Behold, I 
come as a thief.” It is the devil who gathers the whole 
world to that great battle. People may discuss what is 
meant by the dragon, and the beast, and the false 
prophet. I have very little doubt on that point, and I 
may just say, without entering into the details, that the 
dragon is the power of Satan, that the beast is the 
Roman Empire, and that the false prophet is the false 
Messiah at the time of the end. I do not dwell upon 
this, but at all events it is perfectly clear that the three 
unclean spirits, which gather the nations to the battle of 
thé great day of God Almighty, are not the gospel. It 
is the battle which in Isaiah is said to be with burning 
and fuel of fire. The nations are gathered to Arma- 
geddon, and then comes the judgment. The beast and 
its horns destroy Babylon, that great corrupt system, and 
then the beast and the kings of the earth are gathered 
by evil spirits against the power of Christ, Satan being 


ae 


ee At 


cast down from heaven. In the 19th chapter of Reve- 
lation, we read that there comes forth on the white horse 
He who has on His vesture and on His thigh a name 
written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords; that the 
beast and the kings of the earth and their armies, are 
gathered together to make war against Him that sat on 
the horse, and against His army ; ‘‘ and the beast. was 
taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought 
miracles before him, with which he deceived them that 
had received the mark of the beast, and them that 
worshipped his image ; these both were cast alive into a 
lake of fire burning with brimstone; and the remnant 
were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the 
horse.” Thus’we get here very distinctly that there is 
an execution of judgment, And after that—after the 
execution of judgment—Satan is bound. Then we have 
@ passage, which is the only ground we have for saying 
that there is tobe a millennium—a thousand years of 
blessedness. We have seen the general statements that 
the world will be full of the knowledge of the glory of 
the Lord, but that is to be by judgment. But the only 
proof we have that the period of blessedness is to last a 
thousand years—the only evidence for this particular 
character of the glory which is coming—is found in the 
20th chapter of Revelation. We have plenty of testi- 
mony that there will be a time of blessedness, but this 
specific character of it is only found here, and that is 
after the Lord has come as King of Kings, and Lord of 
Lords, and executed judgment, and Satan is bound. 
‘Satan has been corrupting every thing ; but, when he is 
bound, he can no longer do so; and then come the thou- 
sand years, and thrones and judgments are given to us, 
The saints shall judge the world, forso God hath revealed 
in His word. Are there not many professing Christians 
who, if you were to‘say to them, ‘‘don’t you know you 
are'to judge angels ?” would think you were mad? And 


es Ee SSS Oe ae, ee ee ee SS. ee ee lee CU ee!hClUC 


29 


yet.it-wapito the Corinthiana, who were very far from 
being the most perfect of Christians, who were, indeed, 


,@oing on very. badly, that this was said. The full import 


of the connection of the Church with Christ, has been 
almost wholly forgotten. People talk of their hopes of 


being saved, and of living godly, but the connection of 


the Church with the second Adam is practically forgotten. 
The power of redemption, and the high privileges con- 
nected with it, are overlooked. Let us revert for a 
moment to the 17th of Revelation, to see how inti- 
mately the saints are associated with Christ in that day. 
We-read that the beast and the kings of the earth shall 
make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome 
them ; for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings ; 
‘* and they that are with him are called, and chosen, and 
faithful.” That description does not apply to angels. 
No doubt He will come with tho holy angels, but the 
expression, ‘‘ called; and chosen, and faithful,” applies 
to the saints, who c..me ‘ arrayed in fine linen, ,clegniand 
white,” which ‘‘is the righteousness of sainte:” So 
arrayed, they come with the Lord. We. shall be caught 
up to meet the Lord in the air, and when He appears, ‘we 
also: shall.appear with Him in glory. There is. another 
point I wish to shew you, although I cannot go into 
details. I can only touch upon the great principles bear- 


ing on:the subject we are considering, and pags over them 


very rapidly. You will remember a passage of sacred 
history, in the time of Elijah, recorded in the Kings. 
God had:seen that there were seven thousand in Ierael 
who had not bowed the knee to Baal, although Hlijah 
hhad fancied that he only was left, and they sought his 
life to take it away. Acting under God’s authority, 
Elijah raised the question whether Baal was God, or 
Jehovah, was God, and. proceeded to test.it by a public 
demonstration in the face of all.the people. And he 
proposed to test it in this way, that he who answered: by 
B 


OS Steen apm 


80 


fire, should be acknowledged as God. Sacrifices accor- 
dingly were prepared, and the priests of Baal.cried aloud 
from morning until noon, “O, Baal, hear us!” And 
Elijah mocked them, and said, ‘‘Ory aloud, for he is a 
God ; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in 
a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be 
awaked.” And they cried aloud, and cut themselves 
with knives, until evening, but there was no answer. 
And then Elijah built an altar, and laid on it the sacri- 
fice, and filled the trench about it with water, and called 
upon the Lord ; and the fire of the Lord fell and con- 
sumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and licked up 
the water that was in the trench; and when all the 
people saw it, they fell on their faces, and said, ‘‘The 
Lord, he is the God ; the Lord, he is the God.” Now 
we find, in, the Revelation, that the false prophet brings 
down fire from heaven in the sight of men. It is all 
- lies, of course, but he does it in such a way ‘as to de- 
ceive men. The very thing which Elijah did to prove 
that Jehovah was the true God, the false prophet, or 
false Messiah, also appears to do—bringing down in the 
sight of men the very thing which proved Jehovah to be 
God ; and that he succeeds by it in deceiving men, shews 
that they are given up to strong delusion to believe a lie. 
- This refers to the Government of the world, so far as 
the Jews are concerned. If you turn to 2nd Thessalonians, 
‘ you will see the same, where Christianity. is concerned, 
-in connection with the apostacy: ‘‘Then shall that 
wicked be revealed . . . even him, whose coming is 
‘ after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and 
lying wonders.” Of course they are all “lying,” but 
. still they are ‘‘ powers, and signs, and wonders”—words 
verbally identical in his original with those used by Peter 
“when he preached of ‘‘ Jesus of Nazareth, a man ap- 
‘ proved of God among you by miracles and wonders and 
-signs,” ‘That is; Antichrist does the .same things, lying 


81 


of course, but the same as regards men’s apprehension of 
them, which proved Jesus to be the Christ, and the same 
things that proved Jehovah to be the true God. By 
these means he blinds and deceives the people, and leads 
them away to worship the dragon and the beast. He 
does this by bringing fire down from heaven and leads 
them to recognise the false Christ as the true one, by 
doing the same things—falsely of course—as Christ 
had done. Yvcu cannot conceive a more awful and solemn 
thing, than that men should thus be given up to strong 
delusion to believe a lie, and to be subject to the power 
of him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with 
all power and signs and lying wonders ; and it is not 
surprising that the apostle should be so impressive in his 
warning, when he says, ‘*This know, that in the last 
days, perilous times shall come.”” Now beloved friends, 
the more you search the Scriptures, the more you will 
find these great leading principles clearly brought out. 
But the professing church refuses to see them—and this 
is connected with what I pointed out at the outset that 
everything which in God's great scheme is trusted to 
man is a failure. It was while men slept, that the enemy 
came and sowed the tares, and then we have the positive 
revelation that the church, not continuing in God’s 
goodness, will be cut off. Therefore the notion that the 
outward church of God, after having become corrupt, 
will again be set right, is an entire delusion. I say out- 
ward Church of God—for, as regards individuals, what 
is revealed on this point is only a reason for greater 
faithfulness on their part. That is another question 
altogether. Asregards the duty of individuals, Scripture 
gives plenty of directions about that, even when speak- 
ing of the last days, when there shall be a form of godli- 
ness and a denial of the power thereof. From such, says 
the Spirit, turn away. It will be as with the saints as 
with Elijah—there never will be a time when individually 


el 


: — — — : 
ti A te Ro NR re gr RR A A a a a 


mere ee 


they. will have.a greater. consciqusness of the power of 
Qbriat; than'in the time of general declension. That, 
Jhowever, isnot the point, the question is as.to the. out- 
ward manifestation and outward effect in the world, Men 
‘have comforted themselves with the thought. of an invisi- 
ble Church, forgetting tl is said, ‘‘ Ye are the light of 
the world.” Of what valu, .s an invisible light.? It ia aaid, 
‘* let your light so shine before men;” that is, let your 
profession of christianity be so distinct ‘‘ that they may 
see your good works, and glorify your Father whigh,is in 
heaven. And now, beloved friends, take this lesson with 
you, that, during this time of God’s forbearance, until 
He comes forth to execute judgment, a deep. responsi- 
bility is laid upon each of us. Let each man take heed 
how and what he believes. Keep in mind that it is by 
false doctyines that Satan has corrupted the Church—by 
Judaism, by the worship of saints, and by all sorts of 
errors. We have not t* to enumerate them all, but 
it is by the introduction ese falee and heretical, doc- 
trines that Satan has succeeded in corrupting christianity, 
so much «so, that if you wished to look for really the 


- darkest characters of evil, you would have :to.go among 


chiriatians to find it—of course christians merely:in name 
Imean, but yet those who boast that theirs:is the:only 
true christianity in the world. I only add now this 
thought : How’ important it is, if we are approaching 
these. scenes of judgment, that we should underatand 
correctly what is the destiny of the Church, instead 


of imagining that all is to go on rightly until the 


whole world is filled with blessedness. How impor- 
tant is it that we should understand that this mystery of 
iniquity, already at work in the Apostle’s days, is. to go 
on until God leaves the bridle loose, as it were, for the 
whole power of evil to do its worst; that the: evil;is 
working until the saints are taken up to meet the Lord 
in the.air, and then the final. power of Satan will begin 


' 
| 


oO mm? © Bae BX 


33 


to work, This surely is a solemn thought for me, if I 
care for the Church, how I have discharged my own 
responsibility, when the question is put, as in Jeremiah, 
‘* Where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful 
flock ? what wilt thou say when he shall punish thee ?” 
Read the Acts, and see what Christendom is now, and 
say what likeness there is. Ask not only, is there the 
doctrine, but where is the practice now? Yet the Lord 
is faithful. And, when judgment comes, the Lord 
having bought the field, has got the treasure safe, and 
He has kept it safe all the while. We shall afterwards 
take up that part of our subject which connects God’s 
dealings with the world more particularly with the Jews. 
But, meanwhile, the Lord give us to lay this to heart— 
the difference between what is called the Church, the 
outward thing, and what the Church really ought to be 
—and let us see what our own characters are, if there is 
anything in us which is an adequate fruit of the travail 
of the Son of God, and of the coming down of the Holy 
Ghost as the Comforter and Sanctifier. It is best always, 
in making application of these truths, te begin with our- 
selves. Let us see, then, whether in our hearts we love 
and care for Christ, and about the condition in which 
the Church of God is, or whether we are deceiving our- 
selves by imagining that it is in a proper condition to set 
the world right. I do not doubt that the Holy Ghost is 
remarkably working now. From the first time these 
things broke in upon my mind, I have always expected 
that the Spirit of God would work ; and I bless God 
that he is doing so much at this time. Yet I feel 
assured, from what I find in the Scriptures, that it is by 
judgment that this working is to be followed. 


aah se ecnciatne- © ope ern OSCR SCTE 


Lovell and Gibson, Printers, Toronto. 


ener aa 


LECTURES ON THE SECOND COMING. 


LECTURES VI. AND VII. 


DANIEL IL, 19 TO END, 


AND 


DANIEL VII. 


By J. N. D. 


Coronto : 


GOSPEL TRACT DEPOSITORY. 
(MRS, DREW, 370, YONGE STREET.) 


Price Ten Cents, 


sd ewe 
. 
. 
- 
2 canna = inches tia ss 
a = CRETE a RIE ASE MRA EAN a SERBIA RC STI Eg ER Te RE BRANES EES NTE ab | — -- 
inal hls SoTL U INTENT: = eT rn nr es _ 


NOTES OF TWO LECTURES 


ON 


DANIEL II, 19 TO END, 


AND 


DANIEL VII. 


Meertine Hooss, Alexander Street. 

Toronto, 3rd and 10th June, 1863. 

I have read this chapter, dear friends, because it gives 
an outline of a part of prophecy of which other parts of 
Scriptures are the detail. We began with the Church’s 
having a sure and certain hope, through the never chang- 
ing promise of God, of being caught up to be for ever 
with Christ before He comes to judge the world, and we 
saw that the looking and longing, where the heart is truly 
for Christ, for His coming again, is the bright and cheer- 
ing influence of the christian’s path. Last evening we 
saw the professing church looked at as in the world, that 
which is called the Church, to be at last utterly rejected 
of God, fearfully judged for its corruption, or spewed out 
of Christ’s mouth as nauseous. When we turn to the 
ways of God on the earth, we have seen that His direct 
government had always been exercised with the Jews as 
acentre. Providential government, He always exercises. 
He makes all things work together for good to those that 


4, 


love Him. Not a sparrow falls to the ground without 
Him who is our Father. But when we come to direct 
government, the immediate dealings with men on the 
earth according to their conduct, and the direct public 
interference of God to shew His ways on earth, then the 
Jews conié on'the's¢ene, ahd’ aré’ the pivot round’ which 
those ways turn. But they extend necessarily, when fully 
displayed, to the Gentiles who surround them, and fill the 
earth, the great body of whom have now long oppressed 
them. Hence the same passages which refer to the Jews 
refer to the Gentiles also, as those who come up before 
God when He begins that government in which the Jews 
have the first and principal place on earth. These pas- 
sages I will now refer'to, somie of which, by reason of 
what I have just noticed, have already been quoted in re- 
ference to the Jews. But before-doing so I must point out 
two classes of Gentiles to which they refer, in respect of 
whom there are two very distinct classes of prophecy in 
Scripture : that which refers to those who were enemies 
of the Jews when God was there‘ with them’ on the earth, 
when He owned them; or will hereafter again own them 
as’ His people; and that which refers to those who op- 
press'them when they aré not, when God has written on 
them’Lo Ammi, not my people, and thé times of the 
Getitiles have begun. These are entirely distinct. We 
get certain’ powers dealt with which are outside Israel, and 
are their enemies when the presence of God and His 
throne are still in the midst of that people, and the re- 
presentatives of whom will be found in the latter days, 
when God has taken Israel up again. But after the Jews 
turned'to idolatry, and, whatever had been God’s patience 
rising up early and sending His prophets till there wasno 
remedy, He was obliged to give them up to Judgment, — 
He then set up’ Nebuchadnezzar, and the times of the: 
Gentiles-began—and they are still running on. The em- 
pire passed from’ Babylon to Persia; and-Persia to Greece; 


5 


and the Jews were,slaves to the Romans when Christ 
came, slaves to the. Gentiles. Their ecclesiastical polity 
was allowed to exist, but the civil power wasin the hands 
of their oppressors. These times of the Gentiles run on 
until Christ executes judgment, until those who were the 
oppressors of (tod’s people when He does not own them, 
shall be destroyed, and those. who are their enemies out- 
side these oppressors shall be brought to nought at a 
time when they think they have got it all their own way, 
and then the Jew is set free. In a word, Scripture shews 
us that the Jews are the centre of God’s earthly dealings ; 
and that as regards the Gentiles there are two classes of 
prophecy, one referring to the enemies of God’s people 
when He owns them, and the other their oppressors when 
they are turned off and He does not own them. The 
32nd chap. of Deuteronomy lays the prophetic ground 
at the very origin of their whole history, of all that is to 
come to pass. In the,8th verse, as we have seen when 


speaking of the Jews, they are shewn to be the centre of 


His ways. ‘* When the Most High divided to the nations 
their inheritance, when He separated the sons of Adam, 
He set the bounds of the people (peoples) according to 
the number of the children of Israel.” Just connect it 
now with the general judgment of the Gentiles. The 
prophet first states that after his decease Israel would cor- 
rupt themselyes, then he goes on in verse 21 to the wick- 


edness, the fruit of which is going on now. In the 25th 


verse he rises above the wickedness so as not to destroy 
them, to shew that He is God. Then he goes on to the 
time of His rising up to judgment, leading us to that of 
which we are speaking. When Israel is brought utterly 
low He will indeed judge His people, but He will also 
repent Himself concerning His servants. His hand, asit 
is expressed, takes hold on judgment, rendering vengeance 


to His enemies, for such the Gentile powers are found to 


be, and apostate Jews too, He makes His arrows drunk 


6 


with blood, and His sword devours flesh. Yet this it is 
brings in the millennial blessings, when the nations wil] 
rejoice with His people, for He will avenge the blood of 
His servants, a thing we have not yet accomplished, will 
render vengeance to His adversaries, and, mark the ex- 
pression, be merciful to His land and to Fis people. — 
Thus we have His people judged, His servants avenged, 
His adversaries brought under vengeance, yet His land 
and people Israel coming into mercy, and the gentiles re- 
joicing with them. Ina word, judgment, the Lord’s ad- 
versaries destroyed, Gentiles and apostate Jews, His ser- 
vants avenged, Israel restored, and the nations blessed 
with them but Israel His people. I will now turn before 
distinguishing the enemies of Israel owned of God, and 
their oppressors when given up, to the general testi- 
mony of the judgment of the nations, and then shew you 
the two distinct. Turn to the last chapter of Isaiah Ixvi. 
15th verse, ‘‘ For, behold, the Lorp will come with fire, 
and with His chariots like a whirlwind to render His anger 
with fury, and His rebuke with flames of fire; for by 
fire and by His sword will the Lord plead with all flesh.” 
We have the great general fact of the judgment of the 
nations ; and if you turn to verses 6 to 14 you will see 
the Jews set up again. ‘‘For thus saith the Lord 
(verse 12) Behold I will extend peace to her (Jerusalem) 
like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing 
stream. Then you get the ungodly Jews in the 17th and 
thence to the 24th, the manifestation of Jehovah’s glory, 
those that escape the judgment that accompanies it going 
off to the nations and announcing the appearing of that 
glory, and bringing back the scattered Jews to Jerusalem. 
I get, then, thus the great fact that the Lorp comes to 
judge all flesh, and those He finds interfering with Israel 
He cuts off. Now turn to the 9th and 10th Psalms, they 
celebrate the judgment and destruction of the enemies of 
Israel in the land. The Psalmist introduces the whole 


ee 


7, 
subject in the 4th and 5th verses, ‘‘ For thou hast main- 
tained my right and my cause ; thou satest in the throne 
judging right, thou hast rebuked the heathen, thou hast 
destroyed the wicked, thou hast put out their name for 
ever and ever.” ‘* That I may show forth all thy praise 
in the gates in the daughter of Zion : I will rejoice in thy 
salvation. The heathen are sunk down in the pit that 
they made: in the net which they hid is their own 
foot taken. The Lorp is known by the judgment which 
he executeth : the wicked is snared in the work of his own 
hands. Higgaion. The wicked shall be turned into hell 
and all the nations that forget God, x. 16. The Lorp is 
king for ever and ever : the heathen are perished out of 
his land.” These are thetwo Psalms which, after speak- 
ing of the rejection of Christ as king in Zion, and His ta- 
king the character of universal headship as son of man in 
Psalm 8 bring in the whole testimony of the Psalms, the 
state and feelings of the remnant of Israel in the last days, 
and the judgment which God executes upon the Gentiles. 
Hence, remark, it is that we find in the Psalms these ap- 
peals to judgment and demands for it, which have often 
stumbled christians, when urged by the enemies of chris- 
tianity. They are not the expression of christian feelings. 
We leave the world and go to heaven. In no sense have 
we to demand the destruction of our enemies in order to 
pass into glory. But Israel cannot have their rest on 
earth until the wicked are destroyed, and therefore they 
do demand this righteous judgment, and that is the way 
they will be delivered. To pursue our subject ; Turn to 
the 25th of Jeremiah. This is aremarkable chapter ; but 
first I will give you a few verses from the end of the 
24th of Isaiah verse 16, but to show the connection 
with Israel I will read from the 13th verse, ‘‘ And thus 
it shall be in the midst of the land among the people, 
there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the 
gleaning grapes when the vintage is done, they shall lift 


8 


up their voice, they shall sing far the majesty of the Lorp, 
theyshall cry aloud from the sea. Wherefore glorify ye the 
Lorp in the fires, even the name of the Lorp God of 
Israel in the isles of the'sea, From the uttermost parts 
of the earth have we heard songs, even glory to the 
righteous. But I said, my leanness, my leanness, woe 
unto me ! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously 
yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously. 
Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabi- 
tant of the earth. And it shall come to pass, that he who 
fleeeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit ; 
and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall 
‘be taken in the snare : for the windows from on high are 
open and the foundations of the earth do shake. The 
earth is utterly broken down, the earthis clean dissolved, 
the earth is moved exceedingly.” There you get the 
world reeling like a drunkard, under the terrible judg- 
ment of God, and (verses 21, 22) we see the judgment of 
the powers of evil on high, the prince of the power of the 
air and his angels, and of the kings of the earth on the 
earth ; and then the Lord reigning in Zion and before 
His ancients gloriously. Now turn to Jeremiah xxv. 15, 
“ For thus saith the Lorp God of Israel unto me: Take 
the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the 
nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it. He speaks of 
the various nations in that way and then goes on from 
the 29 to the 33 verses to declare the universal judgment 
of the heathen describing the terrible coming down of 
Jehovah in judgment upon them. Turn now to 5th 
chap. of Micah, ‘‘ And I will execute judgment in anger 
and fury upon the heathen, such as they have notheard.” 
But then, too, Israel is blessed and re-established in pow- 
er in verses 7, 8 and that through Christ, great to the end 
of the earth, (verse 4, 5,) ‘* And he shall stand and feed in 


‘the strength of the Lorn, in the majesty of the name of 
the Lorp hjs God ; and they shall abide ; for now shall 


9 


he be great unto the ends.of the earth. And this man 
Shall be the peace, when the, Assyrian shall come into our 
land : and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall 
we raise against him seyen shepherds and eight principal 
men.” Turn to Joel iii. 9 to 17, ‘*Proclaim ye thisamong 
the Gentiles ; prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let 
all the men of war draw near, let them come up. Beat 
your ploughshares into swords, and your pruning-hooks 
into spears: let the weak say I am strong. Assemble 
yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather your- 
selves together round about: thither cause thy mighty 
ones to come down, O Lorp ; let the heathen be wakened, 

and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat : (Jehoshaphat 
means judgment of Jehovah) for there will I sit to judge 
all the heathen round about. Put ye in the sickle, for 
the harvest is ripe ; come, get you down ; for the press 
is full, the fats overflow ; for their wickedness is great. 
Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision : for the 
day of the Lorp is near in the valley of decision. The sun 
and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall with- 
draw their shining. The Lorp also shall roar out of Zion, 
and utter His voice from Jerusalem ; and the heavens 
and the earth ghall shake : but the Lorp shall be the hope 
of His people, and the strength of the children of Israel. 
So shall ye know that I am the Lorp your God, dwelling 
in Zion, my holy mountain : then shall Jerusalem be holy, 
and there shall no strangers pass through her any more.” 
What makes this passage additionally important is, that 
Jerusalem is brought back to blessing and never to be 
trodden down again, no strangers shall pass through her 
any more, but the Gentiles who helped on her affliction 
are. destroyed for ever. In the time of Nebuchadnezzar 
when Jerusalem was in trouble, and again when Titus 
besieged and took it, the Gentiles were not destroyed at 
all, when Cyrus sent back a remnant to Jerusalem they 
remained captive, and strangers are yet. in Jerusalem,— 


10 


Again we find here all the nations gathered together, the 
Gentiles destroyed and the Jews set up.—Zephaniah iii, 3 
to end, Jehovah’s determination is to gather all the na- 
tions. They are to be devoured by the fire of His jeal- 
ousy, here again, too, we find that Israel will never be 
cast out again. He will bring back their captivity and 


. make them the praise amongall the people. He will cast 


out their enemy, they will not see evil any more. Jeho- 
vah is in the midst of Jerusalem, Gud will rest in His love. 
I will turn to one more passage before I shew the differ- 
ence between the two classes of enemies to Israel. Hag- 
gai ii. 5 to 9, ‘* According to the word that I covenanted 
with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remain- 
eth among you: fear ye not. For thus saith the Lorp 
of hosts ; yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake 
the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land 
and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations 
shall come : and I will fill this house with glory, saith 
the Lorp of hosts. The silver is mine, and the gold is 
mine saith the Lorp of hosts. The glory of this latter 
house (properly the latter glory of this house) shall be 
greater than of the former, saith the Lorp of hosts: and 
in this place will I give peace, saith the Lorp of hosts,” 
The apostle quotes this passage in the Epistle to the He- 
brews, shewing that it has not yet come, ‘‘See that ye 
refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not 
who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall 
not we escape, if we turn away from Him that speaketh 
from heaven.” Heisu» | not to rest on earthly 


and created things, that time of universal 
shaking of the ung le creation, was yet to 
come, declaring at all .uld ve shaken and pass away. 
Let us now take a review of Scripture as to the two clas- 
ses of Israel’s enemies of which I have spoken. The chief 
enemy of Israel, while Israel was still owr 41 of God be- 
fore the captivity of Babylon was the Av rian. There 


aos 


T.eon nw @ 


—- —ctr OT 


11 


had been others as Syria, but Syria succumbed to the 
Assyrian. Egypt then sought to fill the scene of the 
world and came up, conquered Judea and met the power 
of Babylon at Carchemish, but its power was broken and 
Nebuchadnezzar became the head of gold over the whole 
earth, and the times of the Gentiles began, which are still 
running on and will till the Lord takes His great power 
and reigns, No doubt the Jews came back, or a small 
remnant of them, from Babylon, to present Messiah to 
them. But they were so wicked and perversely idola- 
trous that God had given them up to captivity, and, even 
when in their land on their return, they were subject to 
the Gentiles, God’s glory and His throne were no longer 
amongst them. When they came back they never got the 
Shekinah, the Shekinah was the cloud that manifested the 
presence of God, They had no longer the ark, or the 
Urim and Thummim, What constituted the witness of 
God’s presence was gone, and these things were never re- 
stored. . These are the times of the Gentiles still ; the 
four beasts constituted the times of the Gentiles. And 
this as to the earth was of the last possible importance.— 
The throne of God ceased to be on the earth. Prophecy 
indeed remained till the outward order was restored, but 
it is remarkable that the post-captivity prophets never set 
aside the judgment pronounced in Hosea—‘‘ Ye are not 
my people.” They never call the Jews God’s people in 
their then standing, doing so only when they prophecy of 
that future day when they will be restored to the Divine 
favour, which is yet to come. Finally when Christ came 
he was rejected and sat down on His Father’s throne, and 
the Divine power and glory is wholly above, the object of 
faith to the believing soul. The people whom God had 
called and had God’s throne among them were wholly cut 
off though preserved. Well, the throne of God had 
ceased on the earth at the beginning of these times of 
the Gentiles, and, therefore, in Daniel you never get the 


12 


God of the earth, but the God of heaven, because He was 
not there with them. ‘This departure of God from the 
direct government of the earth with Israel for the centre, 
His throne being i in their midst, sitting between the cher- 
ubim, as it is said, and Hisfreturn to the government _of 
the earth, is of immense importance. In Ezekiel we see 
this judgment on J erusalem. God comes, (Nebuchad- 
nezzar being | the instrument), God comes on the Cheru- 
bim in the way of providence, those wheels which were so 
high they were dreadful, spares His own whom He has 
marked, and gives up the rest to destruction. He executes 
judgment, leaves them, and goes into heaven. The Gen- 
tiles are left to rule subject to God’s providence and final 
judgment, Israel, and God’s throne in their midst, is set 
aside. Four great Empires arise successively —Babylon, 
Persia, Greece and Rome. ‘The Roman Empire, while 
devastating everywhere, does not succeed in getting all 
nations under its power, but continues the great power 
of the world till the judgment, though in a special form. 
‘Then the Assyrian comes on the scene again at the close, 
that is, geographically what i: now Turkey in Asia and 
part of Persia, but in the last . .ys Assyria will appear on 
ithe scene in the Russian power according to the testi- 
mony of Ezekiel xxxvii. xxxviii. (a passage applied to 
‘this power near two hundred years ago by the elder Lowth 
‘before the present question arose, ) and the world as con- 
nected with Israel and God’s ultimate purposes on the 
earth is divided into Western Europe, and the basin of 
the ‘Mediterranean, the Roman Empire, and Eastern Eu- 
rope or the Russian ; these two are never confounded in 
Scripture. The Assyrian was the power that warred 
against Israel when God owned them, and the other the 
_power that oppressed and held them captive when they 
were.not owned. 
Now in Isaiah and the precaptivity prophets you get 
.the Assyrian all through, the beast being scarcely men. 
tioned ; cnoe as the King to complete the scene, and even 


18 
that, I apprehend, is-a subordinate ally of the beast. 


Whereas i in Daniel you don’t get the: Assyrian unless 
possibly obseurely i in one chapter and them not as. such, 


the same thing being true of Zechariah save’ that all: 


nations are mentioned in both in a general way,. as 
brought as sheaves to the floor when rising up against 
Jerusalem. Thus far I have been speaking of the general 


judgment, now, having distinguished between the: beasts. 
and: the Assyrian power of the latter day, we have to:cite: 


those which apply to them distinctively. Turn to Daniel, 
you get fully the beasts, but not the Assyrian ; let us 
examine first the chapter I read. Here we have Nebu- 
chadnezzar the head of gold, the Persian Empire denoted 
by silver, the Grecian by: brass, the Roman by iron, while 
the iron and. clay represent the present state of things, 
Then: after these. last were formed a stone is cut. out 
without hands, God’s sovereign work, smites the image, 
all becomes as the chaff of the summer: threshing fioor, 


and no place is found for them, and then the stone which: 


smote the image became a great mountain whic.. filled 


the whole earth. There is not here, remark, a trace: of’ 


influence exercised over the previous component parts of 
the image so as to produce a change of character. The 
notion is that Christianity will spread and pervade these 
countries. Now the stone does not grow at all till they 
are entirely destroyed. There is no influence exercised, 
no modification takes place, no change at ‘all is spoken of 
here, The little stone destroys all before it increases. 
It is the stone which has smitten the image which grows. 
What we have got here is the coming of Christ’s kingdom 
in judgment, and a total destruction of the empires which 
preceded its action, that action was on the last, and more 
particularly on the toes of iron and clay, the last form 
which this image took, looked at in its geographical dis- 
tribution on earth, and the condition of its. parts, partly 
strong, partly broken, What gives its specific character 


Mee, era eee Pa 


14 


to the figure is, that the stone does not grow at all until 
it has done all these things, and after it has finished its 
work of judgment and destruction grows to be a great 
mountain. What is going on now is not this. Christ 
has ascended up on high and He waits, in the spirit of 
grace, sitting on the right hand of His Father’s throne, 
while the saints, His co-heirs, the church is gathering 
out of the world ; until at the moment known to God 
alone He rises up from the Father’s throne, then to take 
to Him His great power and reign, His enemies being 
now put under His feet. Turn now to the intepretation 
itself, which is perfectly clear on this point. Power in 
the world is entrusted to man in the person of Nebuchad- 
nezzar, three empires succeed his and at the end though 
there be a strength in the last which breaks in pieces and 
subdues all around it, yet a conflict of principles charac- 
terises its latter form (I have little doubt the Teutonic 
and Latin elements) and it is partly strong and partly 
broken, but then the close comes, verse 44: ‘* And in the 
days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a 
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed : and the king- 
dom shall not be left to other people ; but it shall break 
in pieces and consume all these kingdoms and it shall 
stand forever.” 


ED reece 


You will remember, beloved friends, that on the last 
evening we saw the general outline of God’s dealings 
with the Gentiles, in connection with His chosen earthly 
people the Jews ; the Jews being the centre of all God’s 
earthly dealings, First that at the restoration of the 
Jews there would be the judgment of the Gentiles, 
the nations being divided into two classes, those that were 
enemies to God’s people when God owned them and had 
His throne in their midst ; and those who led them captive 
and oppressed them when God did not own them. Both 


15 


will be cast out from the seat of power. It is evident 
that as regards the world it is an all important fact, 
God’s taking His throne from it. When that took place 
He was no longer the God of the earth, though he over- 
rules all things providentially, but does not exercise direct 
government as in Israel when His throne was there. 
Hence Daniel calls Him the God of heaven, and it is not 
until He comes to judge the world that He takes His 
name of God of the earth, Lord of the whole earth, (see 
Zech. xiv.) The time during which God gives up His 
throne on the earth is called the times of the Gentiles. 
During these times the Jews who were taken captive and 
made slaves to Nebuchadnezzar have ceased to be God’s 
people as a present position, and are always subject to 
the Gentiles, and the times of the Gentiles run on till He 
comes to take vengeance. Then He takes them up again 
casting out, as we saw before, those who oppressed them 
when they were not owned, and those who were enemies 
when they were owned and His throne was in their midst. 
The distinctions of these two classes is important to us 
because we are in the times of the Gentiles. In the 
prophecies there is never the slightest confusion between 
the two. The Assyrian, and finally Gog, is the great 
enemy of Israel when the people is owned, the four 


beasts or Gentile empires their oppressors when they are | 


not. The prophets up to the captivity, and Ezekiel speak 
of the former, Daniel and Zechariah of the latter, to 
which when we come to the New Testament we must add 
Revelation. The whole New Testament history is under 
the last beast. The first and fullest, most general account 
of these is in the 7th chapter of Daniel, which we have 
read, If we turn to it now for a moment we shall see 
that it is divided into portions by the term : I saw in the 
night visions. First we have, verse 1—6, the fact of the 
four great empires and a brief account of three. The 
next division, beginning with the 7th, to the 12th, a 


té 


particular description of the fourth beast. and then a 
throne set up and judgment—verse 13 beginning another 
division in which the kingdom is given to the Son of Man, 
after this we have the explanation given to Daniel by the 
angel, in which the condition of the Saints under the 
beasts and particularly the last beast, and finally under 
the Son of Man is given. They are beasts as having, 
lost. their intelligence towards God, not owning Him, 
and. doing their own will in ravening power as far as they. 
can. Of this the madness of Nebuchadnezzar was a figure. 
The three first great empires are Babylon (the head of 
gold); the Bear, Persia (silver) ; Leopard, Grecian, (brass). 
On these I do not dwell, they are past. The fourth beast, 
described as wo have seen apart more particularly, is the 
Roman ; you find him represented as fierce and powerful, 
tearing and devouring ; not simple conquest, but putting 
all down under it; treading down what it did not devour, 
and where has not Western Europe sought to place its 
power, but which is far more important still, we find 
direct antagonism to God. 7-8, ‘‘ After this I saw in the 
night visions, and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and 
terrible, and strong exceedingly ; and it had great iron 
teeth : it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the 
residue with the feet of it: and it was diverse from all 
the beasts that were before it ; and it had ten horns. I 
considered the horns, and, behold, there came up among 
them another little horn, before whom there were three 
of the first horns plucked up by the roots, and, behold, 
in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth 
speaking great things.” You will remark that there is a 
special power here (a horn the symbol of power or a king- 
dom) ; before it three of the kingdoms fall. Its general 
character is given here. We shall see the details further 
on, It has eyes of man, eyes. here mean intelligence, 
insight into things) His mouth speaks great things, 
saying, Who is Lord over us. Nor is this all, that his lips 


RoC 2 2S Bae ae ye 


17 


are his own, as the psalm speaks, but he will not allow of 
God. ‘‘I beheld till the thrones were cast. down, ‘here 
with the lxx. and best judges we must read, set, which 
falls in with the sense indeed of the whole passage,) and 
the ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as 
snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool : his 
throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning 
fire. A. fiery stream issued and-came forth from before 
him : thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten 
thousapd times ten thousand stood before Him; the 
judgment was set, and the books were opened. I beheld 
then because of the voice of the great words which the 
horn spake : I beheld even till the beast was slain, and 
his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.” 
The three first powers you may remark had their do- 
minion taken away, their power was destroyed, but sub- 
sisted afterwards as subject kingdoms, whereas when the 
Roman Empire is put an end to it is destroyed utterly. 
To this we must now turn. It has an importance which 
none of the others have, though Babylon has a special 
character. It.was the Roman Empire that was in power 
when Christ was born and took part in His rejection 
through Pilate, and hereafter they will join Anti-Christ 
when he comes. The prophet regards till the thrones 
are set and the ancient of days sits. The Roman Empire 
will then subsist and, whatever its form or its apparent 
subversion, is not supplanted by any other beast till the 
judgment comes. The prophet beholds till the thrones are 


set, and the ancient of days sits. This is an important 


element in the fourth beast’s history, the consequence is, it 
is utterly destroyed when it ceases to be an Empire. Re- 
mark too the clear proof we have of what I drew your 
attention toasso important in speaking of Chap. ii., namely 
—that the kingdom i is not assumed by the Son of Man till 
the judgment is executed. He may and will destroy the 
boast by His power ; but it is only when ‘it is 8 destroyed 
a2 


18 


His own kingdom is established. It cannot be along 
with evil. This is the question of the expectant and suf- 
fering Jew in Psalms xciv. 22, It is not now but after the 
judgment that the growth of Christ’s kingdom takes place. 
He is sitting at the right hand of God, but comes thence 
to take the kingdom with glory and power ; He is gather- 
ing in now thé joint heirs. Next we find here that what 
is brought out as the cause of this judgment is the great 
words of blasphemy of the little horn. There cannot bea 
more definite statement that the glory and kingdom of 
Christ is consequent on the judgment. I insist upon this, 
because it bears upon every thing we are treating of, and 
determines our whole view of the nature of Christ’s king- 
dom. There is nochange in the principle of sin, in the first 
Adam, but it goes on to the end. It was lawless at the 
beginning, breaking law when law was given, rose up 
against the Lord in hatred to God when He was made 
flesh and dwelt among us, and Satan having throughout 
corrupted the church as we have seen, his power is allowed 
to unfold itself in the beasts, and in the last beast ripens 
to a head, and leads the kings of this earth to make war 
with the lamb ; the lawless one, the man of sin, being 
then openly revealed. Our portion, as we have seen, is 
in the Lord, nor will the fruitful power of His grace to- 
wards us cease till we shall be like Himself. But though 
the kings of the earth stand up together, and the rulers 
take counsel together, yet God will set His King upon 
His holy hill of Zion. Here, however, the aspect of His | 
power is somewhat different, He is seen as Son of Man a 
term of wider dominion than Son of David in which the 
2nd Psalm views Him, but even there the heathen are 
given to Him for an inheritance, and He breaks them in 
pieces like a potter’s vessel. The difference is this that 
here the kingdom is given and possessed as a dominion, 
in the 2nd Psalm established by judicial power. We now 
come to the interpretation in which this very judgment is 


19 


spoken of, some immensely important truths besides 

being brought ont. In the prophecy nothing had been 

said of the saints heavenly or earthly. Here we shall find 

both. I do not say the church, but still heavenly saints. 

Indeed, when God’s mind is thus given, and not merely 
the outward facts, the connection of these events with 
the saints is the principal point. (17th verse), ‘‘ These 
great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall 
arise out of the earth. But the saints of the Most High 
shall take the Kingdom, and possess the kingdom forever, 

even for ever and ever.” The saints will do it, not only 

the Son of Man. (21st verse), ‘‘I beheld, and the same 
horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against 
them ; until the ancient of days came, and judgment was 
given to the saints of the Most High ; and the time came 
that the saints possessed the kingdom.” Here you will 
first remark the extremely important point that the An- 
cient of days himself comes. For though Christ, as man, 
is gone to receive a kingdom and to return ; yet the Son 
of Man is the Ancient of days. So it is said in Timothy 
that the King of kings and the Lord of lords would shew 
Christ.in glory. But in the Revelations Christ comes as 
King of kings and Lord of lords, and I may add, in ano- 
ther relationship, the traits of the Ancient of days in 
Daniel are found in the Son of Man who walks in the 
midst of the golden candlesticks. He is there distinctly 
both—Son over His own house who built all things. An- 
other term calls for remark here. The saints of the Most 
High ; or, as in the margin, heavenly places, which we 
find again in Ephesians, as the place of the saints—yet 
it is immediately connected with the name God takes as 
possessor of heaven and earth. It is not here the Church 
but all the saints who have their dwelling in heavenly 
places in connection with the kingdom, yet in a state of 
eternal glory. God took the name of God Almighty in 
relationship with Abraham, of Jehovah with Israel, of 


| 
it 
it 
y 

| 
ft 


20 


Pather, in grace, with us. Thus Abraham was to be per- 
feot, walking before.God Almighty, Israel was to be per- 
feet'with Jehovah their God. We are called to be per- 
fect.as our Father which is in heaven is perfect. We are 
before God as Christ, but, as He isin us, we are called 
to display: the divine nature, to be imitators of God as 
dear children and walk in love as Christ loved us, But 
the name of Most High is the expression of God’s sover- 
eign dominion above all that is called God, the supreme. 
So'when Abraham returned from the slaughter of the 
kings, figure of Israel’s deliverance and final victory in the 
latter day, Melchisedech, the figure of Christ as King 
and Priest, Priest upon His throne in the world to come, 
King of righteousness, King of peace, comes forward and 
blesses Abraham on the part of the Most High God pos- 
sessor of Heaven and earth and blesses the Most High in 
Abraham’s name. In our chapter the saints have their 
name in connection with this, and indeed it is applied to 
God with the difference then of being singular instead of 
plural. The saints of the high places shall take the king- 
dom. Meanwhile tribulation and trial is the portion of 
those on earth. The little blasphemous horn who speaks 
such great things makes war with the saints. Thisisthe 
general character. Of course they must be down here. 
Those on high he can only blaspheme. _I do not believe 
this little horn to be Anti-Christ ; the source of persecu- 
tion is ever the traditional religious power. Anti-Christ 
will be in direct association with him and urges him to 
it. Of this hereafter. But this is the last active power 
of evil in the Roman Empire or beast whose names of 
blasphemy are on it. Of this also further. This perse- 
cution will continue till God’s power interferes, This is 
stated in a very important verse, he prevailed till the 
Ancient of days came (here we see that the Son of Man is 
the Ancient of days for we know that the Son of Man 
comes) and thus'a total. change takes place, judgment is 


21 


given to the saints of the High places, and the: time is 
come that.the saints possess the kingdom. He does: not 
say saints. of the Most High here, for on earth and in 
blessing the earthly saints will possess,the kingdom as in 
Matthew xxv.—but judgment is given only to the saints 
of the Most High. The Ancient of days then comes, 
judgment is given to the:heavenly saints (compare Rev, 
xx. 4, where we read: judgment was given unto them and 
they. live and reign with Christ 1000 years) andthe saints 
possess the kingdom. When will christians learn their 
place. He is never called our King, but He, is the King 
of the nations, of the world: We reign with Him.— 
Nothing is so hard as to get the saints to accept the place 
they have in Christ, to know that in Him, through the 
price of His own most precious blood, they are one, with 
Him in God’s sight and purpose now, and after having 
been caught up to Him in the clouds, as.we have already 
seen in a previous lecture, will come with Him when He 
comes to judge the nations. But I pursue the explana- 
tion. 24th verse,—‘‘ And the ten horns out of this king- 
dom are ten kings that shall arise, and another snall arise 
after them ; aud he shall be diverse from the first, and 
he shall subdue three kings, and he. shall speak great 
words against the Most High, and think to change times 
and laws: and they shall be given unto his band until a 
time and times and the dividing of time.” Most High, 
the first time it is mentioned here is God Himself, times 
and laws refer to Jews entirely, the words are terms which 
refer to their statutes and ordinances. These, not the 
saints, are given unto his hands, God never gives His 
saints into their enemies hands, tho’ He may use these 
as arod. When that time comes the beast at first makes 
his covenant with Israel according to Daniel ix.. 27, first 
joins with them, then breaks with them and makes the 
sacrifice and oblation to cease, All the Jewish order 
which had been set up in pride will he. completely upset, 


22 


| as in Isaiah xviii ‘‘ They shall be left together unto the 
+ | fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the 
earth shall winter upon them.” They are brought into 
such trouble as never was since there was a nation, no, 
nor ever will be. It is the time, times and half a time, 
the great tribulation. The verse gives in few words, but 
+ | precisely, the state of things when the little horn is wear- 
i ing out the saints of God.* Satan will be cast out of 
heaven and have come down, as we have seen, in great 
rage, having but a short time. 
Before that period every thing is given into the power 
(| of the beast. Then the Lord, the Ancient of days who 
is come, takes all into His hand. ‘‘A short work will 
| the Lord make upon the earth, for the judgment shall 
sit ; the kingdom shall be given to the people of the saints 
of the Most High, that is to the Jewish people, now | 
i brought into connection with the rule of heaven, and se- | 
cured by it. In order to get that clear a little we turn 
i to the Rev., for there we find the history of this beast 
4 unfolded, in the 13th chapter. I shall refer to it fully 
farther, here, only to notice its character and what it is. 
It is the Roman beast with seven heads and ten horns. — 
i | It receives its power from the dragon, blasphemes God 
| and those in heaven, and makes war with the saints, It 
7 is ministered to spiritually by the deceitful power of Sa- \ 
a tan. It is the instrument of Satan’s power in the earth, 
when he is cast out of heaven. Already as the dragon 
the Romans had joined in rejecting Christ. The Roman 
beast is the only one who has done it in the person of Pi- 
late. But then Christ owned the power as of God as it 
was. He said ‘Thou hadst had no power, if it had not 
been given thee from above,” though Satan’s influence 
as prince of this world was guiding the use of that power. 


*The saints of the Most High here, I do not doubt, are specially 
a those spoken of in the last part of Rev, xx. 4, who, refusing to worship 
the beast will, being killed, have their place on high. 


23 


Then judgment was on one side, perfect righteousness on 
the other. When Christ comes again judgment will re- 
turn to righteousness, They will be reconciled in one, 
as it is in Psalm xciv., The Lorp will not cast off His 
people, neither will He forsake His inheritance. But 
judgment shall return unto righteousness and all the up- 
right in heart shall follow it.” Till then the saints must 
not expect it. God may hold the reins and control to 
His own purposes the powers that be whom he hath or- 


dained, may give thus all quietness, as we surely experi- : 


ence it and have to thank Him for, but we must not ex- 
pect the motives of government to be righteousness as 
God sees it. It is the time to do well, suffer for it, and 
take it patiently as Jesus did, and when God looses the 
reins to evil—when Satan is come to the earth—then the 
full true character of evil power from Satan will be man- 
ifested. ‘*The dragon gave him his throne, and power, and 
and much authority.” Such is the Roman beast in its final 
state during the time, times and half a time. The distinct 
and definite place and character of this period becomes 
as plain as possible if we consult the end of the 9th Dan- 
iel. The prophet receives from the heavenly messenger 
the assurance that the Jews will be restored. ‘‘ Know, 


' therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of 


the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto 
the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks : the streets 
shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times, 
and after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut 
off and shall have nothing,” as in margin. Not for himself 
is not the sense. ‘‘ And he shall confirm the covenant 
with many for one week and in the midst of the week 
he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.”— 
First, seven weeks during which time Jerusalem is re- 
built, then sixty-two weeks—making sixty-nine weeks. — 
Messiah was cut off but there was a week or part of one 
left. After the close of the sixty-ninth week Messiah 


ES 


—— — 


EE — 
- 


24 


was cut off and He took nothing. Thereupon the Jewish 
nation, instead of being restored was completely subverted : 
—we find in Luke, ‘‘ And they shall fall by the edge of 
the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations 
and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles un- 
til the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled,” The last week 
thus remains. In the first half indeed Messiah was there 
but [rejected by the nation and owned only by the rem- 
nant. At the end Anti-Christ is owned by the nation, 


- rejected by the remnant, The beast makes a covenant 


with the Jews for that week, but breaks it in the midst 
of the week, the half week remains unaccomplished,— 
You get then three and a half years that remain to 
be accomplished, when abominations, 7. ¢., idolatry, 
will overspread the Jewish people, the times and laws 
will be changed, at that very time Satan is come down 
in the 12th chapter of Revelation, and the woman, 
the true remnant in Jerusalem, flees into the wilder- 
ness for a time, times and half a time. This is Daniel’s 
half week. You get it thus perfectly clear. The rem- 
nant owned Christ, but the Jewsdid not. You get the 
sixty-nine weeks and then a long parenthesis in which 
Christ is set aside and the Jews on the earth, ‘‘ desola- 
tions being determined,” which goes on until the time 
of the Gentiles is fulfilled. During this period the church, 
the heavenly thing, is called. Thus the time we are in 
is not reckoned at all, so the prophets who do not speak 
of the times of the Gentiles as Daniel does, pass it over 
altogether and connect Christ’s second coming to earth 
with His first. "We have a very remarkable proof of this 
from the Lord Himself, when quoting from Isaiah lxi.— 
‘‘The spirit of the Lorp Gop is upon me; because the 
Lorp hath anointed me to peach good tidings unto the 
meek ; he hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, 
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of 
the prison to them that are bound ; To proclaim the ac- 


25 


ceptable year of the Lorp.” The prophet adds—‘' And 
the day of vengeance of our God.” This Christ does not 
read, though in the same sentence, but stops short in the 
midst of a sentence, when He had read as far as—‘‘ To 
preach the acceptable year of the Lorp ”—and then cea- 
sed : ‘‘He closed the book, and sat down ;” because the re- 
maining part of the prophecy extended beyond the period 
in which they then were, and in which we still are, to a 
time which is yet to come—the time of vengeance of the 
Lord, All this time the interval in the midst of Daniel’s 
week runs on without being counted. We don’t count 
by time in heaven, and this is the time of the heavenly 
calling. This is evident from the passage in Daniel ix. 
for the weeks go on to sixty-nine, then all is vague to the 
one week at the end, but as soon as ever God takes the 
Jews up again Daniel’s week begins again. If you ap- 
ply therefore the time times and half a time or the forty- 
two months, or the twelve hundred and sixty days (which 
are precisely the same time, three hundred and sixty days 
being counted to a year and the five intercalary days or 
epigomena being left out) to the intervening epoch, you 
are necessarily on false ground. I believe there is an an- 
alogy, as there are many Anti-Christs thongh they are not 
the Anti-Christ, proving in a moral sense we have been in 
the last days since the Apostle’stime. But the moment 
you come to be precise it all falls to the ground, although 
there is an analogy. The counting of time belongs en- 
tirely to the Jews, and the three years and a half begins 
to run when they are again on the scene, when Satan has 
been cast down, and the beast has assumed a diabolical 
character, is come up out of the abyss. If you take the 
13th chap. of Rev. you get the details of this beast—2nd 
verse—‘‘ And the beast which 1 saw was like unto a leo- 
pard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his 
mouth as the mouth of a lion : and the dragon gave him 
his power, and his seat, and great authority.” There I 
B 


iq 
i 
F | 
1 
! 
q 
: 
i 
4 
FA 
| 
i! 


26 


thé direct authority of Satan. The saints of the 
ost High did not take the kingdom then, we shall be 
taught up and be entirely out of the way of that power of 
evil. Srd verse, ‘* And I saw one of his heads as it were 
‘wounded to death ; and his deadly wound was healed ; 
and all the world wondered after the beast.” I do not 
doubt that we get here the Imperial head once destroyed 
‘but now revived—4th verse—‘‘ And they worshipped the 
dragon which gave power unto the beast, saying: Who 
is like unto the beast ? who is able to make war with 
him?” That is, the direct power of Satan, as dominaat, 
is publicly owned, and the Roman Imperial beast thus 
Yestored carries all the world enthusiastically after it.-— 
Worses 6-6, ‘‘And there was given unto him a mouth 
Bpeaking preat things and blasphemies ; and power was 
given unto him 'to continue forty and two months. And 
‘he Opened ‘his inouth in blasphemy against God, to blas- 
phere ‘his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwelt 
in Heaven.” ‘Mark here, ‘he‘can’t touch them in heaven, 
‘put he’ blasphemes them, Satan had been cast out, he was 
‘fio: longer an accuser and those abuveche can only blas- 
phetic. There will he some who wil! havea place in hea- 
‘von and whose hearts are weaned from earth whom ‘he 
‘will “injure. ‘Those ‘Whom he can hurt and kill will be 
exon ‘tp, or they would ‘have lost earthly “blessing by 
‘WN6it faithfulness, ‘and not get heavenly ones. Such'there 
"Wiil"be, Who refuse to Worship him. But this is a detail 
‘tito whith I donot enter ‘here, as our subject is ‘the 
Gentile powers and their judgment. But (8th verse) 
‘Pa “that dwell upon the earth shall Worship ‘him, 
“whose ‘names are hot written from the foundation 
Uf ‘the ‘world in the book of life of the Lamb that 
‘Was ‘slain,’—for ‘such I have no doubt is the ‘true 
force ‘of the passage. Complete power, only God pre- 
‘yérves'a remnant, is in the hands of Satan ‘and ‘his 
‘instruments. But connected with this we have now 


OO ete we Ph Owe OD ee OOOO CF 


Ss @e 


27 


another power coming out of the earth, ‘‘ And I beheld 
another beast coming out of the earth: and he had: two 
horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.” In this I 
have no doubt we have the Anti-Christ, or false Messiady, 
the direct exercise of Satan’s falsehood on earth; He is 
nos a priest, or anti-priest, here. That he exercised:in 
heaven. He is a false prophet, compare xix. 20; and he 
has two horns like a lamb. Horns are the power ofa 
kingdom and he sets up to have that like the lamb, he 
pretends to the power of Messiah’s kingdom and tobe 
the hoped for king, but when his voice was heard it was 
evidently Satan’s. Anti-Christ denies the Father and 


the Son, i.e, Christianity ; he openly denies its truths and . 


and he denies that Jesus is the Christ, the first, so to 
speak, Jewish form of Christianity, though ever of course 
true but what a Jew was and will be called on to own, 12th 
and 13th verses, ‘‘ And he exerciseth all the power of the 
first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them 
which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly 
wound was healed, and he doeth g-eat wonders, so that 
he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in 
the sight of men.” How solemn this as the power of 
delusion, remark. It was the proof Elijah gave that 
Jehovah was the true God, not Baal. Here this active 
power of Satan is shewing by the same sign that his 
witness is to be received, and that they are to own the 
beast and worship him, and they are so given up that 
they do believe the lie. We have seen elsewhere that he 
did falsely what Christ did to prove his mission. He 
leads them thus further to open denial of Christ, denies 
Christianity altogether and says he is Christ himself, bat 
at the same time leads them by these means into idolatry 
and to make an image to the restored beast, 14, 15; 26; 
and decviveth them that that dwell on the earth by tie 
means of those miracles which he had power to do in'the 
sight of the beast ; saying to them that dwell on the earth 


28 


that they should make an image to the beast, which had 
the wound by a sword, and did live, and he had power 
to give, not life, none can do that but God, but, breath 
unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast 
should both speak and cause that as many as would not 
worship the image of the beast should be killed. And 
he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free 
and bond, to receive a mark on their right hand or in their 
foreheads :” that is, he forces them to be his avowed 
slaves and make an open profession of his service, In 
sum, we have a second beast using diabolical spiritual 
energy, and playing into the hands of the first beast who 
_ held his throne from Satan. You get a kind of trinity 
of evil, and resurrection. The dragon gives the throne 
to the beast as the Father to Christ, and the second beast 
exercises in spiritual energy the power of the first beast, in 
his presence 'as the Holy Ghost with Christ. This is the 
fruit of the falling away, the apostacy of Christianity. So, 
the first beast was slain and his deadly wound is healed. 
In the 17th chapter we have other aspects of the beast 
or Gentile power. The empire is given, but it will 
ascend out of the bottomless pit, become definitely dia- 
bolical and go into perdition.—9, 10, 11. And here is 
the mind which hath wisdom. Theseven heads are seven 
mountains on which the woman sitteth, and there are 
seven kings, forms of power, five are fallen, and one is, 
and the other is not yet come, and when he cometh he 
must continue a short space. And the beast that was, 
and is not, even he is the eighth and is of »:e seven, and 
goeth into perdition. That is five forms of government 
were failen in the apostle’s time and one was the imperial, 
a sixth was to come and abide a short time, and the last, 
‘who is of the seven, asa form I suppose imperial, butis an 
eighth. In this last form he comes out of the bottomless 
pit, has a diabolical character. It will bea Roman Em- 
peror, he is the eighth head and is the beast, that is, 


29 
concentrates all the power in his own person. After him 
the world, save only the elect, will go, seeing the long ‘lost 
form of power revived in this eighth head. It is Rome, 
for the seven heads are seven mountains, on which the 
woman sits. Of her anon. But another important ele- 
ment is added, 12, ‘‘ And the ten horns which thou saw- 
est are ten icing, which ‘have received no kingdom as 
yet ; but receive power as kings one hour with the beast,” 
One-hour with the beast: mark that, because it is the 
definite evidence that it had not been going on since the 
full of the Roman Empire, through the inroad of the 
Northern nations. Those nations broke up and, for the 
time, destroyed the beast, gave it its deadly wound. 
These receive power one hour with the beast, therefore 
the beast must come up again. It existed at the first 
without these kings. Then these kings existed without 
it, and you have the ten kings without the beast. At the 
end you get the ten kings with the beast. Men form 
schemes but the moment I get Scripture I can surely say 
we have not the beast in this form yet. What is presen- 
ted here is, subsisting kingdoms but kingdoms which: have 
given their power, without ceasing to be kingdoms, to one 
head, who leads all asa whole. These shall | thake war 
with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcdme them : for 
he is the Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they 
that are with Him are called, and chosen, and faithful. 
This beast with his subordinate kingdoms rises up in open 
hostility against the authority of Christ; while Christ 
comes with His armies to judge and destroy them all. 
God’s mighty ones come down, the saints come with 
Christ, 15th and 16th verses, ‘‘And he saith ‘unto 
me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore 
sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and 
tongues. And the ten horns which thou sawest upon 
the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make 
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, 


} 
» 
| 
B 


| 
| 
| 


se EO 


i 
i 
i} 
| 
i 
I 


SE ARE SR 


6 Lit eas RE ETTS: 


4 


eee ey 


30 


and burn her with fire.” This introduces us to the 
judgment of Babylon, of Rome, of the great whore, 
the mother of harlots and abominations. We see, not 
a spiritual change, but, her utter destruction by the beast 
and the ten kings, the ruin of priestcraft. They pull it 
all to pieces and devour its wealth and destroy it utterly, 
wearied with its dominion and falseness. It had deserved 
it. But it is not the power of good. For God hath put in 
their hearts to fulfil his will, and to agree, and to give 
their kingdom wnto the beast, until the words of God 


- shall be fulfilled.” It is a perfect riddle how people 


who profess to receive Scripture have invented all sorts 
of notions as to course of events connected with Chris- 
tianity in this world, the moment I come to Scripture 
they are all gone, men may talk as they like about the 
steady growth of religion in the world and the way in 
which God’s Word will remove the power of evil from it. 
It is directly stated that, when the beast and the horns 
destroy the corrupt power which had long ruled them 
and made the nations drunk with her fornications, they 
give their kingdom to the beast. You will find at the 
end of the 19th chapter, God’s dealings with the beast, 
14th to 20th verse, ‘‘ And the armies which were in 
heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine 
linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a 
sharp sword, that with . he should smite the naticns : 
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron : and he treadeth 
the winepress and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath 
on his vesture and on his thigh a name written Kine oF 
Kines and Lorp or Lorps. And I saw an angel 
standing in the sun: and he cried with a loud voice, say- 
ing to the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, come 
and gather yuurselves together unto the supper of the 
great God ; that ye may eat the fiesh of kings, and the 
flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, aud the 
flesh of all men, both free and bond, both smal] and 


3l 


great. And I saw the beast, and the kings of the 


earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war _ 


against him that sat on the horse, and against his army. 
And the beast was taken, and with him the false 
prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he 
deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, 
and them that worshipped his image. These both were 
cast alive into a lake of fire byrning with brimstone,”— 
And the false prophet which is the second beast—21st 
verse—‘* And the remnant were slain with the sword of 
him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out 
of his mouth, and all the fowls were filled with their 


flesh. A strong figure drawn from Ezekiel of judgment 


and destruction. There we see that power has come, not 
the influence of the word, whether law or gospel, but 
power has come in which puts down evil power. Inthe 
20th chap. we have a full development of what we read 
in the 7th of Daniel. We get in the Revelation the his- 
tory of the last beast more fully developed, that is of the 
Roman Empire which had already rejected Christ when 
on earth in conjunction with the Jews. Consequent on 
the exaltation of Christ to the right hand of God the 
Jews being set aside as a nation, the church was formed. 
She doe: not belong to the world, but is the bride of 
Christ in heavenly places. Then when the church is 
caught up the beast which seemed to have been destroyed 
is found in a new form, still as such, its deadly wound 
being healed, and as he had joined in rejecting Christ, is 
now in the closest connection with Anti-Christ. At the 
first he deals with the Jews, makes a covenant with them 
but in the last half week of Daniel turns against them 
persecutes them, changes times and laws makes the sacri- 
fice and oblation to cease. The King, the Anti-Christ 
establishes idolatry, and divides their land, you read his 
character in this point of view in the 11th chap. Daniel 
36th verse—‘‘ And the King shall do according to his 


82 


will ; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself 
above every God, and shall speak marvellous things 
against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the indiena- 
tion be accomplished ; for that that is determined shall 
be done.” Ina word, in Daniel as in the part of Revela- 
tions I have referred to, is the testimony of the beast the 
last form of the power which oppresses Israel when they 
are captive, and does so until the Lord comes and delivers 
though He judges them.” Now another power, the As- 
syrian comes before us, Israel’s great enemy when God 
owns them, and who will also appear on the scene in his 
last form in the last days thinking, when the beast is des- 
troyed, to possess all, but comes to his end. In the 5th 
verse of 10th chap. of Isaiah we read—‘‘ O Assyrian, the 
rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is my in- 
dignation.” After giving the various instruments which 
God had used to chasten Israel, he comes to the last and 
terrible invader. That was God’s indignation against the 
rebellious people—the indignation describing the last ter- 
rible visitation of God. Compare Isaiah xxvi. 20, 21 with 
Daniel xi. 36, the last words of which are also a technical 
expression for the short work which God will at the end, 
make on the earth, as in Daniel ix. 27, and this chapter 
Isaiah x. verse 23, compare Isaiah xxviii. 22. If you look 
now at the 25 verse you will see what will make the force 
of it quite clear, ‘‘ For yet a very little while and the in- 
dignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruc- 
tion.” That is, the whole judgment of God on Israel.— 
His indignation is closed in the destruction of the. Assyr- 
ian. Now, beloved friends, we will turn to the 30 chap. 
of Isaiah, but before we do so, let us just in passing 
look at the passage I have referred to in the 28 chap. 14 
15, 16, ‘‘ Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scorn- 
ful men, that rule His people which is in Jerusalem, be- 
cause ye have said, we have made a covenant with death 
and with hell are we at agreement, when the overflowing 


33 


scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us ; for 
we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have 
we hid ourselves ; therefore thus saith the Lord God, 
Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried 
stone, a corner stone a sure foundation, he that believeth 
shall not make haste,” that is, they made as we have seen 
@covenan’ with the power of evil but to no purpose. 
But the remnant who trusted the Lord and counted in 
his promise though not yet delivered nor knowing re- 
demption as we do, yet looking, through the testimony 
then given, to the son of man the branch whom Jehovah 
had made so strong for himself, at any rate the wise 
ones of Daniel and all true hearted ones resting on such 
testimonies as this and Isaiah viii., did not make haste 
or join the Antichrist, while as to the mass the hopes 
they had put in him and the beast are confounded, 
and the scourge of this invader flows through. After- 
wards at the end, as we see in the following or 29th 
chapter, itis exactly the opposite (verses 4-7, ) the enemies 
who were ready to devour are destroyed. Now look atthe 
end of the 30th chapter, and you will find this enemy and 
hisend. ‘‘ For through the voice of the Lorp shall the 
Assyrian be beaten down, which smote witha rod. And 
_ in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which 
the Lorp shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and 
harps: and in battles of shaking will he fight with it. 
For Tophet is ordained of old ; yea, for the king (or, as 
I believe, also for the king) it is prepared ; he hath made 
it deep and large; the pie thereof is fire and much 
wood ; the breath of the Lorp, like a stream of brim- 
stone, doth kindle it.” The grounded staff is God’s 
decreed rod. When this is laid on the Assyrian, it is the 
source of joy and triumph because of deliverance, the 
end of the indignation. Turn now to the 5 chapter of 
Micah where we shall see the connection of Christ with 
the judgment of the Assyrian and the subsequent bless- 


34 


ing of Israel. Nothing so laid hold of a Rabbi I 
was conversing with, a3 this passage (verses 1-9.) ‘‘ Now 
gather th self in troops, O daughter of troops: he hath 
laid siege against us ; they shall smite the judge of Israel 
with a rod upon the cheek. But thou Bethlehem 
Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of 
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that 
is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been 
from of old, from everlasting. Therefore will he give 
them up, until the time that she which prevaileth hath 
brought forth ; then the remnant of his brethren shall 
return unto the children of Israel. And he shall stand 
and feed in the strength of the Lorp, in the majesty of 
the name of the Lorp his God; and they shall abide : 
for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth. 
And this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian 
shall come into our land ; and when he shall tread in our 
palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, 
and eight principal men. And they shall waste the land 
of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in 
the entrances thereof : thus shall he deliver us from the 
Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he 
treadeth within our borders. And the remnant of Jacob 
shall be in the midst of many people, as a dew from the | 
Lorp, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not 
for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men. And the 
remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the 
midst of many people, as a lion among the beasts of the 
forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep ; who, 
if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in 
pieces, and none can deliver. Thine hand shall be lifted 
up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be 
cut off.” 

The rejected Christ is now to be great to the ends of 
the earch. He is the peace, secures the peace of Israel 
when the Assyrian their last rod whose destruction puts 


i 


AE A eC Scene erence ethies aeneine 
. mprenaecnan 
TRIBAL ELIE IE LOM AMR STIL LOO ELIT GOT) OVERUSED ID PP RDN OLAS SON 


rie 


35 


I an end to the indignation, is in the land. He will at firat 
“ tread in Israel’s palaces, but at the end Messiah’s power 
ih destroys him, and Israel will be as a lion among the Gen- 
el tiles, though asthe dew of divine blessing also. The enemies 
pa, of the Lord will be cut off. He will judge fully rebellious 
of Israel, indeed, but execute vengeance and fury upon the 
at heathen such as they have not heard. At this time re- 
da mark the Jews are owned, seen in their land and judged 
ve as the people of God there. Daniel we have seen ocou- 
th pied with the Gentiles when Israel is in captivity, and 
Mu Jerusalem and the land desolate. He brings all these 
id powers to an end but never takes up the consequent 
of blessing. His subject is the times of the Gentiles, Eze- 
sine kiel does exactly the contrary, he goes, himself a cap- 
h. tive, up to the taking of Jerusalem: by Nebuchadnezzar, 
su and goes then right over to the end when Israel would 
ur 


be restored and the enemies go up against them in their 
land. 


‘We will turn now to His prophecy where you will find 
largely developed this other great power. Chap. xxxviii- 
1-2, ‘‘and the word of the Lorp came unto me, saying, 
Son of man set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, 
the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophecy 
against him.” The chief prince of Meshech, is properly 
interpreted prince of Rosh Meshech and Tubal,* and then 
follow the names of countries which agree with the names 
of those of the present day under the influence of Rosh 
“Russia.” You will remark that in the two preceding 
chapters xxxvi. and xxxvii., you have the restoration 
of the people and divine revival of Israel, now, when 
restored and guiet in the land, Gog comes up against 
them xxxviii. 8 to plunder and possess the land, but it 


* This translation, of the correctness of which I have no 
doubt, is that of the elder Lowth some 150 years ago, before 
these prophetic views were ‘nrooted. 


36 


is that the heathen may know Jehovah when He is sanc- 
tified in Gog before their eyes (verse 16) they will then 
know by-his judgments that He is Jehovah (23.) In 
xxxix. God leaves a sixth part of them, and when judg- 
ment is thus executed, God’s holy name is known in 
the midst of his people Israel. He will not let them 
pollute His holy name any more, ‘‘ And the heathen shall 
know that I'am Jehovah the Holy one in Israel.” He 
then calls on all the fowls of the air to come and feast 
on the slaughtered victims whom He has slain for a 
sacrifice, so many are they that it is seven months be- 
fore the land is clean. This also is the one of whom He 
has spoken in old times by his servants the prophets. 
The Assyrian of the last days in whom, as these chap- 
ters plainly shew, the indignation ceases. xxxviii. 14-20, 
‘Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto Gog, 
Thus saith the Lord Gop: in that day when my 
people of Israel dwelleth safely, shalt thou not know 
it? And thou shalt come from thy place out of the 
north parts, thou and many people with thee, all of 
them riding upon horses, a great company and a mighty 
army: And thou shalt come up. against my people of 
Israel, as a cloud to cover the land, It shall be in the 
latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that 
the heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in 
thee, O Gog, before their eyes. Thus saith the Lord 
Gop: Art thou he of whom I have spoken in old time 
by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied 
in those days many years that I would bring thee against 
them? And it shali come to pass at the same time when 
Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord 
Gop, that my fury shall come up in my face. For in my 
jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, 
Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in. the 
land of Israel; so that the fishes of the sea, and the 
fowls of the heavens, and the beasts of the field, and all 


37 
anc- creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the | 
hen men that aro upon the face of the earth, shall shake at , 

In my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, | 
idg- and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to 
n in the ground.” xxxix. 1-8. ‘Therefore, thou son of man, 
hem prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord Gop ; 
hall Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the prince of Rosh 

He Meshech and ‘Tubal and I will turn thee back, and leave 
east but the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come 
ra up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the 
be- mountains of Israel. And I will smite thy bow out of 

He thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of 
ets, thy right hand. Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of 
lap- Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that is 
-20, with thee : I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of 
+0g, every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured. 

my Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken 
now it, saith the Lord Gop. And I will send a fire on Magog, 
the and among them that dwell carelessly in the isles. And 
l of they shall know that Iam the Lord. So will I make my 
shty holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; and 
> of I will not let them pollute my holy name any more ; and 
the the heathen shall know that Iam the Lorp, the Holy 
that One in Israel. Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith 
d in the Lord Gop ; this is the day whereof I have spoken— 
ord 21, 22. And I will set my glory among the heathen, 
ime and all the heathen shall see my judgment that I have 
sied executed, and my hands that I have laid upon them. So 
inst the honse of Israel shall know that I am the Lorp their 
hen God from that day and forward.—28, 29. ‘‘Then shall 
ord they know that I am the Lorp their God, which caused 
my |. them to be led into captivity among the heathen : but I 
ren, have gathered them unto their own land, and have left 
the none of them any more there. Neither will I hide my 
the face any more from them; for I have poured out my 
| all Spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord Gop.” I get 


B2 


9,7 | 
% Vy Vx, Wg \’ 
| Y es a 4 VY ex 
WW ce Ko oo < S 
ws IS ‘“ x» . 
Vv ‘<° 
2 2 aa =f 
SIC) di Aagaas.3 =I _ oD - 
uw = aes ia nO 
fs oll =) 2 Eee 
=u ye er Se 3. 
; OA os) 
| EMS 
» 
Es is 
AF AN lx 
XA, oY ~~ 
SACS. . Ie & ~ 
> Ke IN G ee Seg | 


38 


here this other fundamental principle, when Israel is re- 


stored, then the heathen themselves, judged that it may 


be. so, understand that Jehovah, the God of Israel, is 
the Most High over all the earth, and submit to Him. 
You will see how the 8th Psalm expresses this : ‘‘ O Jeho- 
vah our Lord,” says Israel, when Christ is set up, not 
simply as Son of David, according to Ps, ii., which will 
indeed now be accomplished, but as Son of Man, ‘‘how 
excellent is thy name in all the earth.” This is the prayer 
of Ps. lxvii. I should multiply quotations too much 
were I to quote ‘all the Psalms which speak of this, I 
will allude to a remarkable series—xciv. toc. xciv. calls 
for judgment ; xcv summons Israel to repentance ; xcvi. 
the;heathen are called to own Jehovah, for He is coming to 
judge the world in righteousness : in xcvii. He is actually 
coming in clouds ; in xcviii. the Lord is come and has made 
known His salvation ; in xcix. He is known upon the earth 
again, and is sitting between the cherubims; and c. 
calls on all nations to come and worship Him now that 
His throne is set up on the earth for blessing. The cry 
for vengeance and deliverance is the cry of the remnant 
from the time of God’s bringing back the people till His 
sitting on the throne of judgment. He will send deli- 
verance by power. The throne of iniquity will not share 
the power with Him. Now, grace calls souls from the 
evil to come to God and go to heaven, and grace cha- 
racterises the Christian though he knows vengeance will 
come. I have now gone through the passages which 
give us the history of the beast, and a sufficient num- 
ber of those which speak of the Assyrian, to have a 
distinct idea of these two powers, now concentrated 
in Western and Eastern Europe. Zechariah never 
speaks of the Assyrian. He belonged to the captivity 
of Israel; though the Jews were restored that Messiah 
might be presented to them, but the post-captivity pro- 


or Se = CO 6 hm 


39 


phets do not call the Jews God’s people unless speaking 
of their future, and the other prophets, those before the 
captivity, never speak of the beast as such, because Israel 
was owned, God’s throne still there. Ezekiel we have seen 
goes over from Babylon to Israel again in the land. We 
have more directly to say to the beast because the time 
is going on in which they rule: only that in result it 
becomes open rebellion, there is a raising up of the beast 
from a seemingly fatal wound in an utterly diabolical 
character. God has put into the hearts of a little rem- 
nant of the Jews then to look to Him. But the nation 
blossoms and buds and seems as if it was beginning a 
time of full prosperity in its own land. But then it is 
broused and eaten down, the resort of beast and birds of 
prey. These are judged and Israel is received and 
blessed. And if, says the apostle, the falling of them 
away be the riches of the ‘Sentiles what shall the receiving 
of them be but life from the dead to the world. All this 
calls our hearts beloved to a far more divine apprehension 
that our portion is in heaven while Christ is rejected, and 
that Christ having been rejected Christians are, and that 
Christ being in heaven their conversation or citizenship 
is there also. No living here any more though we pass 
through it as pilgrims and strangers. What I have to do 
is to convince the world that there is a power which de- 
livers from it, to manifest Christ and Christ’s motives in 
it. If ye do well and suffer for it and take it patiently, 
this is acceptable with God. ‘The danger for the saints 
now is that instead of seeing evil going on and rising up 
toa head against the Lord, man is thinking of improving 
the world and bringing in good. What is before us is 
that in the last days perilous times shall come. But men 
are wise in their own conceits and fancy they will do bet- 
ter than Christ and the Apostles ; not make Christians for 
God, but improve the earth. The testimony of God is 


40 


that the professing church and the world are both ripen- 
ing up to evil and that the Lord is coming to receive us to 
Himself, and to judge the habitable earth in righteousness, 
and reign for its blessing, and primarily. over the restored 
Jewish people, 


Lovell and Gibson, Printers, Toronto. 


