School of Theology at Claremon 


UU 


1001 1371410 








Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 








THE SHEPHERD PSALM 


Ci oy m= eo 
H om, OP I 6D 


a 2 
& § fy 


The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. 
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures : 
He leadeth me beside the still waters. He 
restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in the 
paths of righteousness for His name's sake. 
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the 
shadow of death, Iwill fear no evil: for Thou 
art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff they 
comfort me. Thou preparest a table before 
me in the presence of mine enemies; Thou 
anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth 
over. Surely goodness and mercy shall fol- 
low me all the days of my life; and I will 
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. 











Kev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 


& 


_ New York 
H. M. Caldwell Co. 
Publishers 


ot 
» 
" 
vd 
™ 
~ 
™ 
~ 
” 
™ 
re 
» 
~ 
~ 
m 
» 
-) 
“ 
™ 
re 
) 
™ 
” 
ro) 
» 
™ 
o) 
» 
~ 
) 
od 
SS 
- 
io 
™“ 
» 
- 
* 
i 
1 iy 
cI 
™ 
- 
» 
4 
- 
~ 
be 
» 
he 
” 
” 
o) 
» 
mf 
ro 
i 
a 
Ll 
» 
_ 
” 
™ 
= 
* 
” 
™ 
™ 
ie | 
~ 
eI 
vn 
= 
C 
ty 
m 
= 
" 
™ 
» 
» 
“ 








ete. 


CeerAA. 


PREFACE. 


O see a masterpiece of painting on the 

walls of an art gallery while a throng 
of conventional sightseers is pressing past 
is a very different matter to seeing it quietly 
on the walls of some stately mansion, when 
there is time to sit down and drink in the 
artist’s thought, or catch the different lights 
of early morning, of noon, or of the fading 


~ day. 


Perhaps the enjoyment is the more com- 
plete when some devoted lover of the work 
stands beside, telling the story of its daily 
effect upon his mind, and indicating subtle 
beauties which had escaped the first superfi- 
cial gaze. ‘ 


6 PREFACE. 


It is with some such intention that this 
book is sent forth — that, in the quiet of the 
sick-chamber or of the prayer-closet, atten- 
tion may be again concentrated on this in- 
imitable psalm; that the familiar words may 
be considered in the light of growing Chris- 
tian experience; and that perchance some 
unnoticed beauty may be suggested by one 
who seldom comes to it without discerning 
some fresh reason to thank the Spirit of 
Inspiration that He ever led the sweet min- 
strel of Scripture to indite the Shepherd 


Psalm. 
F. B. MEYER. 


PART 


II. 
TEL. 


TV. 


VI. 
VII. 


VIII. 
IX. 


XI. 
XII. 


CONTENTS. 





THE PSALM OF PSALMS 
Tue SHEPHERD LorpD’» 


PASTURES OF TENDER GRASS AND.» 


WATERS OF REST 
“He ReEstoreTH My Sou.” 
THE SHEPHERD’S LEADING‘). 
THE VALLEY OF SHADOW 
COMFORT THROUGH THE ROD AND 
THE STAFF 
THE BANQUET , 3 
“THou ANOINTEST My HEAD 
WITH OIL” 
THE OVERFLOWING CUP 
THE CELESTIAL ESCORT 
“THe HousE OF THE LORD FOR 
EVER” 


PAGE 


19 


32 
43 


55 
66 


80 
93 
109 
124 


140 


I51 


as 


Pits iasbys Seg 





ake 


fae SHEPHERD: PSALM: 


——_—_>___ 


I. 
THE PSALM OF PSALMS. 


HIS psalm has sometimes been called 

the Psalm of the Crook. It lies be- 
tween the Psalm of the Cross and the Psalm 
of the Crown. If the Twenty-second tells of 
the Good Shepherd, who died, and if the 
Twenty-fourth tells of the Chief Shepherd, 
who is coming again, the Twenty-third tells 
of the Great Shepherd, who keeps His flock 
with unerring sagacity and untiring devotion. 
No hireling is He. He asks no wage; He 
takes no reward. He counts not the cost. 
The sheep are His own. And in these sweet 


9 


Io THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


words we learn what He is towards them 
to-day, in all His shepherd tenderness and 
love. 

Some have spoken of this psalm as a creed. 
I have it on good authority that one thinker 
at least, wearied with the perplexing ques- 
tions that agitate so many hearts and brains 
in this strange questioning age, and pressed 
to give some positive affirmation of his creed, 
began reciting these words with solemn pathos 
of voice and kindling rapture of eye. And 
when he had finished the whole psalm he 
added: “That is my creed. I need, I desire 
no other. I learned it from my mother’s 
lips. I have repeated it every morning when 
I awoke, for the last twenty years. Yet I do 
not half understand it; I am only beginning 
now to spell out its infinite meaning, and 
death will come on me with the task unfin- 
ished. But, by the grace of Jesus, I will 
hold on by this psalm as my creed, and will 
strive to believe it, and to live it; for I 


THE PSALM OF PSALMS. It 


know that it will lead me to the cross, it will 
guide me to glory.” 

Yes, the testimony is true. And as one 
looking into some priceless gem may see 
fountains of colour welling upward from its 
depths, so, as we shall gaze into these verses, 
simple as childhood’s rhymes, but deep as an 
archangel’s anthem, we shall see in them the 

i gospel in miniature, the grace of God re- 
flected as the sun in a dewdrop, and things 
which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor 
the heart of man conceived. Read into these 
words the meaning of the Gospels, and you 
have an unrivalled creed, to which all Chris- 
tians may unhesitatingly assent. 

Others have spoken of it as a mznstrel. 
Before me lies a page that describes it in 
some such terms as these: that it is a pil- 
grim minstrel commissioned of God to travel 
up and down through the world, singing so 
sweet a strain that none who hear it can 
remember whatsoever sorrow has been rend- 


I2 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


ing and tearing at the heart! This, too, is 
true. This psalm speaks in language that 
the universal heart of man can comprehend. 
It exercises a spell that can charm away the 
griefs that bid a bold defiance to philosophy 
and mirth. 

“Tt has remanded to their dungeon more 
felon thoughts, more black doubts, more 
thieving sorrows, than there are sands on 
the seashore. It has comforted the noble 
host of the poor. It has sung courage to 
the army of the disappointed. It has poured 
balm and consolation into the heart of the 
sick. It has visited the prisoner and broken 
his chains, and, like Peter’s angel, has led 
him forth in imagination, and sung him back 
to his home again. It has made the dying 
Christian slave freer than his master, and 
consoled those whom, dying, he left behind 
mourning, not so much that he was gone as 
because they were left. Nor is its work 
done. It will go singing on through all the 


THE PSALM OF PSALMS. 13 


generations of time, and it will not fold its 
wings till the last pilgrim is safe and time 
ended ; then it shall fly back to the bosom of 
God, whence it issued, and sound on, min- 
gled with all those harmonies of celestial joy 
which make heaven musical for ever.” 

But it may also be compared to the holy of 
holies of old, —the inner shrine of that splen- 
did temple which rose, noiseless as some tall 
palm, at the bidding of Solomon. However 
eager or noisy might be the tide of human 
life that throbbed and surged through the 
narrow streets of the Holy City, or even 
pulsed in the temple courts, yet there was 
always one quiet and undisturbed enclosure 
where angel guardians stretched out their 
wings in calm repose over the ark of God. 
There at least was rest; and if the priestly 
occupants had only been allowed to tarry in 
that secret place of the Most High, surely 
they had forgotten the fret and rush of life 
under the spell of that unutterable repose. 


14 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Dusty haste and restless anxiety must doff 
their garments and shoes ere they could 
enter there. 

And all this is the psalm before us. It is 
an oasis in the desert ; it is a bower on a hill 
of arduous climbing; it is a grotto in a 
scorching noon ; it is a sequestered arbour for 
calm and heavenly meditation; it is one of 
the most holy places in the temple of Scrip- 
ture. Come hither, weary ones, restless ones, 
heavy-laden ones; sit down in this cool and 
calm resort, while the music of its rhythm 
charms away the thoughts that break your 
peace. How safe and blessed are you to 
whom the Lord is Shepherd! Put down 
this volume and repeat again, in holy rev- 
erie, the well-known words to the end, and 
see if they do not build themselves into a 
refuge on which the storms may break in 
vain. 

There is no question as to who wrote it, — 
David’s autograph is on every verse. But 


THE PSALM OF PSALMS. I5 


when and where did it first utter itself upon 
the ear of man? Was it sung first amid the 
hills of Bethlehem, as the sheep were grazing 
over the wolds, dotting them like chalk- 
stones? Or was it poured first upon the 
ear of the moody king, whose furrowed brow 
made so great a contrast to the fresh and 
lovely face of the shepherd lad, who was 
“withal of a beautiful countenance, and 
goodly to look to?” It may have been. 
But there is a strength, a maturity, a depth, 
which are not wholly compatible with ten- 
der youth, and seem rather to betoken the 
touch of the man who has learned good 
by knowing evil, and who, amid the many 
varied experiences of human life, has fully 
tested the shepherd graces of the Lord of 
whom he sings. 

These words were surely first sung by one 
who had suffered deeply; who had tasted 
many a bitter cup; who had often been com- 
pelled to thread his way through many a 


16 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


dangerous labyrinth, and beneath many an 
overhanging, low-browed rock. 

We are told, in Persian story, of a vizier 
who dedicated one apartment in his palace 
to the memory of earlier days, ere royal 
caprice had lifted him from lowliness to 
honour. There, in a tiny room with bare 
floors, was the simple equipment of shep- 
herd life, — the crook, the wallet, the coarse 
dress, the water-cruse; and there he spent 
a part of each day, remembering what he 
had been, as an antidote to those temptations 
which beset men in the dazzling light of royal 
or popular favour. So David the king did 
not forget David the shepherd boy. There 
was a chamber in his heart whither he was 
wont to retire to meditate and pray; and 
there it was that he composed this psalm, in 
which the mature experience of his manhood 
blends with the vivid memory of a boyhood 
spent among the sheep. 

This only we say further, as we close this 


THE PSALM OF PSALMS. 17 


meditation: that as this psalm hath virtue, 
which streams to heal those who touch, so 
it is true that its power lies in dwelling 
so little upon man, and so much on God. 
See how every verse tells us what fe is 
doing. This is the true policy of life. Un- 
belief puts circumstances between itself and 
Christ, so as not to see Him; as the dis- 
ciples did, through the mist, “and they cried 
out for fear.’ Faith puts Christ between 
itself and circumstances, so that it cannot 
See them stor. the glory. of sthat-light.?’ 
Unbelief fixes its gaze on men, and things, 
and likelihoods, and possibilities, and circum- 
stances. Faith will not concern herself with 
these; she refuses to spend her time and 
waste her strength in considering them. Her 
eye is fixed steadfastly on her Lord, and she 
is persuaded that He is well able to supply 
all her need, and to carry her through all 
difficulties and straits. 

O trembling heart, look away, and look 


18 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


up! Your sorrows have been multiplied 
indeed by looking at difficulties and second 
causes. Now cease from all this. Talk no 
more about the walled cities and giants, about 
the rugged paths and dark valleys, about 
lions and robbers; but think of the love, 
the might, and the wisdom of the Shepherd. 
Love that spared not its blood! Might that 
made the worlds! Wisdom that named the 
stars! Your salvation does not depend on 
what you are, but on what He is. For every 
look at self, take ten looks at Christ. Cease 
using the first pronoun, and substitute for it 
the third. 

Tell us no more of your tears, your fail- 
ures, or your sins; but tell us, oh, tell us, 
of the all-sufficiency of Jesus, and how your 
needs have been the foil of His deliverances. 
Sing again the old song of how all wants are 
swallowed up in the shepherd love of God. 
And emphasise each “ HE” as you say again 
the psalm of childhood and of age. ° » 


ay 


THE SHEPHERD LORD. 


“The Lord is my Shepherd; 
I shall not want.” 

Be REE thousand years have passed away 

since the sweet singer of Israel first 
sang this psalm about the shepherd care 
of God. Thirty centuries! It is a long 
time. And in that vast abyss all the ma- 
terial relics of his life, however carefully 
treasured, have mouldered into dust. 

The harp, from the strings of which his 
fingers swept celestial melody ; the tattered 
banner, which he was wont to uplift in the 
name of the Lord; the well-worn book of 
the law, which was his meditation day and 
night ; the huge sword, with which he slew 


i) 


20 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


the giant; the palace chamber, from which 
his spirit passed away to join the harpers 
harping with their harps, — all these lie deep 
amid the debris of the ages. 

But this psalm — though old as the time 
when Homer sang, or Solon gave his laws, 
and though trodden by the myriads of men 
in every succeeding age —is as fresh to-day 
as though it were just composed. Precious 
words! They are the first taught to our 
children, and perhaps the Holy Child Him- 
self first learned to repeat them in the old 
Hebrew tongue beside his mother’s knee in 
Nazareth ; and they are among the last that 
we whisper in the ear of our beloved ones, 
standing in the twilight between the darken- 
ing day of earth and the breaking day of 
heaven. The sufferer in the sick-chamber ; 
the martyr at the stake; the soldier on his 
sentry duty; the traveller amid many perils ; 
the Covenanter; the Huguenot ; the Vaudois, 
— these, and a multitude which no man can 


THE SHEPHERD LORD. 21 


number, have found in these words a lullaby 
for fear, an inspiration to new life and hope. 
“The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not 
want.” 


“THE Lorp.” It is printed in small capi- 
tal letters, and wherever that is the case we 
know that it stands for the mystic word 
JeHovaH. And so much in awe did the 
Jews stand of that awful name that they 
substituted for it some lesser word of God 
wherever it occurred in their public reading 
of sacred Scripture. Only once a year was 
it pronounced, and that on the great day of 
Atonement, by the high priest in the most 
holy place. 

Jehovah means the Living One, the self- 
existent Being, the I AM; He who was, and 
is, and is to come, who inhabiteth eternity, 
who hath life in Himself. All other life, from 
the aphid on the rose-leaf to the archangel 
before the throne, is dependent and derived. 


22 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


All others waste and change and grow old; 
He only is unchangeably the same. All 
others are fires, which He supplies with fuel; 
He alone is self-sustained. This mighty 
Being is our Shepherd. Lift up your heart 
to Him in lowly adoration, and say, “Give 
ear, O Shepherd of Israel, Thou that leadest 
Joseph like a flock; Thou that dwellest be- 
tween the cherubim, shine forth.” 

But as we travel in thought down the ages 
we meet a gentle, weary Man, on whom the 
shadow of coming sorrow hangs darkly. He 
is speaking within a few miles of the spot 
where these words had been first uttered 
some twelve hundred years before. Is it 
treason? Is it blasphemy? Is it the rav- 
ing of lunacy? No; with all the marks of 
self-possession and sober truth, He takes up 
these very words, and applying them to Him- 
self, He says, “I am THE GooD SHEPHERD.” 

Combine these two, —the august word for 
the everlasting God, and the tender word 


THE SHEPHERD LORD. 23 


for the Saviour, —and we have a worthy 
title for our Lord, /ehovah-Jesus. Let us 
read it into our psalm, and say, with a new 
appreciation of its meaning, “ Jehovah-Jesus 
is my Shepherd.” What need can we have 
which may not be met by this twofold 
nature? As Jehovah He has all power; as 
Jesus all sympathy. As Jehovah He sus- 
tains all worlds; as Jesus He ever liveth to 
make intercession. As Jehovah He is sov- 
ereign Lord of all; as Jesus He still treads 
the pathways of this world by our side, whis- 
pering sweetly and softly in our ears, “ Fear 
not, little flock.” 


“SHEPHERD.” That precious word for God 
was uttered first by Jacob, — himself once a 
shepherd, —as he lay a-dying in his hiero- 
glyphed chamber, and with the long thoughts 
of old age went back to the imagery of his 
early life, speaking of God as having “ shep- 
herded him all his life long.” All through 


24 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


the Bible the golden thread runs, until in its 
closing pages we read of the Lamb who leads 
His flock to the river of water of life. 

The Eastern shepherd occupied quite a 
unique position towards his flock, and a 
friendship sprang up between him and the 
dumb creatures of his care to which there 
is no counterpart among ourselves. Let us 
think ourselves into that relationship. In 
the early morning he would lead his flock 
from their fold to the pasture-lands. All 
day he must closely watch, lest harm should 
come to them from prowling beasts of prey 
or robber hordes. To the still waters he 
must lead them, that they may drink where 
no current shall frighten or endanger them, 
and at night he must conduct them back 
to the security of the fold. At a certain 
season of the year he must lead them yet 
farther afield, far away from his own home 
and the haunts of men, where he will 
live among them, scorched by the heat at 


THE SHEPHERD LORD. 25 


noon, and drenched by the dews at night. 
Should one of the lambs be unable to keep 
pace with the rest of the flock, he must carry 
it in his bosom. Should one of the flock go 
astray, he must search for it until he finds it, 
tracking it by the tufts of wool left in the 
briers and thorns. Should danger assail, he 
must be prepared to risk his life. Shepherds 
in the East look like warriors armed for fight, 
the gun slung over the shoulder, pistols at 
the belt, and club in hand. 

Living on such terms, the shepherd and 
his flock are almost friends. They know 
him, and answer to their names. Some 
always follow close behind him, as his es- 
pecial favourites, sure of his love. He can 
do almost as he wills with any of them, 
going freely in and out among them with- 
out exciting the slightest symptom of alarm. 

Now all this is true of our Lord Jesus, 
that Great Shepherd of the sheep. He has 
a shepherd’s Aeart, beating with pure and 


26 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


generous love that counted not His life-blood 
too dear a price to pay down as our ransom. 
He has a shepherd’s eye, that takes in the 
whole flock, and misses not even the poor 
sheep wandering away on the mountains cold. 
He has a shepherd’s fazthfulness, which will 
never fail, nor forsake, nor leave us comfort- 
less, nor flee when He seeth the wolf com- 
ing. He has a shepherd’s strength, so that 
He is well able to deliver us from the jaw 
of the lion, or the paw of the bear. He hasa 
shepherd’s ¢exderness, —no lamb so tiny that 
He will not carry it; no saint so weak 
that He will not gently lead; no soul so 
faint that He will not give it rest. He 
pities as a father. He comforts as a mother. 
His gentleness makes great. He covers us 
with His feathers, soft and warm and downy; 
and under His wings do we trust. 

Ah, He has done more! “All we like 
sheep have gone astray; we have turned 
every one to his own way.” Punishment 


THE SHEPHERD LORD. 27 


and disaster were imminent; but Jesus, 
from His throne in eternity, saw the dan- 
ger, and was filled with compassion for the 
multitudes which were as sheep not hav- 
ing a shepherd. Therefore, because He 
was the Shepherd, He offered to give His 
own life as the substitute; and God laid 
on Him the iniquity of us all. Then was 
heard the terrible summons, ‘Awake, O 
sword, against my Shepherd, and against 
the Man that is my fellow, saith the Lord 
of hosts: smite the Shepherd.” “He laid 
down His life for the sheep,’ and thus 
redeemed the flock by the blood of the ever- 
lasting covenant. Praise Him! Praise Him! 


“My.” What a _ difference comes in 
with that little word my! “The child is 
dead!” said one of the farm-servants, who 
had carried the sick boy to his mother; 
“My child is dead!” said the mother. 

«This estate is well known to me; I have 


28 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


trodden every mile of it from childhood,” 
so speaks the gray-headed bailiff; «This 
is my estate,’ thus speaks the heir. So in 
religion the difference between knowledge 
and appropriation is simply infinite. It 
makes all the difference between being 
saved or lost whether you say, “Jesus is a 
Saviour,’ or “Jesus has saved) mej” 
whether you say, “The Lord is a Shepherd” 
or “ The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not 
want.”” Even if, like Thomas, you could see 
the Saviour in the clear light of reality, and 
have every doubt removed, and His hands 
offered to your touch, yet it would avail 
you but little unless you could appropriate 
Him by saying, “My Lord and my God.” 

Jesus waits to be appropriated. He is 
mot content to be a Shepherd, a Good 
Shepherd, the Shepherd of the holy 
angels, the Shepherd and Bishop of count- 
less redeemed ones. His travail over you 
will not be satisfied till you put your hand 


THE SHEPHERD LORD. 29 


on him and say, “My Shepherd.” And 
you may do that if you will. There is 
nothing to hinder you. Do not tarry to 
inquire if you are one of His sheep; look 
away from yourself to Him, and see if He 
be not well qualified to be your Shepherd. 
And the first cry of “Mine!” on your part 
will be a certain indication that you are 
included in that flock which He is leading 
through many a tangled brake to the one 
fold of heaven. “The Lord is my Shep- 
herd ; I shall not want.” 


“T SHALL NOT WANT.” Amid all the 
sorrow and want of the world the Lord’s 
sheep are well supplied. The cry of 
the worldling is contained in the weary 
confession, “I perish with hunger.’’ But 
the boast of the saint rings through the 
glad assurance, “My God shall supply 
all your need according to His riches in 
glory by Christ Jesus.” His hired servants 


30 _ THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


have bread enough and to spare; how 
much more His own! “The young lions 
do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that 
seek the Lord shall not want any good 
thing.” 

Your experiences may seem to contra- 
dict that glad announcement; but per- 
haps you have not by faith sought and ap- 
propriated the supplies which have been 
placed ready to your hand; or you have 
not made your requests known unto God 
with prayer and supplication; or your 
hour of need has not yet fully come; or 
you have misunderstood your real need, 
and are asking for something which 
would do you harm. In one of these 
directions you must seek the reason of the 
apparent disparity between these glad, tri- 
umphant words and your own experience. 
For it is true for evermore that ‘there is no 
want to them that fear Him.” He is able 
to make all grace abound, and He does 


THE SHEPHERD LORD. 31 


make all grace abound. To Him be the 
glory for ever and ever. ; 

Oh, bind this bright assurance to your 
heart; and whatever perils may menace 
and threaten you, whatever wants may 
assail, go forward, stepping out into the 
dark, encouraging your heart by this sweet 
refrain: “The Lord is my Shepherd; I 
shall not want.” 


ES, 


PASTURES OF TENDER GRASS AND WATERS 
OF REST. 
‘“¢ He maketh me to lie down 


In green pastures: 
He leadeth me beside the still waters.” 


N this sweet pastoral symphony, the first 

verse gives the air, when it tells us that 
there is no want to the man who lives under 
the shepherd care of God. In the succeed- 
ing verses the harmony is worked out, and 
the music in all its completeness is rendered 
effectively. 

The first want which, according to this 
verse, he who belongs to Christ shall never 
know, is the want of rest. This verse 
breathes the very spirit of rest, as is even 


32 


PASTURES OF TENDER GRASS. 33 


more apparent in a more literal rendering 
of the words. It may be rendered thus: 
“He maketh me to lie down in pastures 
of tender grass: He leadeth me beside the 
waters of rest.” 

What a delightful scene is thus conjured 
up before our fancy! It is the scorching 
hour of an Eastern noon. The air is stifling 
with fever-heat, and all the landscape is bak- 
ing in the awful glare. The very stones 
upon the hills burn the feet that touch them. 
At such a time woe be to the flock without a 
shepherd ; and to the shepherd who cannot 
find the blue shade of some great rock, the 
shelter of some bushy dell, or the rich and 
luscious pasturage of some lowland vale! 

But there is no such failure here. See 
where the pellucid stream is rolling its tide 
through the level plain. Higher upward in 
its bed, when it was starting on its course, 
it foamed and fretted over its rocky channel, 
leaped from ledge to ledge, chafed against 


34 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


its restraining banks, and dashed itself into a 
mass of froth and foam. No sheep would 
have drank of it then; for the flocks will 
never drink of turbid or ruffled streams. 
But now it sweeps quietly onward, as if it 
were asleep, —there is hardly a ripple on 
its face; every flower, and tree, and sedge, 
as well as the overhanging banks, is clearly 
mirrored on its surface, and every stone in 
its bed may be clearly seen; on its banks 
the pasture is always green and luxuriant, 
carpeted in spring by a thousand flowers ; 
the very air is cooled by its refreshing pres- 
ence, and the ear is charmed by the music of 
its purling waters. No drought can come 
where that river flows; and the flocks, satis- © 
fied by browsing on the tender grass, lie 
down satisfied and at rest. 


WE ALL NEED REST. There must be 
pauses and parentheses in all our lives. The 
hand cannot ever be plying its toils. The 


PASTURES OF TENDER GRASS. 35 


brain cannot always be elaborating trains of 
thought. The faculties and senses cannot 
always be on the strain. To work without 
rest is like overwinding a watch; the main- 
spring snaps, and the machinery stands still. 
There must be a pause frequently interposed 
in life’s busy rush wherein we can recuperate 
exhausted nerves and lowered vitality. There 
is more permanence than many think in the 
commandment which bids us rest one day in 
seven. 

But there is no part of our nature that 
cries more urgently for rest than our spir- 
itual life. The spirit of man, like the dove, 
cannot always be wandering with unresting 
wing; it must alight. We cannot ever be 
travelling up the rugged mountain pass of 
difficulty, or traversing the burning marl of 
discontent. We must be able to lie down 
in green pastures, or to pass gently along 
the waters of rest. There are three things 
needed ere sheep or human spirits can rest. 


36 THE SHEPHERD. PSALM. 


1. A consciousness of safety. The growl 
of a lion, the bark of a dog, the presence of 
a little child, will be quite sufficient to spoil 
the rest of a flock of sheep, and to drive 
them trembling and timid into an affrighted 
group. And how can we rest so long as we 
feel ourselves liable to the attack of the roar- 
ing lion of the pit? Who can rest so long as 
eternal destinies lie uncertainly in the balance? 

Against all this our Shepherd Jesus has 
provided. He has Himself met the great 
adversary of our souls, and has for ever 
broken his power. We can never forget 
that fearful conflict between the two, —the 
malice of the one; the strong cryings and 
tears, the anguish and bloody sweat, of the 
other. It was not a time when we could 
throw the balance of our weight into one 
scale or the other; we were rather the prize 
for which the battle was fought through the 
long and weary hours. On the one hand 
stood cruel hate and bloodthirsty destruc- 


PASTURES OF TENDER GRASS. 377 


tion; on the other was mercy yearning to 
deliver, although at the cost of bitter agony 
and wounds, of which the scars shall remain 
for ever. In the end, the Good Shepherd 
gave His life for the sheep. No hireling 
coward He! His all was at stake. The 
flock was His own, given Him by his father ; 
and He laid down His life for it. 

But in that death He slew our enemy; 
as two antlered champions of the woods 
have sometimes been discovered side by side 
in death, because the one, in his own death- 
throes, had struck the other with a mortal 
wound. But God “brought again from the 
dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of 
the sheep, through the blood of the everlast- 
ing covenant.” And now He lives to guar- 
antee our safety. He has suffered all that 
there is to suffer. He has mastered all the 
opposition that there is to encounter. He 
has secured us everlasting deliverance from 
the slaughter-knife, from the demands of the 


38 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


divine law, and from the consequences of our 
own sins. ‘Who is He that condemneth? 
It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen 
again.” 

And now, O timid soul, be at rest! The 
blood-red brand which is upon thee is a sure 
token that thou art safe. He cannot have 
done so much for thee to lose thee now. In 
all moments of peril or dread softly murmur 
his name, /esus / Jesus / and He will at once 
comfort thee by His presence and by His 
voice, which all the sheep know; and this 
shall be His assurance: “My sheep shall 
never perish, neither shall any man pluck 
them out of my hand.” 

“The Lord is thy Keeper.” “We know 
that whosoever is begotten of God sinneth 
not; but He that was begotten of God keep- 
eth him, and the evil one toucheth him not” 
(1 John v. 18, R. V.). 

2. Sufficiency of food. A hungry sheep 
will not lie down. Main force will fail in 


PASTURES OF TENDER GRASS. 39 


making it do so. But the shepherd who can 
provide it with plenty of good pasturage will 
soon bring the most restless animal to lie: 
contentedly among the fragrant herbage, 
while birds may settle on its woolly back 
and bees murmur drowsily around. 

We can never rest so long as the hunger 
of the spirit is unappeased and its thirst un- 
slaked. Strange that men are so slow to 
realise this! Yet the whole drift of human 
life seems impelled by the aching void within. 
Conscious of their hunger, men try to satisfy 
it with the husks that the swine eat; but 
they try in vain. And there is no answer to 
the unrest of the inward man until the voice 
of Jesus is heard, saying, “He that cometh 
to me shall never hunger; and he that be- 
lieveth on me shall never thirst.” 

Oh, to eat of the flesh of the Son of man, 
and to drink His blood, —in hours of devout 
reverie, in moments of rapt and intimate 
communion! This is life. This is eternal 


40 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


satisfaction. Here are pasture-lands indeed, 
and the rivers of His pleasures. _ 

The Word of God may fitly be compared 
to green pastures. There is nourishment 
there for all hungry hearts, — “enough and 
to spare.” Nor do these pastures ever be- 
come barren or sear. They are as green 
and fresh to-day as when they were first 
issued by the Holy Spirit. Though multi- 
tudes of commentators have considered them, 
and myriads of Christians have studied and 
conned them, they cannot be pondered by a 
loving and obedient heart without yielding 
nutriment and strength. 

There are many spiritual realities corre- 
sponding to the waters of rest. What is the 
Lord’s day but a water of rest; or the hour 
of worship ; or the long period of illness and 
convalescence; or the summer holiday; or 
the long halcyon period of spiritual prosper- 
ity, when it would almost seem as though 
Satan had forgotten to tempt? At such 


PASTURES OF TENDER GRASS. AI 


times it is sweet to know that He who anon 
led to war or work is now leading to rest. 

And in some cases, in the midst of life’s 
rush and pleasure, He beckons us aside to 
rest with Him awhile, that we may have 
leisure to eat. He causes our hearts to 
keep Sabbath and be at peace. He makes 
us drink of the brook by the way, and at 
noon we rest with His flock in the blue 
shade of the Rock in the weary land. 

3. Obedience to the Shepherd’s lead. The 
tenderest shepherd cannot bring a flock of 
sheep to rest unless they follow him. If 
they lag far behind him, if they go astray 
from him, if they take their own several 
ways, then, however good the shepherd’s in- 
tentions, they cannot but be thwarted and frus- 
trated. “My sheep,” said Christ, “hear my 
voice, and I know them, and they follow me.” 

This test of following the Shepherd’s lead 
is most important. It is by no means won- 
derful that we lose our rest when we run 


42 THE SHEPHERD PSAIM. 


hither and thither, following the devices and 
desires of our own evil hearts. We substi- 
tute our plans for His. We insist on our 
schemes and stratagems. We crowd our 
days with much of our own, in addition to 
something of His. We do not look up often 
enough to see which way He is going and 
what He would have us todo. And so our 
rest is broken and lost. We must follow the 
Lamb whithersoever He goeth if we would 
be led to the living fountains of waters, 
which are fed from heavenly springs. 

Oh, sigh not for the rest of God as if it 
were impossible for thee! The Good Shep- 
herd waits to make thee lie down, and to 
give thee to drink long, deep draughts of 
rest. Only trust Him! Hand over to Him 
all that breaks the stillness of thy spirit, 
though it be but a gnat-sting; and take 
from Him His own deep, sweet rest. Claim 
that He should make thee lie down by the 
arts of His gentle compulsion. 


IV. 
‘‘HE RESTORETH MY SOUL.”’ 


HESE words are among the most pre- 
cious in this priceless psalm. They 
speak to the experience of many children 
of God, who are deeply conscious of the 
need of the restoring grace of the Good 
Shepherd. If He were alone to be followed, 
and if His influences upon us were always 
instantly and wholly obeyed, there would 
be no need of restoration. But we are not 
always susceptible and obedient to the heav- 
enly leadings ; we easily relapse into states. 
of lethargy and indifference, and it is nec- 
essary that we should be restored. 

The most fruitful source of spiritual de- 
clension ts the neglect of the Word of God 
and of private devotion. Just so long as 

43 


44. THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


the spirit of man keeps on terms of inti- 
macy with the loving Spirit of God, while 
the Bible is regularly and _ prayerfully 
studied and the habit of retirement is 
maintained, there will be a regular growth 
in grace and in the knowledge and love of 
God. 

If only the golden pipes are kept free 
and unclogged, there will be an _ uninter- 
rupted flow of the golden oil to feed the 
flame of a holy life. We know all this. 
Our hearts have often tasted the sweet re- 
freshing and holy encouragement which 
are found in these quiet, blessed hours 
spent in the most holy place. We know 
that there is nothing which is more pro- 
ductive of all that makes life worth having 
than communion with God. And yet this 
is the one exercise which we are most prone 
to hurry or neglect. The chapters of the 
Word of God are skimmed as a duty, as 
the surface of a mountain lake is touched 


“(HE RESTORETH MY SOUL.” 45 


here and there by the breast of the wild- 
fowl; while the morning or evening prayer 
is uttered so coldly and perfunctorily that 
it had almost have better been unsaid. Is 
it, then, to be wondered at that the ener- 
gies of the spiritual life decline, and sadly 
need the interposition of some strong, wise 
hand to restore? 

Unconfessed sin is another cause of swift 
Spiritual decline. If there be a cause of 
disagreement, however trivial, among friends, 
they shrink from meeting ; or if they meet, 
there is a coldness and restraint which is 
the more evident and painful in proportion 
to the warmth and intimacy of their pre- 
vious attachment. There can be no more 
heart-union till the cause of estrangement 
has been probed, and the wrong confessed 
or the misunderstanding explained. And 
the same principle obtains in the relationship 
of the soul with God. When we sin, there 
is generally a tendency to imitate Adam and 


46 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Eve in their concealment beneath the foliage 
of the garden. Before that sad yielding is 
the temptation of the devil. The happiest 
hour in all the day was that in which, as 
the evening breeze shed a delicious cool on 
the tropic heat, the voice of the Lord God 
was heard summoning them to commune 
with Him. But that sin makes the thought 
of fellowship unwelcome. Similarly we 
have learned again and again that uncon- 
fessed sin casts a dark shadow over our 
fellowship with God, and makes it irksome 
or perfunctory. Then we begin to ex- 
change the open heart for the averted one, 
and put on the shy look and the formal 
phrase. And if the sin is not instantly 
confessed and put away, the little rift 
within the lute will widen, until it make 
the music mute. 

Worldly society, with all its accessories, 
is another fruitful source of spiritual de- 
cline. It is impossible to spend much time 


“HE RESTORETH MY SOUL.” 47 


amid the trifling talk, the inane conversa- 
tion, the banter, the ridicule, the empty 
literature, the frivolous pursuits of what is 
called ‘society,’ without losing much of 
the fine edge, the holy temper of the soul. 
Man cannot touch a butterfly’s wing with- 
out rubbing away some of the delicate down 
that covers it with microscopic feathers ; 
and we are equally unable to be constantly 
living in the atmosphere of the salons of 
this world without sacrificing that indescrib- 
able delicacy and holiness of character which 
is God’s choicest gift. 

Of course, if the Lord Jesus sends us into 
the world to work for Him, He will keep us 
there. But we shall soon decline in spiritual 
health if we choose to live there; just as the 
country maiden will lose her bright, healthy 
colour, and show signs of consumption, if she 
always lives in the stifling atmosphere of the 
overcrowded room and amid the unwhole- 
some conditions of our city life. 


48 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Neglect of some known command will also 
soon pull down the strongest spiritual health 
into the weakness of disease and decline. If 
only all the Christians who are now fencing 
with some known command of Christ would 
dare to obey it, there would be one of the 
greatest revivals that we have ever seen. 
You sometimes meet Christians who tell you 
that they used to be deeply “exercised” on 
certain matters. 

What does the word “exercised’’ mean ? 
Does it not mean that Christ was testing 
them by a certain definite command, and 
that they were, in point of fact, resisting 
Him, choosing their own way rather than 
His? And if this “exercise” of soul has 
stayed, what is the cause save this, — that 
the gracious Master has had the direct nega- 
tive so clearly given Him, that it is of no 
further use for Him to ply the disobedient 
spirit, and so He has withdrawn from it? It 
may be saved, “so as by fire.’ But it can 


“‘HE RESTORETH MY SOUL.” 49 


never know His tenderest love, or be used by 
Him for His loftiest ministry. 

There are many signs of the declension 
of the soul: its restlessness; its spirit of 
captious complaining ; its want of interest in 
the concerns of Christ’s kingdom ; its inabil- 
ity to testify for Christ or against sin; its 
unwillingness to admit that it is any different 
to what it used to be; its wincing beneath 
contact with the Word of God faithfully 
preached, and with the experience of others 
who are living in soul-health and in happy 
fellowship with God. Just as we have met 
with people afflicted with an insidious and 
dangerous disease who yet refuse to consider 
themselves so, and who fight against the 
desire of their friends to summon medical 
aid, so one phase of spiritual decline is the 
attempt to turn aside all suggestions of its 
presence, although gnawing the vitals of the 
heart. Then follows the sad admission, ex- 
torted as the years go on, that things are 


50 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


not as they were; which is followed by the 
hopeless conclusion that they cannot now 
be mended. 

How welcome it is to turn to the restor- 
ing grace of the Saviour! Nature is full of 
great restorative processes. Directly a rent 
is made in her hillsides, she begins to festoon 
it with grasses, ferns, and creepers. When 
a wound is caused in our flesh, and the red 
blood breaks through the broken rampart as 
it passes, it begins to build up the breach, so 
that presently soundness takes the place of 
the lacerated aperture. Even when a rent 
is caused in our families by the death of 
some dear invalid, whose presence had given 
a new thoughtfulness to all the inmates, and 
whose death makes a breach almost irrepara- 
ble to the survivors, then time with its heal- 
ing influences begins to repair the yawning 
void. 

So, spiritually, the blessed Spirit of God is 
ever brooding over human hearts to do His 


“HE RESTORETH MY SOUL.” 51 


choice and beloved work of reparation and 
restoration. When the sheep is missing from 
the flock, He goes after the truant until He 
finds it, and restores it to its place among 
the rest. When one piece is missing from 
the completed circle of His crown, one jewel 
from His breastplate, He rests not till it is 
replaced. When one child is away in a far 
country, His own joy is at an end till he is 
back. 

O gentle, tender-hearted, pitiful Saviour, 
how eager Thou art in pursuing these, Thy 
chosen ministries to Thy weak and unworthy 
children ! 

Christ uses many restorative ministries. 
Sometimes it is the word of a friend or 
minister. Or it may be a hymn breathing 
the fragrance of a holy heart and speaking 
of a happier past. Or it may be a para- 
graph, a sentence, in some biography or 
religious treatise. Not unfrequently it hap- 
pens in this wise: you are away in the coun- 


b» 


52 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


try, walking solitarily and moodily, when 
there is a burst of sunbeams, or of song- 
notes from the brake; or, without any natu- 
ral cause, you are suddenly aware of the 
gentle, thawing, all-pervasive influence of 
the grace of God, which touches the deepest 
springs of the heart, and softens it, and leads 
it to contrition and prayer. Is not this ex- 
perience something like that resulting from 
the look which Jesus cast at Peter, and 
which sent him out to weep bitterly, and 
was the first stage in his restoration ? 

Let those who want to understand the 
whole philosophy of restoration read the mar- 
vellous story of the way in which the Good 
Shepherd restored the soul of His erring 
apostle. We can only enumerate the stages 
here. He prayed for him, and warned him. 
From the midst of the rough crew that did 
their will on Him, “ He turned, and looked 
upon Peter,’ —not angrily, nor harshly, but 
with the tenderest reproach. He gave a 


“HE RESTORETH MY SOUL.” 53 


special message to the angels that they 
should bid the women summon Peter amid 
the rest on the resurrection morning, show- 
ing how constantly he had been in the 
Saviour’s heart all through His sorrows. 
He met him alone on the world’s first 
Easter day, and permitted him to pour 
out the story of his sorrow unrestrained 
by the presence of any besides themselves. 
He gave him an opportunity of thrice attest- 
ing his love, to wipe out the memory of the 
thrice denial. And this is not more than 
He will do for any of us. 

Oh, do not wait for days or weeks to 
elapse, ere you apply to Him for His restor- 
ing grace; but just as you are, dare to trust 
Him to do it now. While the throb of pas- 
sion is still beating high, and the deed of 
shame is recent, look*up to Him, and claim 
forgiveness first, and in the same breath ask 
Him to put you back immediately in the very 
place which you occupied before you fell. 


54 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


And then, though as yet no answering joy 
thrills your heart, you will be able to exclaim, 
in the assurance of faith, “ He restoreth my 
soul.” 

Yes, and for those who dare to claim it 
there is another promise still more reassur- 
ing, which tells us that “He will restore 
the years that the canker-worm has eaten,” 
— giving back to us opportunities and priv- 
ileges which we may seem to have forfeited 
for ever. 


Ae 


THE SHEPHERD’S LEADING. 


“He leadeth me in the path of righteousness 
For His name’s sake.” 

«6 E leadeth me.” What a wondrous 

link between those two personal pro- 
nouns! The chasm between the Shepherd 
in glory and His poor sheep might seem to 
be an infinite one; but it is bridged by this 
one sweet, tender word, “leadeth.” As in 
the East the shepherd always precedes the 
flock, to discover the greenest patches of 
grass, and the least stony path, so does Jesus 
ever keep in front of the soul that trusts and 
loves Him. And it is our part to allow as 
small a space as possible to intervene be- 
tween His footsteps and our own. 

55 


56 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


We must be willing to be led. There is so 
much natural impetuosity in us to shoot on 
in front and “prospect” for ourselves. Is 
that not so? And out of this restlessness 
there arises so much of the fret, and chafe, 
and disappointment of life. We think we 
can do so much better for ourselves than 
Christ can do for us. We doubt whether 
there is not something outside the limit of 
His will which it might be worth our while 
to snatch at. Weare inclined to run before, 
or linger behind, or go off to forage on the 
right and left. We take a long time ere we 
learn that the place of usefulness and bless- 
edness is in following the lead of Jesus. We 
are much more liable to imitate some scheme 
which our judgment may have passed after a 
hurried hearing of its claims than to ask 
where Christ wants us to be, and whither 
He is leading. 

The one ambition of our being should be 
to be sure that we are resolutely following 


THE SHEPHERD’S LEADING. 57 


the Shepherd whithersoever He goeth; ac- 
cording to His own assurance, when He 
putteth forth His own sheep, “He goeth 
before them, and the sheep follow Him.” 

These words make a considerable demand 
upon our faith. Of old, the apostles could 
see Him in front of them as He went up 
to Jerusalem, and they followed Him in fear. 
But that is impossible now. We cannot see 
that gracious form treading earth’s dreary 
pathways, and casting its shadow upon the 
sands of time. We love Him whom we have 
not seen. We follow Him whom we cannot 
behold. But though He be viewless as the 
air, or as the attraction by which the sun 
conducts the worlds through space, yet His 
leadings are distinctly discernible by the 
trusting, loving heart. 

We detect His leadings in many ways. In 
the drift of His example and in the direction 
of His advice contained in the Gospels; in 
the counsel of a friend, the message of a 


58 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


sermon, the monition of a text flashed into 
our memories; as well as in those inner 
promptings of His Spirit which come we 
know not whence, and bear us we know not 
whither. Sometimes the way opens up be- 
fore us quite marvellously where it had 
seemed closed; as when a vessel, threading 
her way through a labyrinth of rock, finds a 
space of shining water beckoning it from the 
jaws of reef which threatened it. At other 
times a strange impulse seizes us, which, 
after due thought and prayer, we are con- 
strained to follow. 

This only we would insist upon: if you do 
not know which way to go, wait till you are 
sensible of the leadings of the Good Shep- 
herd. Your life is wonderfully interesting. 
to Him; every step of it is the subject of 
His thought. It will be a sore mistake and 
wrong for you to act without being sure of 
what He wishes you to do. And if you are 
not sure what that is, it is evident that the 


THE SHEPHERD’S LEADING. 59 


time has not yet come for you to move. 
Stay just where youare. If you dare to wait 
you will be clearly shown your path, and the 
revelation will not come a moment too late. 

Oh, do not say that you are so stupid that 
you can never know His will. You always 
were dull of apprehension, and your very 
nervousness to understand aright has some- 
times made you too flurried clearly to appre- 
hend the simplest directions. But obtuseness 
of the intellect matters little to Christ. He 
can deal with that, and He will. If He can- 
not make you understand in one way, He 
will in another. It is the business of the 
Shepherd to lead the willing sheep aright. 
The only thing which obstructs His guidance 
is the obtuseness of the heart and will; we 
are frequently too self-willed or too impetu- 
ous to await His time. 

In the previous verse the psalmist declared 
that the Shepherd led beside still waters ; and 
the inference might have been that when the 


60 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


feet were cut or the muscles strained by the 
clamber up the rocky mountain track, or that 
when the course lay amid deep, damp glens 
overshadowed by heavy forests and overhang- 
ing rocks, — that at such times the sheep was 
following its own wild way, outside the ten- 
der guidance of its Lord. And so the 
psalmist takes up the metaphor again, and 
tells us that there are other walks by which 
the Shepherd is leading us to our home. 
Not always beside the gentle streamlet flow, 
but sometimes by the foaming torrent. Not 
always over the delicate grass, but sometimes 
up the stony mountain track. Not always in 
the sunshine, but sometimes through the 
valley of the shadow of death. But which- 
ever way it is, it is the right way, and it is 
the way home. 

Christ's leadings are always along “ paths 
of righteousness.’ And what are these but 
right paths? They are not only consistent 
with the divine rectitude, but they are justi- 


THE SHEPHERD’S LEADING. 61 


fied by the review of the spirit, when in after- 
days, looking back on them from the eminence 
to which they have led, it confesses that they 
were vight paths. 

You hesitate at this. You say that you 
cannot feel that God’s ways with you have 
been right. You are puzzled by their mys- 
tery. You are almost driven to despair by 
their mazy difficulties, their inexorable de- 
mands. Such feelings are not to be mar- 
velled at as you sob them out in the ear of 
God, And Heé-is “very pitiful; “for He 
knoweth our frame; He remembereth that 
we are dust.” 

Only do not judge God’s ways while they 
are in progress. Wait till the plan is com- 
plete. Wait till the tapestry is finished, and 
you can see the other side where the pattern 
will be worked out. Wait till the silver- 
paper is torn off the worsted-work and the 
blending of the colours is disclosed. Wait 
till you have got out of the vale to the 


62 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


mountain brow. Wait till, in the light of 
eternity, God can call you aside and reveal 
to you His purposes. 

Meanwhile, trust! “All his paths drop 
fatness.” “All the paths of the Lord are 
mercy and truth.” If it is-true that “His 
path is in the mighty waters,” it is also true 
that He leads “by a right way to the city of 
habitation.” Let us not judge God by an 
incomplete or unfinished scheme; let us have 
patience till the end shall justify the path by 
which we came. In the breaking dawn of 
eternity we shall discover that God could not 
have brought us by another route which 
would have been as expeditious or as safe as 
the one by which we have come. Would 
that we had the faith to look up from every 
trying circumstance, from every fretting 
worry, from every annoyance and temptation, 
into the face of our Guide, and say, “It is 
the right way, Thou great Shepherd of the 
sheep; lead Thou me on!” 


THE SHEPHERD'S LEADING. 63 


“Lead Thou me on, 
O’er moor and fen, o’er crag and torrent, till 
The night is gone.” 


But we do not need to plead with Him 
for this. He is pledged to do it for the 
sake of His own great name. “He leadeth 
me in the paths of righteousness for His 
name’s sake.’ Remember how eager Moses 
was for the honour of the name of God. 
From many a saintly lip have the words 
broken, “ What wilt Thou do for Thy great 
name?” The name denotes the honour 
and character of God. These are impli- 
cated; these are at stake; the right leading 
of the saint is guaranteed by their immuta- 
bility. 

What is Hisname? ‘“ Wonderful?” Then 
there is a claim on the marvellous working 
of His power to overrule everything to our 
highest good. “Counsellor?”” Then there 
is a claim upon His unerring wisdom to work 
out a scheme which will fill heaven with ad- 


64 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


miration. “The mighty God?” Then there 
is a claim on Him to do nothing inconsistent 
with divine integrity and glory. “The ever- 
lasting Father?” Then there is a claim on 
Him to deal no less tenderly than a father 
with his child. “The Prince of Peace?” 
Then there is a claim on Him in accord- 
ance with the sweetness and loveliness of 
His heart, the memories of His cross, and 
the tenderness of His benediction of peace. 
“For His name’s sake.” What a plea 
that, to look right up from the heart of 
man to the heart of Christ, sure that He 
will not deny Himself, or belie His char- 
acter, or do aught inconsistent with His 
tender love to those for whom He died! 
Tell us Thy name, O wondrous Shepherd, 
going on before, and leading us by way of 
Gethsemane and Calvary to the garden of the 
Easter morn, and the sward of the ascension 
mount! And as we catch Thine answer, 
melodious with love, we will trust and not 


THE SHEPHERD’S LEADING. 65 


be afraid ; we will follow thee whithersoever 
Thou goest; and we believe that we shall 
find that no step of the path was inconsist- 
ent with the leadings of a Love wise and 
strong and tender as the heart of God. 


VI. 


THE VALLEY OF SHADOW. 


“ Yea, though I walk through the valley 
Of the shadow of death, 
I will fear no evil; for Thou art with me.” 


N all Scripture there is no verse more 

familiar than this. No Bible figure has 
made a more lasting or indelible impression. 
This picture of the close of our lives, with a 
dark valley at the end of their sunny path- 
way, was hung up long ago in the halls of 
memory, as we first learred to lisp these 
venerable words ; and though much has hap- 
pened since then, it holds its place, and will 
while memory endures. In millions of cases 
these have been the last words uttered by 
dying saints; and it is in the highest degree 

66 


THE VALLEY OF SHADOW 67 


probable that they will be gently uttered by 
many of those who read these words, as the 
spirit passes the borderland into “its ain 
countrie ;”’ unless the Lord come first, and 
we miss the passage of the valley, being 
caught up to meet Him in the air. 
Methinks I see that valley now. The 
Shepherd is conducting His flock towards 
their fold in luxuriant pastures, and in quiet 
resting-places. But suddenly the path turns 
downward, and begins to wind towards the 
ravine below. On the one side is a preci- 
pice, yawning in sheer descent to the steep 
river-bed, where the water foams and roars, 
torn by jagged rocks. On the other side 
the mountain-firs cast a sombre shadow in the 
deepening twilight. The path still plunges 
downward, until it passes into a deep and 
narrow gorge, overhung by the frowning bat- 
tlements of rock, which almost touch over- 
head; while the trees join hands, bough 
enclasping bough. It would be dark there 


68 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


in the most brilliant noon. To linger 
there after sundown would be to court 
the ague. All along its course are the 
lairs and haunts of ravenous beasts. Such 
is the valley of the shadow of death, through 
which the Great Shepherd once went alone, 
and by which He now conducts all His flock 
to their home. The foremost ranks have 
long ago emerged into the sunshine; others 
are now passing through its dark shadows ; 
and ere long we, too, may be beneath 
them. 

This figure gives us some comforting 
thoughts about death. It is not a state, an 
enduring condition, or an abiding-place. 
It is a passage, a transition, a valley 
through which we walk. The valley may 
be darksome and lonely, and infested with 
evil things; but we do not pitch our tent 
there; we pass through it to our rest. In 
death the spirit leaves the body and passes 
out, just as an artisan will leave the work- 


THE VALLEY OF SHADOW 69 


shop at the evening hour, shutting blinds 
and doors as he passes out to his home, 
and leaves it deserted and still; but his 
voice is to be heard in his home circle, as 
he makes glad the wistful hearts that had 
waited for him, and whose joy had been 
incomplete till he came. 

In Damascus there is a long, dark, nar- 
row lane, ending in a tunnel. It has been 
there for ages. The traveller descends and 
passes through; but on the other side he 
emerges into the courtyard of an Oriental 
palace, flashing with colour and sunlight. 
Myis isa figure of a believer's ‘death, 
Christ is called the first-born from the dead. 
Dying is being born out of the confine- 
ment and darkness of earth into the glorious 
light and liberty of the heavenly life. It is 
a physical act which affects the body, but 
does not touch the faculties or acquirements 
of the individual soul. “Absent from the 
body, present with the Lord.” No staying 


7O THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


in a state of unconsciousness; but an exo- 
dus, a passage, a walking through a brief 
valley, sunshine on this side, sunshine on 
that, and just a moment, a parenthesis, a 
hand-breadth of gloom. 

Death is the gate to life. Our beloved 
are not dead; they are the living, who 
have passed through death into the pres- 
ence of the King. And whensoever we 
stand beside our dear ones, called to this 
exodus, of which the Apostle Peter speaks,* 
we may address them with words of com- 
fort and of hope: “Go forth; O Christian 
soul, from this world, in the name of God 
Almighty, who created thee; in the name 
of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, 
who suffered for thee; in the name of the 
Holy Ghost, who was poured out for thee!” 

Yet the valley ts dark. The pain of the 
body often depresses the spirit and over- 


12 Peteri. 15 (exodus). The word occurs in one 
other instance in the New Testament (Luke ix. 31). 


THE VALLEY OF SHADOW 71 


casts it with a gloom, which is often 
erroneously attributed to spiritual causes. 
It is hard to part without sadness from 
those who have been the beloved fellow 
pilgrims of the march. There is, more- 
over, a sense of loneliness; for though it 
is peopled with pilgrims, — three thousand 
each hour,—yet each goes alone. “/e 
mourrat seul.’ Nor are elements of dark- 
ness wanting through the machinations of 
our direst foe, who delights in the moment 
of mortal weakness to accumulate objects of 
dread before our failing sight. 

At the best it is a solemn thing to die. 
The hardened desperado may meet his end 
without a shudder. “There are no bands 
in his death: his strength is firm.” But in 
proportion to the nurture of the spirit in all 
refined and tender feeling it is impossible 
to quit the receding shore, and make for 
the sea, darkling under the clouds of night, 
without a sense of seriousness and sobriety. 


72 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


The befitting pace is aptly described as a 
walk: “Yea, though I walk.” 

But at the worst, death ts only a shadow. 
It is “the valley of the shadow of death.” 
Christ met the substance, we encounter 
but the shadow. The monster is deprived 
of teeth and claws. Our Theseus has 
destroyed him who had the power of death, 
that is, the devil; and has delivered them 
who through fear of death were all their 
lifetime subject to bondage. He has abol- 
ished death. And we who belong to Him 
may boldly cry, “O death, where is thy 
sting?” Ah, the wasp stung the Good 
Shepherd to death, and has left his sting 
fixed in that cross where He died. 

A shadow is the exact counterpart of its 
substance. But it is not in itself harmful. 
The shadow of a dog cannot bite; of a 
giant cannot kill; of death cannot destroy. 
The prophet says that death is a veil cast 
over the face of all nations; but a veil is 


THE VALLEY OF SHADOW 73 


harmless enough. Besides, you cannot 
have a shadow unless there be a bright 
light shining somewhere. The shadow is 
temporary, the light eternal; for “God is 
light, and in Him is no darkness at all.” 

But this imagery may stand for other 
experiences besides dying. We have often 
to pass through dark valleys on our way 
home. The road to the heavenly Jerusa- 
lem lies through the valleys of Baca, 
where eyes wax red with weeping, and tears 
brim into pools. The great dreamer, in 
his description of the Pilgrim’s Progress, 
places the passage of the valley of the 
shadow in the middle of his course. Be- 
tween the House Beautiful and Vanity 
Fair there lies such a description of ¢hzs 
valley as could only have been written by 
one who had passed through its ravines. 

“ Now morning being come, he looked back, not 


out of any desire to return, but to see, by the light of 
the day, what hazards he had gone through in the 


74 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


dark. So he saw more perfectly the ditch that was 
on the one hand, and the quag that was on the other; 
also how narrow the way was which lay betwixt them 
both; also now he saw the hobgoblins and satyrs and 
dragons of the pit, but all afar off (for after the break 
of day they came not nigh); yet they were discovered 
to him, according to that which is written: ‘He dis- 
covereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth 
out to light the shadow of death.’” 


We pass through many a valley of shadow 
ere we reach THE valley, And whenever we 
feel our souls overcast we should stay to 
consider if there be a cause arising from 
our neglect or sin. If there be, a moment’s 
confession will bring us out again into the 
light. But if there be none, so far as we 
can tell, then let us be brave to plod on. 
Every step has been measured out for us, 
even as it has been trodden before us. And 
God is testing us to see whether we can 
trust Him in the dark as well as in the light, 
and whether we can be as true to Him when 
all pleasurable emotions have faded off our 


THE VALLEY OF SHADOW yh 


hearts as when we walked with Him in the 
light. 

There is a good purpose in all these 
shadowed valleys. They test the quality 
of the soul. They reveal our weak places. 
They unveil the stars that peer down 
through the interspaces of rock and tree. 
They make us follow the Shepherd closely, 
lest we lose Him. They teach us to value, 
as never before, the rod and staff. Blessed 
are those that do not see, but who yet be- 
lieve ; and who are content to be stripped 
of all joy and comfort and ecstasy, if it be 
the Shepherd’s will, so long as there is left 
to them the sound of His voice, and the 
knowledge that He is near. 

Listen to the courageous declaration of the 
saintly soul, boasting of its fearlessness: “1 
will fear no evil.” There is no fear in love. 
Perfect love casteth out fear. Nothing else 
can do it. You may argue against fear. 
You may deride it. You may try and shame 


76 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


it. But all will be in vain. If you would 
master it you must expel it by the trust 
which is born of love. A man comes home 
faint and famished, his nature craves for 
food; but as he enters into his house he 
learns that his child, suddenly stricken with 
fever, is lying at the point of death; and in a 
moment he has forgotten his hunger in the 
paroxysm of love and grief with which he 
bends over the tiny feverish form, and 
hastens to moisten the dry lips. Thus the 
lower passions are subdued in the soul by 
the higher. And so it happens that the 
most timid spirit which is conscious of the 
presence of the Good Shepherd can sing as 
it passes onward through the gloom, and its 
notes vibrate with the buoyancy of a courage 
which cannot flinch or falter. “Yea, though 
I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death, I will fear no evil.” “God is our 
refuge and strength, a very present help in 
trouble. Therefore will not we fear.” 


THE VALLEY OF SHADOW 77 


It is very well to say, “ What time I am 
afraid, I will trust in thee;” but it is still 
better to say, “I will trust, and not be 
afraid.” 

Sorrow and dying make Christ’s presence 
veal, Have you ever noticed the change in 
the pronoun? Hitherto the psalmist has 
spoken of the Lord in the ¢4zvd person; but 
now, as he moves down into the dark, he 
draws closer to the divine Leader and Guide, 
speaking to Him in a whisper, and saying 
Thou. Inthe green pastures it was enough 
to speak of “He;” but now there is need 
for the closer, tender address. When things 
are going well with us we may content our- 
selves with talking about the Lord; but 
when the sky darkens we hasten to deal 
with Him and talk to Him directly. The 
child which had been playing about the room 
will run to your knee and cling closely to 
your bosom as soon as the thunder-clouds 
gather, and the wind moans through the 


78 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


house. In this way death-chambers become 
presence-chambers. 

The darkness is sometimes too dense for 
us to be able to see Christ. But faith can 
always be sure that He is there; not because 
of the evidence of sense or feeling, but be- 
cause He has said, “I will never leave thee, 
nor forsake thee.” He cannot break His 
word. He has not left us alone. He is 
looking down on us with unabated tender- 
ness. The depths may sever Him from the 
apprehension of our love; but neither death 
nor life, nor height nor depth,-can separate 
us from the strong grasp of His faithful and 
unchanging affection. Yea, “the mountains 
may depart, and the hills be removed; but 
His kindness will not depart from thee, 
neither will the covenant of His peace be 
removed,” 

“The darkness and the light are both 
alike to Thee,’’ O Christ, who didst tread 
the dense darkness of Gethsemane and Cal- 


THE VALLEY OF SHADOW 79 


vary, — alone, desolate, and forsaken of Thy 
Father. But Thou knowest the way, since 
Thou has trodden it. Thou art as near to 
us as when we can see and feel Thee near. 
And Thou wast lonely that we might never 
be lonely ; Thou wast forsaken that we might 
never be forsaken; Thou didst tread the 
wine-press alone that each poor timid child 
of Thine in all future ages might be able to 
sing the words of undying comfort: “I will 
fear no evil: for Thou art with me.” 


VIE 


COMFORT THROUGH THE ROD AND STAFF. 
“Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort me.” 


WA on the valley of the shadow 

of death may stand for in our Chris- 
tian experience, there is no doubt that the 
lonely spirit, in its passage through it, stands 
in urgent need of comfort. From the begin- 
ning to the end of Scripture there is no re- 
frain more frequent or more consolatory than 
the thought embodied in the words, “Com- 
fort ye, comfort ye, my people, saith your 
God.” Indeed, it would almost appear as 
if the eternal God had set to Himself the 
task of comforting His people as a mother 
comforteth her first-born. 

80 


THE ROD AND THE STAFF. 81 


All true comfort emanates from God, 
through the work of the Holy Spirit. 
whose comfort is especially mentioned in 
Acts ix. 31; and any who would experi- 
ence God’s comfort in all its tender help- 
fulness, let them read perpetually in the 
Word of God, that through patience and 
comfort of the Scriptures they may have 
hope (Rom. xv. 4). 

It would sometimes appear, indeed, that 
God puts us into special circumstances of 
difficulty and trial, in order that He may 
make manifest to us the infinite resources 
of His consolation; just as we need to go 
out into the dark night in order to behold 
the stars. But the great point brought out 
in these words is that the Almighty God, our 
Shepherd, comforts us by His rod and His 
staff. How is it that these two badges of 
the Shepherd’s office, which seem rather to 
speak of discipline, can possibly bring com- 
fort to tried believers? It is this point which 


82 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


we desire for a moment to elucidate; and 
may we not hope that the God of all com- 
fort will reveal to us fresh sources of comfort, 
that we may be able to comfort others with 
the comfort wherewith we ourselves have 
been comforted of God? 

What ts the Shepherd’s rod? It is surely 
the symbol of His defending power. It is 
the sceptre which He carries as the supreme 
Shepherd-King. It is the weapon by which 
He strikes down our adversaries, even though 
it be heavy with chastisement for ourselves. 
In passing through some rocky fastness or 
shadowed valley where wild beasts have their 
lair, and hill-robbers hide in many a darkened 
cave, a shepherd needs to be well armed with 
heavy club or ponderous rod, that he may 
deal death-giving blows to lion, or bear, or 
stealthy thief imperilling the safety of one 
of his charge. And does not this suggest 
the protecting grace of Christ our Lord, who 
is ever on the alert to ward off from us 


THE ROD AND THE STAFF. 83 


threatening ills, whether they emanate from 
the prince of the power of the air, or 
from those malicious human foes to whose 
presence in this life our psalmist so often 
alludes, and who have their counterpart more 
or less in the lives of us all? 

Many who may read these words spend all 
their lives under the shadow of a great fear. 
They dread the outset of temptation, before 
which they feel themselves as impotent as 
the withered leaves of autumn before the 
gusty gale; they fear that one day they will 
become the prey of the lion, or fall into the 
hands of a Saul. Would that they might 
transfer the responsibility of keeping their 
souls into the hands of their faithful Re- 
deemer, confident that He will be about 
their path, and their lying down, so that 
they may “dwell safely in the wilderness, 
and sleep in the woods.” The Breaker goes 
before the flock, smiting down all opposition 
with irresistible might ; and God Himself is 


84 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


at the rearward of the flock, defending it 
from all attack from behind. 

O timid hearts, dreading every spiritual 
and temporal evil, — like children going down 
a dark lane, in dread lest at every turn they 
should meet some terrible ogre or object of 
dread ; startled by the sigh of every breeze, 
and by the whitened bole of every hollow 
tree, — would that you could realise how 
absolutely Christ assumes the care of all who 
trust Him! The one question is whether 
you have so completely handed over the re- 
sponsibility of your lives to Him as to make 
Him the sole custodian and safeguard of 
your being, both for this world and the next. 
From the defending rod or club of the Great 
Shepherd we may derive abundant comfort ; 
because it is written, “ My sheep shall never 
perish, neither shall any [man or devil] pluck 
them out of my hand.” 

What is the staff? We would rather call 
it the shepherd’s crook, which is often bent 


THE ROD AND THE STAFF. 85 


~ or hooked at one end. It is associated as 
inseparably with the shepherd as the goad is 
with the ploughman. Beneath it the sheep 
pass one by one to be numbered or told. By 
it the shepherd restrains them from wander- 
ing, or hooks them out of holes into which 
they may fall; by it, also, he corrects them 
when they are disobedient. In each of these 
thoughts there is comfort for the tried chil- 
dren of God. 

We are numbered among God's sheep as we 
pass one by one beneath the touch of the Shep- 
herd’s crook, Our names may be unknown 
among the great and learned, but they are 
written in heaven. Our dwelling-places may 
be lowly and ungarnished among the man- 
sions and palaces of the rich, but we have 
“houses not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens.” Our sphere of ministry may be 
limited, and our work in the trenches, pre- 
paring for the foundations, far away from the 
shoutings with which the topstone is placed 


86 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


upon a finished pile in the sunny air; but we 
shine as stars of the first magnitude in the 
sight of God. We are accounted as the 
small dust in the balance, as smoking flax or 
bruised reeds ; but in the eye of our Heavenly 
Father we are prized as very precious jewels, 
entered in His inventory, and destined to 
shine in the regalia of His Son before the 
gaze of all worlds. 

Words were spoken once among the exiles 
in Babylon which we may fitly apply to our- 
selves in this connection. Gathering at night 
by the waters of Babylon, they~hanged their 
harps upon the pliant branches of the wil- 
lows, as they swept in the current of the 
stream beneath, and they wept as they re- 
membered the ruins of their beloved Jeru- 
salem. Then in their midst the prophet 
voice was heard bidding them lift up their 
eyes on high, and behold the starry hosts ; 
also they were reminded that God called all — 
these by names by the greatness of His 


THE ROD AND THE STAFF. 87 


might; and then followed the magnificent 
apostrophe: “Why sayest thou, O Jacob, 
and speakest, O Israel, my way is hid from 
the Lord, and my judgment is passed over 
from my God?” And to each weary heart 
treading the dark valley of sorrow I would 
speak comfort in the selfsame words. 

The myriad stars of heaven seem to make 
up one huge flock. Their Shepherd is God, 
who is driving them through space; or who 
watches them, as it were, resting on the 
heavenly slopes as a flock of sheep on the 
downs at night. And He has a name for 
each of them. Is it therefore to be supposed 
that He will not be as minute in His care of 
each one of us? Will He not have a name 
for each of us? Will He not number us 
when he tells the tale of His sheep, even as 
He numbers the hairs of our heads? This 
very morn He touched you with His staff 
and counted you. You are the destined 
object of His care. Is it likely, then, that 


88 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


He will suffer you to perish, or want any 
good thing? 

By the Shepherd's staff we are also extrt- 
cated from circumstances of peril and disaster 
into which we may have fallen through our own 
folly and sin. ‘Nhen Peter through his un- 
belief began to sink in the waves, the Saviour 
caught him and supported him, so that they 
walked together to the boat. And this is 
only a sample case of our Shepherd’s tender 
care; for very often sin not only grieves 
Him, but it plunges us into circumstances of 
misery and trouble which threaten to over- 
whelm us. 

At such times He is not unmindful of 
His own; and though we may seem to 
have forfeited all claim to His care, yet 
He is “a very present help in time of 
trouble;” He does not permit us to reap 
as we have sown. He averts the full pen- 
alty of our own mistakes and misdeeds. 
He comes after us in the wilderness, not 


THE ROD AND THE STAFF. 89 


staying His foot until He has discovered 
the pit into which we have fallen, from 
which He does not fail to drag us forth; 
placing us on His shoulders if we are too 
weak to walk, and bringing us back; sat- 
isfied with no other recompense than that 
we are safe. “Thus saith the Lord God; 
Behold, I, even I, will both search my 
sheep, and seek them out. As a shepherd 
seeketh out his flock in the day that he is 
among his sheep that are scattered ; so will 
I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them 
out of all places where they have been 
scattered in the cloudy and dark day.” 
Oh, the long-suffering patience of Christ, 
who will not permit us to be overwhelmed 
by the sorrows and penalties which we 
may have incurred, but will reach out His 
crook to drag us back from the death that 
we had courted ! 

By the staff the shepherd also corrects His 
sheep. At first there seems but little com- 


gO THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


fort here. It is not pleasant to any one of 
us to be corrected. The smart stroke of 
the staff is painful. Yet there is consola- 
tion in the reflection that God must care 
for us, or He would not think it worth 
His while to expend time and thought 
upon our chastisement. Who troubles to 
take to the lapidary’s wheel common flints 
and stones of the beach? The stone that 
is deeply cut, the diamond which is care- 
fully polished, the metal which is plied 
with intense heat for weeks and even 
months, must have proved themselves to 
be of excellent worth. What gardener 
would spend time and pains over a tree 
which, after repeated trial, had refused to 
bear fruit? Is it not the bough which has 
already borne luxuriant clusters that re- 
ceives the incessant attention of the hus- 
bandman? “Whom the Lord loveth He. 
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom 
He receiveth. If ye endure chastening, 


THE ROD AND THE STAFF. Qo! 


God dealeth with you as with sons.” 
Welcome, then, O children of God, each 
stroke of the Shepherd’s staff! Get com- 
fort out of every smart by the thought: 
“My Shepherd must love me tenderly, or 
He would never treat me thus; and then 
turn the heart towards Him in eager desire 
to know the lesson He would teach, and to 
miss nothing of the benefits which He in- 
tends. 

So we journey slowly through the valley, 
learning many a lesson of comfort which 
we hide in our hearts. We are almost con- 
tent to suffer because of the rich revenue 
of blessing which accrues. With us, as 
with the oyster, every wound becomes the 
origin of a pearl. And there is this also: 
that our own experiences make us very 
tender towards the failures and sorrows of 
others, and we are able to join in the glad 
outburst of the apostle who said, “Blessed 
be God, even the Father of our Lord 


Q2 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and 
the God of all comfort; who comforteth 
us in all our tribulation, that we may be 
able to comfort them which are in any 
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our- 
selves are comforted of God. For as the 
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our 
consolation also aboundeth by Christ.” 


VIII. 


THE BANQUET. 


“Thou preparest a table before me 

In the presence of mine enemies.” 
T first it seems difficult to catch the 
exact sequence of the _ psalmist’s 
thought, as he turns from the sheep-cotes 
to the festal board. And yet the demands of 
the spiritual life so far transcend all earthly 
analogies as to demand that more than one 
metaphor should be employed, one supply- 
ing what the other lacks, so that the true 
conception of our relationship to God may 

be complete. 

Now it is of course very helpful to 
think of oneself as a sheep, and of 
Christ as a Shepherd; but there can be no 

93 


94 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


fellowship between the dumb animals and 
their watchful keeper. The little child 
that comes from the shepherd’s shealing 
to meet its father has more intimate fellow- 
ship with him, though it can hardly artic- 
-ulate its words, than the dumb creatures 
of his care. 

The psalmist, therefore, seems to say, “I 
am more than Jehovah’s sheep; I am Jeho- 
vah’s guest.”’ It is a mark of great intimacy 
to sit with a man at his table; in the East it 
is essentially so. It is not only a means of 
satisfying hunger, but of intimate and affec- 
tionate love. Hence the aggravation of the 
psalmist’s sorrow, as he said, “He that break- 
eth bread with me is he that lifteth up his 
heel against me.’ Nor was it possible for 
our Lord to give any more touching proof 
of His love for His wayward follower than 
to dip a sop, and pass it to his hands. Here, 
then, arises before us a rich theme for medi- 
tation while we compare life to a seat at 


THE BANQUET. 95 


God’s banquet-table, eating the things which 
He has prepared. 

We stt at the table of God’s daily providence. 
Our Heavenly Father has a great family. 
He is weighted with the concerns of a uni- 
verse. All sentient things depend upon His 
sustaining power. Not a seraph cleaves the 
air but what derives his power of obedience 
from his sovereign Lord; and not a mote of 
life floats in the sunbeam, flashing in the 
light, but it is dependent upon the light and 
life of the central Sun, before whom angels 
veil their faces. 

And yet, amid all the infinite variety of 
nature which God is supplying constantly, 
He is surely most attentive to the needs of 
those who, in an especial sense, call Him 
‘“Qur Father.” We are His pensioners ; 
nay, better,—we are His children! All 
the stores of His divine provision must fail 
before He can suffer us to want. He may 
sometimes keep us waiting until His hour 


96 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


has struck; but just as He will never be 
one moment too soon, so He will not be a 
moment too late. He will cause a widow 
woman to sustain us with the barrel of 
meal, which, however often scraped, will 
yield a fresh supply. He will rain bread 
from heaven, so that man may eat angels’ 
food. He will multiply the slender store 
of the boy’s wallet, so that present need 
may be met, and stores accumulated for 
the future. 

On a recent Sunday evening, a sick mem- 
ber of a congregation, debarred from attend- 
ing her customary place of worship, entrusted 
to the hand of the minister a two-shilling 
piece, which he was to hand to a poor widow 
known to them both. It so happened that 
he encountered her slowly making her way 
to the church, and at once handed to her 
the coin. But he was hardly prepared for 
the immediate response: “I did not think 
that He would have sent it so soon.” On 


THE BANQUET. 07 


further inquiry he discovered that she had 
placed her last coin that day in the collec- 
tion, and was entirely dependent upon such 
answer as her Heavenly Father might send 
to her trustful prayer that He would provide 
for her next meal. Evidently she had been 
accustomed to close dealings with God, and 
had learned that His deliverance is timed to 
arrive “when the morning breaks,’ —the 
morning of direst need; the hour when pride 
and self-sufficiency have expired, but when 
faith and hope stand expectant at the por- 
tals of the soul, looking for the deliverance 
which cannot be long delayed. 

I never shall forget the story of an old 
man discovered sitting in one of the seats 
of York Minster, within a short period of 
closing time, and who had been sitting there 
since the early morning, waiting. He had 
come to the city to find his daughter; but, 
having missed her, had found himself with- 
out friends or food, and with his last coin 


98 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


spent. Not knowing whither to turn, he had 
found his way into the splendid minster, and 
had sat there the livelong day; because, as 
he said, he thought the likeliest place to find 
his Father’s table was in his Father’s house. 
Need I add that his need was fully satisfied ? 

God’s children seem to think that they 
are no better off than men of the world. 
And, according to their faith, so it is done 
unto them. If we do not exercise faith and 
claim God’s provisions, ought we to be sur- 
prised when we do not receive them? If, on 
the other hand, we would dare to put our 
finger upon His promises, which bind Him 
to meet His children’s need, though the 
young lions lack, and suffer hunger, we 
should find that our God would be equal 
to all our emergencies, and that not one 
good thing would fail of all His promises. 
When men indicate certain cases in which 
God’s children have pined to death, it is 
always wise to inquire whether they were 


THE BANQUET. 99 


living in believing fellowship with Him, and 
whether they had claimed the fulfilment of 
His specific pledges. It is very unbecoming, 
to say the least, that God’s children should 
be as fretful about their daily bread, sup- 
posing they are using all lawful methods to 
obtain it, as the children of men. Was it 
not with a tone of reproach that our Lord 
said, “ After all these things do the Gentiles 
seek ?’’ What could be more assuring than 
His own words, backed by the experience 
of His own life, —‘“ Your Heavenly Father 
knoweth that ye have need of all these 
things?” 

What would you say if, when school-time 
came to-morrow morning, your little boy, 
before he started with unwilling feet to 
school, entered your larder and busied him- 
self in examining its contents, with especial 
reference to your provision for dinner? 
Would he not legitimately incur your dis- 
pleasure? Would you not say, “Be off to 


100 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


school, and leave me to care while you are 
gone?” Would you not rebuke him for his 
want of simple trust? Oh, that we might 
learn lessons from our babes, and believe 
that life is one long residence in one of the 
mansions of our Father’s home; and that 
the time can never come when the table is 
quite bare, and when there is nothing for our 
need! He may suffer you to hunger, be 
cause there are some devils which will only 
go forth by prayer and fasting; but, sooner 
or later, His angel will touch you, saying, 
« Arise and eat;’’ and on the desert floor 
you will find, spread by angel hands, a ban- 
quet, though it be nothing more than a cruse 
of water at your head, and cakes baked on 
the hot stones of the wilderness, for your 
repast. 

God also prepares the table of spiritual re- 
JSreshment. Can we ever forget that episode 
—among the most charming incidents in 
the forty days —in which, as the weary 


THE BANQUET. IOT 


fishers emerged with empty boats from a 
long, toilsome night, they found a banquet 
spread for them, by the tender thoughtful- 
ness of their Lord, upon the strand of the 
lake? As soon as they touched land they 
saw a fire of coals, and fish laid thereon, and 
bread. And is not this an emblem of our 
Lord’s perpetual treatment of His children? 
Tired, disappointed with fruitless toils, agi- 
tated by conflicting hopes and fears, we 
often pull to the shore trodden by His 
blessed feet ; nor do we ever approach Him 
without finding that He has anticipated our 
spiritual requirements, and that “ His flesh is 
meat indeed, and His blood drink indeed.” 
Writing to the Corinthian Christians, the 
Apostle Paul said that, inasmuch ‘as Christ 
had been slain as our Passover Lamb, we 
must imitate the children of Israel, who, 
with closed doors and girded loins and san- 
dalled feet, stood around the table eating of 
the flesh of the lamb, whose blood on the 


102 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


exterior of their houses, demanded their de- 
liverance. ‘Christ our Passover is sacrificed 
for us: therefore let us keep the feast.” 
The life of the Church between the first and 
second advents is symbolised by the feast 
on that memorable night. With joy in our 
voices and triumph in our mien, we stand 
around the table where Christ’s flesh is the 
nourishment of all true hearts, straining our 
ear for the first clarion notes which will tell 
that the time of our exodus has come. 
Christian people are very much too thought- 
less of the necessity of feeding off God’s 
table for the nourishment of spiritual life. 
There is plenty of work being done; much 
attendance at conferences and special mis- 
sions; diligent reading of religious books ; 
but there is a great and fatal lack of the 
holy meditation upon the person, the words, 
and the work of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Will each reader of these lines stay here 
for a moment, and ask if he knows anything 


THE BANQUET. 103, 


of the interior life of meditation which is ever 
deriving fresh sustenance from a considera- 
tion of the Lord? 

It was only the other day that I was re- 
buked by the habit of a well-known Roman 
Catholic bishop of whom it is said: “The 
first point of his rule was early rising, which 
he faithfully practised to the last day of his 
life, and often recommended to others. He 
was the first on foot at his palace, and began 
his prayers and meditation between four and 
five o’clock in the morning, and never spent 
less at them than an hour. He often did 
this with his memoranda in his hand, so as 
to recall past graces, and thus rekindle the 
flame. Nor did it seem as if any hour passed 
in his crowded and stirring life without by 
some direct act refreshing his soul by com- 
munion with God.” 

And, in addition to this daily practice, he 
set apart one or two weeks in every year that 
he might quietly meditate more patiently 


104 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


upon the great mysteries of redemption. 
This is what he said: “One must, by con- 
stant meditation on the great mysteries of 
incarnation and the redemption, plunge one- 
self more and more in the love of God, which 
is the greatest grace of one’s life. I will 
occupy myself more and more with our Lord, 
with His earthly and divine life, with His 
hidden, suffering, and glorious life. May my 
own be hidden in God in Jesus Christ!” 

We may especially apply these words also 
to the table of the Lord’s Supper. This is 
emphatically a table which God has pre- 
pared ; which not only perpetuates the mem- 
ory of the night in which our Lord was 
betrayed, but which enables us to raise our 
wandering thoughts, and to fix them on Him 
where He is now seated. There is no mystic 
change made in the bread or in the wine. 
The bread remains bread, and the wine wine, 
to the end of the simple feast; and yet, at 
the moment of partaking of these elements, 


THE BANQUET. 105 


the pious heart does realise that, by its faith 
and holy thought, a distinct blessing is com- 
municated to its invigoration and comfort. 
It is well, of course, at that solemn moment, 
to recall the agony and bloody sweat, the 
cross and passion, the precious death and 
burial; but it is equally incumbent to look 
through the azure depths and to follow the 
Master through their parted folds, so as to 
feed upon His resurrection life, and to par- 
ticipate in the perpetual Eastertide of His 
existence. 

It is very helpful, where possible, to com- 
municate at least once a week, that we may 
clearly learn to lift all life to the level of the 
Lord’s table, to be at every meal as at a 
sacrament, and to use all the emblems of 
nature as means of holy fellowship with Him. 
How can we enough thank God that in this 
sense also He has prepared a table before us ? 

There is much comfort in the three words 
“‘prepared for me,’”’ because it would seem to 


106 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


indicate the anticipatory care of God. He 
does not allow us to be taken by surprise. 
He does not let his children ask for anything 
the need of which He has not foreseen. 
Just as He has prepared beforehand the 
good works in which we are to walk, so has 
He prepared beforehand the food by which 
His workers shall be nourished. All our 
life’s path is lined by cairns beneath which 
our Forerunner has placed the victuals which 
we shall require. ‘Thou preventest me 
with the blessings of Thy goodness.’’ The 
table is spread before the hunger comes. 
The spring is bubbling in the shade before 
mother and child sink fainting on the sand. 
The angel of the Lord’s host has not only 
taken possession of the hostile country, but 
has provided of the old corn of the land. 
God provisions His castles before they are 
besieged. ‘Thou freparest a table before 
me." 

That is a very significant addition, — zz 


THE BANQUET. 107 


the presence of mine enemies. We surely are 
to understand by it that all around us may 
stand our opponents, — pledged to do us 
harm ; to cut off our supplies; to starve us 
out. See that ring of hostile faces, darting 
fierce glances and chafing to rush upon the be- 
~ leaguered soul! But they cannot cut off the 
supplies that come hourly from above. They 
cannot hinder the angel ministers who spread 
the table and heap it up, and then form them- 
selves into an inner ring of defence. They 
may gnash their teeth at the vanity and 
futility of their rage; but when God elects 
to feed a soul, fed that soul shall be, though 
all hell attempt to say it nay! Many a time 
in David’s life he ate his food in quietness 
and confidence, while Saul’s hostile bands 
swept down the valleys and searched the 
caves to find him. As it was with David, so 
it has been often since. 

Yes, soul, God bids thee feast: “Eat, O 
beloved; yea, eat and drink abundantly.” 


108 THE SHEPHERD PSALM, 


The King doth bring thee into His banquet- 
ing-house, and His banner over thee is love. 
Thou shalt eat of the hidden manna, and 
drink of the secret spring which bubbles up 
in the beleaguered city, enabling it to defy 
the encircling lines of its foes. Nor is the 
time far distant when we shall sit with Christ 
in His kingdom; and as the far-travelled, 
footsore brethren of Joseph ate with the 
prince who once lay in the pit, so shall we 
sit down at the prepared table of the mar- 
riage supper, and Christ will gird Himself 
and come forth to serve us, and the festivi- 
ties of an eternity, which shall never know 
penury or want, shall obliterate the memory 
of the sorrows of time. 


IX. 
“THOU ANOINTEST MY HEAD WITH OIL.” 


HIS similitude is borrowed from the 
usage of an Eastern feast, in which 
the welcome of the host to his guests is 
expressed by the precious unguents with 
which he anoints them on their entrance 
into his home. If they were as little wel- 
come as Jesus was in the house of Simon, 
this act of courtesy would be omitted ; and 
- the failure would be at once noticed, and per- 
haps referred to, as when the Master recalled 
it, saying, “My head with oil thou didst not 
anoint.” 
Love and respect could hardly manifest 


themselves more tenderly than by the cost- 
109 


IIo THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


liness of the materials which were com- 
pounded to compose the oil to be lavishly 
poured upon the head of the beloved guest. 
Myrrh, aloes, and cassia would scent the gar- 
ments with fragrance for many days, and 
would be a grateful memento of happy by- 
gone hours. The lavish anointing which 
Mary of Bethany shed on the head of her 
Lord must have refreshed Him during the 
weary hours that followed, as the delicious 
scent stole up to Him from His dress, and 
reminded Him of the affection of one true 
heart. i 

These unguents, so grateful and refresh- 
ing to the scorched flesh and heated brow, 
seem to have been kept in cruses of alabas- 
ter, which were easily broken, so that their 
contents might be poured forth in lavish 
prodigality. How little does love reck of 
cost! When once much forgiveness has 
started the flow of much love, then in the 
first rapturous moments of conscious ac- 


“THOU ANOINTEST MY HEAD.” IIt 


ceptance sinners will not count it waste to 
express their tumultuous emotions in the 
expenditure of the contents of precious 
vases, as well as in tears and kisses, and 
acts of tender thoughtfulness (Luke vii. 38). 

When the psalmist says that God Himself 
anoints him with oil, does he not mean us 
to infer that life is a feast, in which we are 
guests, and God is Host? And does he also 
mean to teach that God greets us in love and 
welcome? He is not niggardly or churlish, 
but glad to see us glad, and to make us 
happy ; conferring on us luxuries as well as 
necessaries ; and taking pains, at great cost 
to Himself, to show us that He is well 
pleased to accept us, and show us grace in 
the Beloved. 

There are many proofs of this tender grace 
to mankind in general, There are gleams 
of light in most human lives, — in the love of 
tender friends, or in congenial surroundings, 
—which speak God’s welcome. To most 


112 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


men entering on life there is the counterpart 
of the Eastern oil of welcome shed on the 
guest entering the festal chamber. Each 
human life is greeted as it steps across the 
mystic threshold from the unseen. There 
is at least the mother’s kiss, the elasticity 
of youth, the keen sense of enjoyment in 
natural scenes, and the absence of foreboding 
care. 

And the blessed God has so contrived and 
adapted our nature to the world in which we 
live that there is a very ecstasy in life, and 
an abundance of natural joy and gladness, 
save where man has by sin vitiated and 
marred the intentions of his Creator. «How 
excellent is Thy loving-kindness, O God! 
therefore the children of men put their 
trust under the shadow of Thy wings. 
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the 
fatness of Thy house; and Thou shalt make 
them drink of the river of Thy pleasures.” 
“Wine that maketh glad the heart of man, 


“THOU ANOINTEST MY HEAD.” 113 


oil to make his face to shine.” ‘Likewise 
of the fishes as much as they would.” 

But though this is true of men generally, 
yet there is an especial anointing in which 
they can have no part. In the Book of 
Exodus (xxx. 23-25) we have a description 
of a special kind of oil, “an oil of holy oint- 
ment,” which was to be used to anoint the 
tabernacle, and the ark, and the holy ves- 
sels, and also to consecrate Aaron and his 
sons, the priests. But there were two 
special provisions attached to it: first, that 
it should not be imitated ; secondly, that it 
should not be poured “upon man’s flesh.” 
Each of these restrictions is worthy of note. 
That it was not to be imitated surely teaches 
that it sets forth some special holy unguent 
in the divine chemistry which has no coun- 
terpart in human experience. And when we 
further search into the sacred text, we find 
that, throughout Scripture, oil is the symbol 
of the blessed Holy Spirit. And we are 


114 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


justified by many passages in reading this 
thought into the glad exclamation of the 
psalmist. Oh, that we might realise more 
constantly that our gracious Host, at whose 
table we sit, is constantly engaged in anoint- 
ing us with the oil of the Holy Spirit! 

These words with deepest significance might 
have been appropriated by our blessed Lord. 
“Unto the Son He saith, God, even Thy 
God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of 
gladness above Thy fellows.” And the 
Apostle Peter, in the house of Cornelius, 
distinctly asserted such an anointing to 
have been communicated by the Father to 
the Son. ‘God anointed Jesus of Naza- 
reth with the Holy Ghost and with power.” 
And with this the united voice of the per- 
secuted but jubilant Church accords, when it 
rises around the person of “Thy holy child 
Jesus, whom Thou hast anointed.” Yes, 
and the Father did not give the Spirit by 
measure, but in unstinted abundance; the 


“THOU ANOINTEST MY HEAD.” = II5 


heavens were opened, —as in after-days the 
cruses of alabaster were broken, —and the 
Holy Ghost descended (Luke iii. 22). 

There never was a time when Jesus was 
not filled with the Holy Ghost. But who 
can read the Scriptures attentively and 
thoughtfully without discovering that the 
anointing of the Lord Jesus at the waters 
of baptism endued Him with special min- 
isterial qualifications? “The Spirit of 
the Lord is upon me,~ because He hath 
anointed me.” “I cast out devils by the 
Spirit of God.” 

Our Lord was anointed as priest. Every 
priest must be anointed with the sacred oil 
(Exod. xxix. 21),. and our High Priest, 
though not after the order of Aaron, must 
not be without so sacred a designation to 
His office; and thus the blessed Spirit de- 
scended and abode on Him, “like the 
precious ointment upon the head, that ran 
down upon the beard, even Aaron’s beard: 


116 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


that went down to the skirts of his gar- 
ments.” We are but as the skirts of His 
garments, near His feet, where the pome- 
granates glisten amid the tinkle of the 
golden bells (Exod. xxviii. 33). Yet may 
we not claim and expect that, as the skirts 
of His robes, we shall receive the sacred 
chrism ? 

Our Lord was anointed as king. “ Mes- 
siah’? means Anointed. “We have found 
the Messiah (which is, the Anointed).” 
And in that magnificent Messianic psalm, 
in which, amid the rage of~His foes, the 
Almighty designates His Son to be the 
true King of men, it is distinctly stated, 
“Yet have I anointed my King upon my 
holy hill of Zion.” Is there not in these 
glowing words a resemblance to the scene 
when, into the midst of the merrymaking 
of Adonijah and his fellow conspirators, by 
the stone of Zoheleth, which is by Enrogel, 
there broke a breathless messenger with 


““THOU ANOINTEST MY HEAD.” 117 


the tidings, “Verily our lord King David 
hath made Solomon king. And Zadok the 
priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed 
him king in Gihon: and they are come up 
from thence rejoicing, so that the city rang 
again?” “ Halleluiah: for the Lord God 
omnipotent reigneth.” The Man of Love 
is God’s anointed Sovereign, and though we 
see not yet all things put under Him, they 
shall be, and the world shall come to re- 
spect the power of God’s irrevocable decrees. 

We, too, are anointed priests and kings. 
Blood and oil were, as we have seen, used 
in the act of consecration. Our Lord, 
therefore, having purchased us and washed 
us in His blood, hath anointed us to be 
kings and priests unto God and His 
Father by the renewing of the Holy 
Ghost, “which He shed on us _ abun- 
dantly.” Hast thou experienced it, my 
reader? Or is this the bitter lack of thy 
life? Ah, there is no favouritism or par- 


118 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


tiality with our God! That anointing is 
thine in the mind and intention of God; 
it is for thee to seek it, to appropriate it, 
and to allow it to be the one blessed con- 
sciousness of thy life; so that thou mayst 
be able to adopt the apostle’s unhesitat- 
ing assurance: “He which stablisheth us 
with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, 
is God; who hath also sealed us, and 
given the earnest of the Spirit in our 
hearts.” 

Let us never attempt to perform the 
work of priests in offering the sacrifice of 
praise or prayer or devotion without having 
sought for and obtained a fresh anointing. 
And let us be sure that it will be impossi- 
ble for us to exercise any kingly function, 
—ruling over our inner-nature, or sitting 
in conscious royalty with Christ on His 
throne, — unless we are perpetually con- 
scious of the anointing grace of the blessed 
Holy Spirit. 


“THOU ANOINTEST MY HEAD.” I19 


It is our privilege to be anointed with fresh 
owl (Ps. xcii. 10). Such was the glad assur- 
ance of the man after God’s own heart. 
There is nothing stale in God’s household 
economy. We do not need to live on dried 
fruits because winter has stripped the trees. 
The power and joy of other days should 
be no subject for lingering regret; for our 
gracious Host is able and willing to do as 
much for us, and more also, on each succeed- 
ing day of our life as in any day of the past. 
Sigh not for the grace of a day that is fled as 
if it will never come back. There are eternal 
stores and reservoirs of golden oil in God’s 
olive-trees, which shall pour down the golden 
pipes of faith, ministering nutriment to the 
lamp of holy living ; so that it shall not flicker 
throughout the long night, but even grow in 
brilliance and radiating glory (Zech. iv. 12). 
Claim each morning to be anew anointed, — 
and with fresh oil. 

These anointings will make us glad. Itis 


120 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


“the oil of gladness.” ‘How great is His 
goodness, and how great is His beauty! corn 
shall make the young men cheerful, and new 
wine the maids.” “Oil to make the face to 
shine.” ‘Let Asher be blessed, and let him 
dip his foot in oil.” The need of the world 
is — shining faces; glad smiles; hopeful 
words ; cheering toilers through the night ; 
and feet elastic with joy, as if bathed in its 
very fullness. To be without these is to miss 
the seal of sonship, which shall most surely 
authenticate it before the eyes of all men, 
and to become a standing libel on the gospel 
of Christ. But if only we acquire them, — 
as we most certainly shall when we are daily 
anointed by the Holy Ghost, — our fellows 
will be attracted by something in our de- 
meanour or looks which they cannot emulate 
or understand; and they will ask us to tell 
them the secret of a joy which the world can- 
not touch because its springs are hidden in a 
land where winter’s frost is unknown. 


‘““THOU ANOINTEST MY HEAD.” I2I 


These anotntings will teach us as no human 
teacher could. “Ye need not that any man 
teach you,’ wrote the beloved disciple to 
his little children: “but the same anointing 
teacheth you of all things.” Fret and im- 
patience are often connected with the attain- 
ment of earthly learning from the lips of 
human instructors; and often we miss the 
things we would most like to know. But 
there is nothing like this with our God. All 
His children are conscious that when He 
teaches them their peace is great. No one 
instructs as He does. And when He under- 
takes the tuition of the soul, there is no item 
in all the sacred lore of heavenly divinity 
which is omitted. 

The effect of these anointings will be abiding. 
“The anointing which ye received of Him 
abideth in you.” Food which we have eaten 
abides in us, and when we are quite uncon- 
scious of its presence it is doing its work in 
building up the fabric of our being. In some 


122 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


such way it must happen that the effect of a 
mighty spiritual blessing does not pass away 
with the moment of its first advent to the 
soul; but it abides. And amid the pressure 
of daily circumstance and toil and engage- 
ment, when the mind seems too set on its 
necessary work to have leisure for upward 
springing, then the Spirit will pursue His 
chosen office of ministering grace and strength 
within. In other words, we receive benefit 
from the anointing of the Holy Ghost long 
after the immediate moment of receiving it ; 
the fragrance still clings about our garments, 
the mollifying softness still lingers on our 
face. 

Let us never rest satisfied with anything 
less than that indefinable and sacred grace 
called “unction.”” We cannot analyse it or 
understand why it effects what learning and 
eloquence fail to accomplish. But we detect 
it when it is present, we miss it when absent. 
. With this the slightest words strike home 


“THOU ANOINTEST MY HEAD.” 123 


to the hearers’ hearts as the message of God. 
Without it the most eloquent sentences are 
like unfeathered arrows, which fall useless at 
the archer’s feet. Withhold what Thou wilt, 
O God, but give us the unction— z.¢., the 
anointing —of the Holy Spirit! “Thou 
anointest my head with oil.” “Lord, not 
my head only, but also my hands and my 
geet}! 


X. 


THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 
“My cup runneth over.” 


LAD and festal moments come to the 

saddest and most weary hearts. At 
the close of a prolonged strain of anxiety, 
when lying exhausted on the desert sand, 
sleep casts its spell over the tired nature; 
angels spread the refreshing banquet; and 
the soul awakes beneath the celestial touch, 
invigorated for new toils. 

We cannot always tell whence such experi- 
ences come; this is all we know: that the 
step is more elastic, the heart swells with 
buoyant hope, songs break from the lips, and 


the whole being thrills, as nature does on 
124 


THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 125 


some lovely day of spring. ‘When the Lord 
turns again our captivity, the mouth is filled 
with laughter, and the tongue with singing: 
then we say among the heathen, The Lord 
hath done great things for us; whereof we 
are glad.” 

At such hours life seems to us like a 
chalice mixed by the loving hand of God, 
and overflowing with His mercy and loving- 
kindness. And with tears struggling with 
smiles for the mastery, as rain and sunbeams 
on an April day, we lift the brimming cup to 
our lips and cry, “ My cup runneth over.” 

A similar experience is unfolded in an- 
other psalm, which, like so many of its charac- 
ter, touches the lowest depths and springs, as 
well as the topmost heights of human experi- 
ence. It begins with the plaintive notes of 
trouble, “the sorrows of death, and the pains 
of hell,” and with rash imputations upon the 
truth of all men. It tells how in his need 
the psalmist called upon the name of the 


126 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Lord. It recounts the glorious deliverance 
there was wrought on his behalf. And now, 
as he reviews his lot, it seems like a cup full 
of salvation, charged with the prompt, gentle, 
and sufficient deliverance wrought for him by 
the Almighty (Ps. cxvi. 12, 13). 

We have nothing to say now about the 
texture of life’s cups. They may be of gold 
or silver or tin or alabaster or glass. There 
is an infinite variety in the raw material of 
which our lives are made. We have to deal 
only with ingredients, which will taste as 
sweet from the earthen mug as from the 
golden goblet. And, after all, the great 
differences that come to men’s lives are much 
more in their contents than in their outward 
seeming. Cease looking disconsolately on 
the outside of thy cup and platter, but look 
thankfully on the contents, which may be 
sweeter and richer for thee, albeit that they 
are held in a cup of common texture, than 
are the contents of other lives which thou 


THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 127 


dost envy, not knowing how bitter is the 
draught contained within. 

It becomes us to remember that “the cup of 
blessing” of which we drink was once filled 
with a bitter curse. We read in Scripture of 
the cup of trembling and of the cup of God’s 
wrath; and as we read the words we know 
that our lives might well have been filled 
with trembling and with wrath, as the just 
reward of our deeds; not that God is vindic- 
tive, or that He rejoices in the death of the 
sinner ; but that His holy nature cannot but 
be roused into antagonism whenever He 
comes into contact with evil and impurity. 
If we had been left to drink the bitter re- 
sults of our sin, it would have been as when 
Moses ground the calf to powder and strewed 
it upon the waters, and made the people 
drink. And if it be asked how it is that we 
have escaped so bitter an experience, the 
answer is given in His words who has pleaded 
the cause of His people: “Behold, I have 


128 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, 
even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou 
shalt no more drink it again.” And when 
He took it out of our hands, He poured its 
contents into the cup mixed for Himself, 
returning it to us emptied even to the dregs ; 
nay, better, filled with the wine of His love 
and life ; while He drank our potion of wrath 
and woe. 

Remember His own words in the garden, 
when His agony had passed and the ruffian 
band was about to bind Him, and Peter im- 
petuously and characteristically drew his 
sword: “Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put 
up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which 
my Father hath given me, shall I not drink 
ite 

Consider the ingredients of Christ’s cup, 
—the shame and spitting; the pain and 
anguish; the physical torture; and, above 
all, the bitterness of our sins, which were 
made to meet in Him; the guilt of our 


THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 129 


curse, which He voluntarily assumed; the 
equivalent of our punishment, which was 
imputed to Him. If we may so put it, 
the human race stood in one long line, each 
with a cup of hemlock in his hand; and 
Christ passed along, took from each his 
cup and poured its contents into the vast 
beaker which He carried; so that on the 
cross He “tasted death for every man.” 
Thus our lives brim with salvation, because 
His brimmed with condemnation. Our cup 
is one of joy, because His cup was one of 
sorrow. Our cup is one of blessedness, be- 
cause His was one of God-forsakenness. 

Oh, that we might in our moments of 
gladness imitate the blessed in heaven, who, 
amid their greatest joys, ever associate their 
happiness with the death of Christ! Never 
forget the cost at which your brightest mo- 
ments have been made possible. 


130 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


LET US ENUMERATE SOME OF THE INGREDI- 
ENTS OF OUR LIFE-CUP. 


1. Good health is one of the chief. A 
man might have everything calculated to 
promote human happiness, but if all were 
tinged with the pain and weariness of con- 
stant illness, what joy could he have? Our 
sad days, when all surrounding objects are 
draped in sombre hues, are, as often as not, 
due to bodily weakness ; and the ecstasy of 
our glad days, when sunny light lies upon 
the lawn of life, is generally coincident with 
a sense of vigorous health. If, then, your 
life-cup seems sweet and refreshing to your 
taste, you may calculate pretty shrewdly 
that good health is a main ingredient ; though 
we can form no estimate of its importance 
until it is withdrawn. 

2. Then there are human friendships and 
affections, the absence of which makes the 
greatest prosperity a dreary desert, so that 


THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 131 


even golden streets blister and weary the 
feet as if they were arid sands; but whose 
presence will gladden the meanest lot, so 
that even a garden of herbs will gleam with 
the glow of heaven. 

3. There are also the comforts of home life, 
to say nothing of the necessaries. What a 
rich admixture of these do most of us enjoy! 
Soft pillows, carpeted floors, warm, weather- 
tight rooms, likewise furniture rich and 
plentiful; and variety of food, sufficient and 
comely garments, attendants who save us 
from harder and rougher toil. The Stoic 
may discipline himself to do without many 
of these things, and may even try to convince 
us that life is easier without than with them ; 
but, nevertheless, it is undeniable that much 
of the enjoyment of our daily lives arises 
from the presence of these amenities to 
which we have become habituated by long 
custom and use. 

4. There are also the joys of the mind. 


132 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Each can draw up from the crypt of the past 
the treasure in which lies the learning of the 
ancient and modern world; each can collect 
the thoughts of poets and philosophers flung 
upon the strand of time as driftweed on the 
beach, torn by storms from ocean depths; 
each can search out and drink in the wonders 
and beauties of nature from the wild-flowers 
of the forest glade. 


“ And those outlying worlds of many mooned spheres ; 
And that great store of stars more thickly strown in 
yonder sky 
Than dust upon the pale leaves of the auricula.” 


5. Now and again there is a dash of extra 
sweetness poured into life’s cup, — some 
special deliverance, some unlooked-for in- 
terposition, some undeserved and unusual 
benediction, — sent apparently for no other 
object than to satisfy God’s passion for giv- 
ing.. And here I must renounce my task, — 
no human pencil can describe all that God 


THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 133 


pours into the lot of our life; many of the 
constituents are too subtle for detection ; 
many are too divine for comprehension ; 
many are too numerous for computation. 
Besides, no life-cup is mixed in quite the 
same proportions. Our Father carefully 
studies our constitution, and then suits His 
preparation to our need; and since we are 
infinitely various in our make, there is an in- 
finite diversity in the draughts which He sets 
before us on the table which He spreads. 
But whatever blessing 1s in our cup, tt ts 
sure to run over. With Him the calf is 
always the fatted calf; the robe is always the 
best robe ; the joy is unspeakable; the peace 
passeth understanding ; the grace is so abun- 
dant that the recipient has all-sufficiency for 
all things, and abounds in every good work. 
There is no grudging in God’s benevolence ; 
He does not measure out His goodness as 
the apothecary counts his drops and measures 
his drams, slowly and exactly, drop by drop. 


134 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


God’s way is alway characterised by multi- 
tudinous and overflowing bounty; like that 
in nature, which is so profuse with beauty 
and life that every drop of the ocean, and 
every square inch of the forest glade, and 
every molecule of matter teems with mar- 
vels, and defies the research and investiga- 
tion of man. Well may we each cry with 
the apostle, “I have all, and abound.” 

On the shore of one of the vast fresh- 
water lakes of America stands a humble log- 
built cabin occupied by a family of settlers 
from the old country. A little child which 
has been playing around all the morning, and 
has become tired and thirsty, goes within to 
ask its mother for water; and the mother, 
taking a cup, goes with it down to the white 
sands on which the mimic breakers dash with 
musical cadence, dips it in, and lifts it, brim- 
ming and dripping with a stream of crystal 
drops, to her darling’s lips. That is the way 
in which God deals with us. He gives to all 





THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 135 


liberally, and does not upbraid. There is 
more in Him than we can ever need; and 
He gives us more than we really can use for 
ourselves. Let us see to it that we so hold 
our cups as that their overflowings may not 
run to waste, but may drop into other cups, 
the cups of those that have not so much as 
we have. Oh, that our paths might be like 
the paths of God, which, when they drop fat- 
ness, drop upon the parched pastures of the 
wilderness, so that the little hills are girded 
about with joy, and become at last covered 
with flocks! ‘They shout for joy, they also 
sing.” 

But tt ts especially in connection with spirit- 
ual blessing that the cup most often seems to 
overfiow. This has been the experience of 
many eminent saints. In one of his sea- 
sons of rapt communion John Welch, of 
Scotland, cried, “«O Lord, hold Thy hand; it 
is enough. Thy servant is a clay vessel, and 
can contain no more!” And John Flavel 


136 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


tells us that once when he was alone on a 
journey his thoughts began to swell and rise 
higher and higher, till at last they became an 
overwhelming flood. Such was the attitude of 
his mind, such the refreshing taste of heavenly 
joys, and such the full assurance of his inter- 
est therein, that he truly lost the sight and 
sense of this world, and of the concerns 
thereof. Many years after he called that 
day one of the days of heaven, and professed 
that he understood more of the life of heaven 
by it than by all the books he ever read, or 
sermons he ever heard about it. 

Certain it is that our Lord Jesus meant us 
to have a more abiding experience of such 
joys. He not only came to give us life, but 
life more abundantly. He spake unto us His 
inimitable words, that our joy might be full. 
He meant our hearts to delight themselves 
with fatness, and ¢o be satisfied with the 
JSavour of the Lord. His ideal for us may be 
compared to those rocky basins hollowed out 


THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 137 


by a perpetual fall of water, and lined by an 
infinite variety of exquisite vegetation, into 
which the fullness of the river, fed from 
perennial springs, is ever overflowing; and 
from which the overflow is ever passing out 
in a constant stream to join the eddying cur- 
rents, to fill some lesser bowl beneath, or to 
play some part in fertilising the multitudinous 
flowers and plants which stretch out eager 
_roots to its nourishing tide. Let us not 
hoard what we have got. Let us freely per- 
mit our cups to run over. Far from us be 
the niggardliness of the miser who dares not 
give because he fears he will not get. Let 
us be prodigal and spendthrift of our wealth ; 
for we know that it is inexhaustible, being 
supplied from our Father’s hand; and one 
of the laws of His kingdom is that we re- 
ceive in the precise proportion with which 
we give. 
One last word: de sure to take the cup of 
salvation. There can be no greater slight to 


138 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


a giver than to have his gifts neglected. Yet 
how many cups God sets before us which we 
refuse to taste! Some appear to think that 
God does not mean them to be thoroughly 
happy ; and if they drink their cups of joy, it 
must be on the sly, or with words of apology. 
Some only drink half; or if they drink all 
they instil some bitter ingredient of their 
own, lest the draught should be too delicious. 
How often we forget that God has given us 
all things richly to enjoy! And when we 
are sure that He has given us aught, let us 
not shrink from taking the cup from His 
hand. Sometimes we have not because we 
are too blind to see, or too slow to take the 
cups which God is preparing for us. 

And as we drink, let us be sure to call upon 
the name of the Lord. Full often, if we dare 
to do so, we shall find that the bitter medi- 
cine which: frightens us has been suddenly 
changed into the very wine of life. There is 
an old legend of an ancient cup filled with 


THE OVERFLOWING CUP. 139 


poison, and treacherously placed into the 
king’s hand. He signed the sign of the 
cross, and named the name of God, and it 
shivered at his feet. So take the name of 
God as your test. Name it over the cups 
which allure you ere you raise them to your 
lips, be they friendships, schemes, plans, busi- 
ness. That name will either show the adder 
that lurks in their heart, as in the goblet of 
the old Egyptian feast, or it will transmute 
common things to sacramental use, and make 
ordinary cups like that which we use at the 
table of our Lord, when over it have been 
spoken those memorable words, “ This do in 
remembrance of me.” 


XI. 


THE CELESTIAL ESCORT. 


“ Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me 
All the days of my life.” 

= LL the days.” What days may not 

come? Spring days, when all the 
world shall be full of glad young life, — 
frolicking in the fields; carolling in the 
skies; bursting into leaf and flower at our 
feet. Summer days, in which the year shall 
have reached its glorious prime, with golden 
light and long-drawn-out evenings and balmy 
nights. Autumn days, when the fields shall 
be filled with sheaves of corn, while busy 
hands tear from orchard boughs and trailing 
vines and towering hot-plants the rich prod- 
uce of the year. Winter days, in which the 
foot shall tread down the crackling leaves 

140 


THE CELESTIAL ESCORT. I4!I 


that carpet the forest glade; days of mist 
and rain and sombre light, when we gather 
round the bier of the departed glory of the 
year, and lay it to the dust. 

We sometimes stand, as it were, on the 
brow of an overhanging hill, peering wonder- 
ingly into the valley at our feet, and asking 
what kind of days lie there, enveloped in the 
impenetrable mists, which only part as we 
advance. What lies in the course of the 
years? Will the days be golden, lit by 
heaven’s warm, sunny glow? Will they be 
rea-letter, not only in the usual sense of the 
word, but because stained with the blood 
of suffering. and sacrifice? Will they be 
drab, attired in sombre tints, dark and sad ? 
Birthdays ; death-days ; marriage-days ; anni- 
versaries of a dead past, which refuses to be 
forgotten ; fast-days ; feast-days ; saint-days, 
because associated with some whom we have 
known and loved as the very elect of God. 
Only a few short hours, — like the flash of a 


142 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


revolving light seen far out at sea between 
two long pauses of black darkness; or like a 
diamond set in ebony, —and yet how much 
of weal or woe, of bitter memory or eager 
foreboding, may be crowded into one brief 
space of time which we call a day! 

But there never will come a day through- 
out all the future in which we shall not have 
the two guardian angels, heavenly escorts, and 
God-sent messengers, Goodness and Mercy, 
who have been told off and commissioned to 
attend the believer during all the days of his 
earthly pilgrimage. 

When, benumbed with cold and bewildered 
with the mist which has suddenly settled 
down upon his track, the traveller across the 
highland moor sinks down exhausted on the 
drenched herbage, what an infinite comfort 
it is, through a momentary rent in the mist, 
to get a glimpse of the plaided figure of a 
shepherd close beside him; or to discover 
two servants from the distant paternal home, 


THE CELESTIAL ESCORT. 143 


sent out to scour the hills in search of the 
missing one, and to bring him safely to its 
shelter and warmth! But it is in some such 
way as this that the eye of the believer may 
detect, in moments of weariness and solitude, 
the presence of those twin angels of God, 
Goopness and MERcy. 

We have never seen angels like the two 
that came to Sodom; nor even their effigies, 
like the two angelic forms which bent over 
the ark in the inner shrine of the holy tent. 
But we can imagine their pure faces, their 
ethereal forms, their gentle ways. But here 
is something better than angel help: the 
personified attributes of God, Hzs goodness, 
ffis mercy ; that is, Himself, in all the ten- 
derest manifestations of His love and pity 
towards men. 

Goodness AND Mercy. Not goodness alone, 
for we are sinners needing forgiveness. Not 
mercy alone, for we need many things besides 
forgiveness. But each with the other linked. 


144 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Goodness to supply every want, mercy to for- 
give every sin; goodness to provide, mercy 
to pardon. David often links these two to- 
gether, as when he says, “ The Lord is good ; 
His mercy is everlasting.” What shall we 
say of these blessed attributes? Take Good- 
ness. It is laid up in vast reservoirs in the 
nature of God; prepared for the poor, the 
food of the hungry, the lodge of the right- 
eous, the crown of the year, the very sun of 
life. “Oh, taste and see that the Lord is 
good.” 

“ How great is. His goodness, and how 
great is His beauty!” 

Take Mercy. She is the daughter of God: 
His delight —“ He delighteth in mercy;” 
His wealth — “He is rich in mercy;” His 
throne — “J well commune with thee from off 
the mercy seat.” Who shall count the rays 
that sparkle from this jewel! Tender, plen- 
teous, sure, everlasting. Truly our Lord 
might say, “ Your Father is merciful.” 


THE CELESTIAL ESCORT. 145 


And they shall fo//ow. In the East the 
shepherd always goes in front. And our 
Good Shepherd never puts us forth to the 
work or warfare of any day without going 
before us. But His shepherd dogs bring up 
the rear. We have a rear-guard against the 
attack of our treacherous foes. We have 
two strong helpers to lift us from tier to tier 
of the pyramid of life, keeping us from falling 
backward, whispering words of comfort, and 
placing strong hands under our arms in cir- 
cumstances of difficulty and stumbling. 

In that word “follow” is it possible that 
there is a suggestion that we are going away 
from God, and that He sends His goodness 
and mercy after us to call us back? It may 
be so. Ifa prodigal leaves a widowed mother 
for the sea, she never forgets him; her 
prayers and tears and loving thoughts follow 
him ; and to win him back she sends out 
only the tenderest yearnings of a heart al- 
most crushed. Even so with God and His 


146 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


own; they may wander from Him, but He 
follows them, He sets Goodness and Mercy 
on their track. Sometimes it seems as if 
disaster on disaster, stroke on stroke, pur- 
sues them; but it is not really so. Things 
are not always as they seem. And these are 
but the disguises which Goodness and Mercy 
assume; their outer garb, protecting the deli- 
cate woollen garments which are prepared 
for the weary head and tired limbs of the 
wearied, wandering, starved, and ragged 
prodigal. He will not break off His kind- 
ness, nor suffer His faithfulness to fail, nor 
forsake the works of His hands, for “His 
mercy endureth for ever.” 

You have only to turn round, or to swoon 
backward, and you will find yourself caught 
in the arms of God’s goodness and mercy, 
which are following you always. You may 
not realise that they are near ; you may feel 
lonely and sad and desolate; it may be one 
of your bad days, sunless and dreary, without 


THE CELESTIAL ESCORT. 147 


a ray of comfort or a flash of hope, surrounded 
by objects and forms of dread. Yet there, 
close by you, evident to God’s angels, though 
veiled from your faithless sight, stand the 
glorious, loving, pitying forms of God’s in- 
finite goodness, which cannot fail, and His 
tender mercy. They will spread you a table 
in the desert as they did for Elijah; or they 
will flash through the storm and stand beside 
you, bidding you fear not, as they did for 
Paul. 
‘* Though unperceived by mortal sense, 
Faith sees them always near, 
A Guide, a Glory, a Defence: 
Then what have you to fear?” 


And in such hopes there need be no ele- 
ment of doubt. <“ Surely,” says the psalmist. 
Why so sure? Because God is God, un- 
changeable and everlasting ; He cannot with- 
draw what He has once given. If we believe 
not, He abideth faithful; He cannot deny 
Himself. His gifts are without repentance. 


148 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


The Giver of every good and perfect gift is 
also the Father of lights, with whom can be 
no variation, neither shadow cast by turning. 
And when once He has begun to follow us 
in goodness and mercy, we may wander from 
His paths and neglect His love and do de- 
spite to His Spirit, ignore the presence of 
His messengers, and bid them begone; and 
yet they will not remove. They may follow 
at a greater distance, but they will follow still, 
never satisfied till they have won us back to 
Himself. 

Surely, because God has never failed in the 
past. Swrely, because it would not become 
Him to take in hand and not complete. 
Surely, because He has pledged Himself by 
exceeding great and precious promises. 
Surely, because the united testimony of all 
His saints attests that He never fails or for- 
sakes. Szuvely, because if He has set His 
love on us in eternity, He is not likely to for- 
get us in time. So surely shall never a day 


THE CELESTIAL ESCORT. 149 


come in our earthly pilgrimage in which God 
shall not be at our side in goodness and 
mercy. 

Instead of surely, some commentators 
make it only. ‘Only goodness and mercy 
shall follow me.” Just as in the Seventy- 
third Psalm they read, “God is good, and 
only good,” — nothing but good, — “to Israel, 
even to such as are of a clean heart.” It 
may be so; and it is certainly a fact that 
God’s dealings with us are never anything 
less than good and merciful. They may not 
seem so; but it is sometimes a greater test 
of love to withhold than to give; to deny 
than to consent ; to take away than to crowd 
the bosom full of overflowing benefits. 

Fearful and fainting hearts, dreading the 
dark way alone, take heart; gird yourselves 
with new courage; lift up the hands which 
hang down, and confirm the feeble knees! 
God knows how many days of life remain; 
He knows their needs, their temptations, and 


I50 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


their sorrows ; and He pledges Himself that 
as the day, so shall be the strength ; that the 
day shall never come which shall be un- 
blessed with His goodness and mercy; and 
that He Himself, in the person of the blessed 
Lord, will be with us all the days, “even 
unto the end of the age.” 


XII. 
“THE HOUSE OF THE LORD FOR EVER.” 


HE passing of the years awakens in 

our hearts the cry for permanence. Our 
nature is keyed, not to the temporal, but to 
the eternal. And as we see the leaves fall- 
ing before the autumn winds or littering the 
forest glade down which we walk in the short 
winter days, as the changes of the natural 
world compel us to remember the still greater 
ones which are ever carrying us out of the 
familiar world of our past into one as strange 
and undiscovered as the new world to which 
Columbus sailed, there arises up within us a 
passionate desire for a home which death can- 
not invade; friendships which time cannot 
impair; chaplets of never-withering flowers ; 

Ist 


152 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


and a condition of existence which is imper- 
vious to change. 

This permanence for which we wait seems 
promised in the words with which the shep- 
herd minstrel closes the psalm, which are 
simple as the words “home” and “ mother,” 
and quite as full of meaning. The course of 
the psalm is as full of change as life itself. 
Every sentence is a word-picture, painting in 
strong and vivid outlines some new scene in 
our earthly pilgrimage. But here the troubled 
stream, broken over many a stone, driven to 
and fro in many a sinuous bend, seems to fall 
into the great deep of the ocean, eternity, 
the music of whose waves, as they break on 
the shores of time, is always in the same 
sweet monotone, “ Forever.” 

No doubt the changes of our mortal life 
are all needed to fit us for the changeless. 
Time is the necessary vestibule or robing- 
room for eternity. Earth is the training- 
house for the real life which awaits us when 


“THE HOUSE OF THE LORD.” 153 


the last lesson is learned and the school-bell 
rings. But all that is, and has been, and 
shall be, is just completing our character, 
adding finishing touches to our symmetry ; 
and all shall be forgotten, as a dream of the 
night, when once we have entered on that 
eternity, which is permanent in the sense of 
never taking from us any of our true posses- 
sions, except to complete them; or in the 
same way that the seed is taken away, when 
from it is developed a higher and ever higher 
growth. 

But better than the thought of perma- 
nence is the thought that heaven is a HOME, 
—it is “the house of the Lord,’ which is 
the nearest approach possible in the Old 
Testament to the words of Jesus: “In my 
Father's house are many mansions.” 

What a magic power there is in that word 
“home!” It will draw the wanderer from 
the ends of the earth. It will nerve sailor 
and soldier and explorer to heroic endurance. 


154 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


It will melt with its dear memories the hard- 
ened criminal. It will bring a film of tears 
over the eyes of the man of the world. What 
will not a charwoman do or bear if only she 
can keep her little home together? 


“ Be it ever so humble, 
There’s no place like home.” 


And what is our great Christmas festival 
but the festival of home? Homes which 
have sprung into existence at the summons 
of One who was homeless fitly celebrate their 
anniversary on His natal day. 

And what is it that makes the idea of 
home so fond? Not the mere locality, or 
the bricks and mortar; the gardens where 
childhood used to hide; the furniture which 
is associated with tender memories, — any of 
which the sight of it will immediately educe. 
No; it is not these that make home. These, 
without the beloved forms which used to oc- 
cupy them, would be a solitude in which the 


“THE HOUSE OF THE LORD.” 155 


survivor would find it impossible to remain. 
We find our home where father, mother, 
brothers, and sisters, the wife, and children 
are; where the presence of the stranger 
throws no shadow over the unrestrained 
play of family life. 

Now let us turn our thoughts to that 
heaven of which we know comparatively 
so little, except that our Good Shepherd is 
gone thither; and see what light is thrown 
upon it by the comparison instituted here 
between it and home. It is surely home 
in the sense of its happy social life. We 
shall be as free in the presence of God as 
children are in the presence of the father 
and mother whom they tenderly love. We 
shall know each other as well, and converse 
with each other as freely, as we have done 
with the merry throng of bright young 
hearts with whom we have sauntered in the 
woodlands gathering wild-flowers; or have 
gathered around the blazing fire, when the 


156 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


yule log crackled and the Christmas glee 
was at its height. Think of the large family 
of noble children of all ages, — from the little 
child of six up to the young man just begin- 
ning his professional or city life in the great 
metropolis, —all gathering to spend a time 
together in the ancestral hall, standing amid 
its far-reaching grounds; and you will have 
some faint conception of what the home- 
going will be, when, amid the welcoming 
shouts and songs of angel harps, the last 
child reaches the Father’s house, and the 
whole family in heaven and earth is gathered 
in the Father’s house for ever and for ever. 
Never again to part! Never again to go 
out! Never again to break up the long, 
happy, and glorious home festival! 

These words may be read by lonely ones 
in all parts of the world, over whom there 
steals at times a strange homesickness : 


“Oh for the touch of a vanished hand, 
‘ And the sound of a voice that is still!” 


“THE HOUSE OF THE LORD.” 157 


“Oh, to be little children again, and to have 
others providing for our comfort and our joy, 
instead of having to fend for ourselves, and 
to be the source of all to others!” And 
mingling with such natural back-yearnings 
there may be the tears of recent bereave- 
ment; the thought of graves so new that 
the flowers have not had time to root them- 
selves in the fresh soil. 

Come, it will not do for us to indulge 
thoughts like these! They unfit us for the 
stern realities of life. They unnerve us. 
Let us not dwell on them. If the paradise 
of the past is Jost, so that an angel stands 
with drawn sword forbidding our return, 
there is another and a better paradise be- 
fore us, at whose gates beckoning angels 
stand, — the paradise of our Father’s home. 
Let us not think of separation, but of re- 
union. In olden days the crews of outgoing 
vessels, till they reached the line, used to 
toast friends behind; but as soon as they 


158 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


had passed it, they began to toast Friends 
before. Let us set our thoughts on the 
friends before us, who, thank God, are those 
whom “we have loved long since and lost 
awhile.” 

Blessed are the homesick, for they shall 
reach home. 

There is great certainty in these words. 
The psalmist has no doubt that he will be 
there. Yet he had been a wandering sheep ; 
his record by no means stainless; his temper 
rather that of a man of war and blood than 
that of peace and gentleness and love, which 
would befit the meek denizen of heaven. 
How should he come there? And what 
made him so sure? He doubtless felt that 
the Good Shepherd could not be there while 
the sheep was bleating piteously without. 
“Where I am, there ye shall be also.” And 
we have a yet more sure word of promise 
to which we may joyfully take heed as to 
a light which shines in a dark place. 


““THE HOUSE OF THE LORD.” 159 


Because we have trusted Christ and are 
one with Him; because we have received 
into our hearts the germ of eternal life, 
which carries with it heaven in embryo; 
because we have the earnest of our inheri- 
tance already in the presence and witness of 
the Holy Ghost ; because God’s promise and 
oath assure us of our eternal blessedness, 
two things which make disappointment im- 
possible, —for all these reasons and others 
the humblest, most timid, and weakest be- 
liever that reads these lines may dare affirm, 
“JT will dwell in the house of the Lord 
for ever.” 

There seems to have been a sense in which 
David enjoyed heaven before he got there. 
To him the Lord’s house was not simply a 
thing in the future, but a possibility for the 
present. In another psalm he talks of dwell- 
ing in the secret place of the Most High, 
and in yet another he employs the noble 
words, “One thing have I desired of the 


160 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


Lord, that will I seek after; that I may 
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of 
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, 
and to inquire in Histemple.” The French 
version of Dr. Segond is so beautiful that I 
am compelled to quote it also: “ Je demande 
al Eternel une chose, que je desire ardemment. 
Je voudrats habiter toute ma vie dans la mat- 
son de l'’Eternel, pour contempler la magnifi- 
cence de l’ Eternel et pour admirer son temple” 
(Ps. xxvii. 4). But this man was full of royal 
business ; he could not literally dwell in the 
sacred courts, for which he pined more than 
hart ever panted for water brooks, or doves 
for their cotes. 

Yet can we doubt that his fervent prayer 
was answered, and that the fixed purpose of 
his heart reached its ideal? There was, no 
doubt, a sense in which, whether at home in 
the palace of Mount Zion, or away in the 
desolate wastes beyond Jordan, he did dwell 
in the house of the Lord, beholding His 


“THE HOUSE OF THE LORD.” 161 


beauty and inquiring His will. What is 
the house of God but the presence of God, 
habitually recognised by the loving and be- 
lieving spirit ; all-encompassing, all-envelop- 
ing, all-pervasive, like the genial atmosphere 
of spring ? 

Why should not we also begin to live in the 
house of God, in this hallowed and blessed 
sense? Our heaven may thus date, not from 
the moment in which we first “enter the 
gates of the city,” but from that in which we 
first wash our robes and make them white in 
the blood of the Lamb. Always and every- 
where we may find our dwelling-place in God, 
who has been the home and refuge and abid- 
ing-place of His people in all generations. 
Always and everywhere we may retreat into 
Him from the windy storm and tempest. 
Always and everywhere we may make His 
nature not only our fortress and strong tower, 
but our oratory, our temple. May the Holy 
Spirit make real to each of us this possibility 


162 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


of living in the house of the Lord hourly 
and daily ; where all tears are wiped as soon 
as shed; whither cares cannot invade; and 
where the Good Shepherd leads His flocks 
ever into green pastures, so that they cannot 
hunger ; and beside still waters, so that they 
cannot thirst ; and in cool, deep glens, so that 
the sun cannot smite by day, nor the moon 
by night! Heaven before we reach heaven ! 

Let us see to tt that we live on this heavenly 
level. There are many possible levels on 
which we may elect to live. That, for in- 
stance, of the church to which we belong, or 
the Christian society in which we mix. The 
conventional level of doing what others do, 
and being content with an average mediocrity. 
This, however, ill becomes those who follow 
on to apprehend that for which Jesus Christ 
once apprehended them. 

But there are two other levels which es- 
pecially claim our thought, and between 
which we must make our choice: there is 


“THE HOUSE OF THE LORD.” 163 


the level of our standing in Jesus Christ, 
and there is the level of our experience or 
emotional life. According to the first we 
have already passed through death to the 
resurrection and ascension side, and are al- 
ready seated in the golden light which beats 
around the throne of Jesus. According to 
the other, which fluctuates with every at- 
mospheric or physical change, we are now 
lifted on the crest of the billow into the sunny 
air, and anon flung, weary and broken, on 
the sand, from which the waves have ebbed, 
leaving us beyond their reach. 

The one is the level on which God means 
us to live. The other is that which we have 
selected for ourselves, — and a sorry change 
it is! What wonder that we are so disap- 
pointed and disheartened! We have put the 
bitter for the sweet; the temporal for the 
eternal; the fluctuating and transient for 
God’s unmoved and unmovable foundation, 
which is changeless as His love. 


164 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


It is a serious question for each one to 
ask, What is the level of my life? Is it 
mine, or my neighbour’s, or God’s? Am I 
living as a risen and ascended one, behind 
whom is sin and death, while above is the 
uncreated light of eternity?” Alas! so 
many of us are levelling our appreciation of 
our standing down to the lowness of our expe- 
rience, instead of seeking to level our experi- 
ence and practice up to the height of our 
standing in Jesus! 

Now faith, when in proper exercise, does 
two things. First, it reckons that.a position 
belongs to it which we do not feel, but which 
it dares to claim on the warrant of God’s 
Word. Second, it lays hold on the power 
of God to make that position a reality in 
daily and hourly experience. 

We do not always feel that we are where 
the burning words of the apostle declare us 
to be. In Romans vi. Ephesians ii., and 
Colossians iii., he affirms that we are risen 


“THE HOUSE OF THE LORD.” 165 


and enthroned, regnant with Jesus, while 
His foes and ours are beneath our feet. But 
faith lays hold of these clear teachings of the 
Word of God and dares to call feeling a liar, 
while it holds God’s Word as truth. Yea, 
and faith goes further. Constantly it lays 
hold on the almighty power of God, the 
power that raised Jesus from the grave of 
Joseph to set Him at the right hand of the 
Majesty in the heavens. And in the might 
of that power it walks across the unstable 
wave and climbs the steeps of air, and holds 
its own, its position as on the throne, against 
all the assaults of hell. It is impossible to 
live the ascension or heavenly life, which is 
certainly ours, without ascension and divine 
power. But that is within the reach of an 
appropriating faith (Eph. i. 19). 

It is very needful for us to invoke the aid 
of the Holy Spirit to maintain us ever in this 
attitude of surrender and faith, drawing down 

‘into our lives God’s constant grace. He is 


166 THE SHEPHERD PSALM. 


the Spirit of memory, who preserves us in a 
continual state of recollection, and who 
prompts us at the hour of temptation, “ bring- 
ing all things to our remembrance.”’ 

And if only we live thus, life will pass on 
happily and usefully. Its stay will shape it- 
self into a psalm, like that which David, the 
shepherd and king, sang centuries ago. It 
may begin with the tale of the shepherd’s 
care for a lost and truant sheep. But it will 
not stay ever on that level ; it will mount and 
soar and sing near heaven’s gate; it will. 
spend its days on the level of those shining 
table-lands where God Himself is Sun; and 
it will finally pass into that holy and glorious 
home circle, each inhabitant of which may 
affirm, without the least shadow of presump- 
tion or of fear, “I will dwell in the house of 
the Lord for ever.” 


THE END. 























Shepherd Psalm / 


BS1450 23d .M4 1900 
Meyer, F.B. (Frederick Brotherton), 18 


a nt 


BS Meyer, Frederick Brotherton, 1847-1929, 
1450 Shepherd psalm. New York, H.M. Caldwell 


23d C19-—?] 
M4 166p. port. 16cm. 
_1900 


‘ 


wn 


is Bible. 0.7. Pseims AXTIT=~Commentaries, 
Igy Palais. 


it a 


CCSC/mmb 






































































































































