Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



SIMPLICITY IN PEEACHING, 



A FEW SHORT HINTS ON A 
GREAT SUBJECT. . 



BY 

JOHN CHAELES KYLE, D.D., 

LORD BISHOP OF LIVERPOOL. 
Author of "Expository Thoughts on the Gospels," etc. 



-M- 



LONDON : 
WILLIAM HUNT AND COMPANY, 

12, PATEBNOSTER BOW. 

1882. 



iLf I . <Vu . \~] ^ • 



The substance of this paper was originally 
addressed, as a lecture, to a clerical audience, at 
St. Paul's Cathedral, on behalf of the Homiletical 
Society. 

For a certain roughness and abruptness of style 
I must apologize. But my readers must kindly 
remember that the lecture was spoken and not 
written, and is prepared for the press from the 
notes of a short-hand writer. 

In the hope that it may prove useful to some 
of my younger brethren in the Ministry, it is 
now published in its present form. 

J. C. Liverpool. 

October Ut, 1882. 




SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 



T7"ING SOLOMON says, in the book of 
Ecclesiastes, "Of making many books 
there is no end." (Eccles. xii. 12.) There are 
few subjects about which that saying is more 
true than that of preaching. The volumes 
which have been written in order to show 
ministers how to preach are enough to make 
a small library. In sending forth one more 
little treatise, I only propose to touch one 
branch of the subject. I do not pretend to 
consider what should be the substance and 
matter of a sermon. I purposely leave alone 
such points as "gravity, unction, liveliness, 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 



warmth/' and the like, or the comparative 
merits of written or extempore sermons. I 
wish to confine myself to one point, which 
receives far less attention than it deserves. 
That point is simplicity in language and style. 
I ought to be able to tell my readers 
something about " simplicity," if experience 
will give any help. I began preaching forty 
years ago, when I first took orders, in a poor 
rural parish, and a great portion of my 
ministerial life has been spent in preaching to 
labourers and farmers. I know the enormous 
difficulty of preaching to such hearers, of 
making them understand one's meaning, and 
securing their attention. So far as concerns 
language and composition, I deliberately say 
that I would rather preach before the Univer- 
sity at Oxford or Cambridge, or the Temple, 
or Lincoln's Inn, or the Houses of Parliament, 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 



than I would address an agricultural con- 
gregation on a fine hot afternoon in the 
month of August I have heard of a labourer 
who enjoyed Sunday more than any other 
day in the week, — " Because," he said, "I sit 
comfortably in church, put up my legs, have 
nothing to think about, and just go to 
sleep." Some of my younger friends in the 
ministry may some day be called to preach to 
such congregations as I have had, and I shall be 
glad if they can profit by my experience. 

Before entering on the subject, I wish to 
clear the way by making four prefatory 
remarks. 

(a) For one thing, I ask all my readers to 
remember that to attain simplicity in preaching 
is of the utmost importance to every minister 
who wishes to be useful to souls. Unless you 
are simple in your sermons you will never 



8 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

be understood, and unless you are understood 
you cannot do good to those who hear you. It 
was a true saying of Quintilian, " If you do 
not wish to be understood, you deserve to 
be neglected." The first object of a minister 
should be to preach the truth, the whole truth, 
and nothing but " the truth as it is in Jesus." 
But the next thing he ought to aim at is that 
his sermon may be understood; and it will 
not be understood by most of his hearers if 
it is not simple. 

(6) The next thing I will say, by way of 
prefatory remark, is, that to attain simplicity 
in preaching is by no means an easy matter. 
No greater mistake can be made than to 
suppose this. "To make hard things seem 
hard," to use the substance of a saying of 
Archbishop Usher's, "is within the reach of 
all, but to make hard things seem easy 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 9 

and intelligible is a height attained by very 
few speakers." One of the wisest and best 
of the Puritans said two hundred years ago, 
"that the greater part of preachers shoot 
over the heads of the people." This is true 
also in 1882 ! I fear a vast proportion of what 
we preach is not understood by our hearers 
any more than if it were Greek. When people 
hear a simple sermon, or read a simple tract, 
they are apt to say, "How true! how plain! how 
easy to understand," and to suppose that any 
one can write in that style. Allow me to say it 
is an extremely difficult thing to write simple, 
clear, perspicuous, and forcible English. Look 
at the sermons of Charles Bradley, of Clapham. 
A sermon of his reads most beautifully. It is so 
simple and natural, that any one feels at once 
that the meaning is as clear as the sun at 
noonday. Every word is the right word, and 



10 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

every word is in its right place. Yet the 
labour those sermons cost Mr. Bradley was very 
great indeed. Those who have read Goldsmith's 
"Vicar of Wakefield" attentively, can hardly 
fail to have noticed the exquisite naturalness, 
ease, and simplicity of its language. And yet 
it is known that the pains and trouble and 
time bestowed upon that work were immense. 
Let the "Vicar of Wakefield'* be compared with 
Johnson's "Rasselas," — which was written off 
in a few days, it is said, under high pressure, 
— and the difference is at once apparent. 
In fact, to use very long words, to seem very 
learned, to make people go away after a 
sermon, saying, " How fine ! how clever ! how 
grand ! " all this is very easy work. But to 
write what will strike and stick, to speak or 
to write that which at once pleases and is 
understood, and becomes assimilated with a 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 11 

hearer's mind and a thing never forgotten — 
that, we may depend upon it, is a very difficult 
thing and a very rare attainment. 

(c) Let me observe, in the next place, that 
when I talk of simplicity in preaching, I would 
not have my readers suppose I mean childish 
preaching. If we suppose the poor like that 
sort of sermon, we are greatly mistaken. If 
our hearers once imagine we consider them a 
parcel of ignorant folks for whom any kind 
of " infant's food " is good enough, our chance 
of doing good is lost altogether. People do 
not like even the appearance of condescending 
preaching. They feel we are not treating 
them as equals, but inferiors. Human nature 
always dislikes that. They will at once put up 
their backs, stop their ears, and take offence, 
and then we might as well preach to the winds. 

(d) Finally, let me observe that it is not 



12 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

coarse or vulgar preaching that is needed. 
It is quite possible to be simple, and yet to 
speak like a gentleman, and with the de- 
meanour of a courteous and refined person. 
It is an utter mistake to imagine that 
uneducated and illiterate men and women 
prefer to be spoken to in an illiterate way, and 
by an uneducated person. To suppose that a 
lay-evangelist or Scripture-reader, who knows 
nothing of Latin or Greek, and is only familiar 
with his Bible, is more acceptable than an 
Oxford first-class man, or a Cambridge wrangler 
(if that first-class man knows how to preach), is 
a complete error. People only tolerate vulgarity 
and coarseness, as a rule, when they can get 
nothing else. 

Having made these prefatory remarks in 
order to clear the way, I will now proceed to 
give my readers five brief hints as to what 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 13 

seems to me the best method of attaining 
simplicity in preaching. 

I. My first hint is this: If you want to 

attain simplicity in preaching, take care that 

you have a clear view of the subject upon 

which you are going to preach. I ask your 

special attention to this. Of all the five 

hints I am about to give, this is the most 

important. Mind, then, when your text is 

chosen, that you understand it and see right 

through it ; that you know precisely what you 

want to prove, what you want to teach, what 

you want to establish, and what you want 

people's minds to carry away. If you yourself 

begin in a fog, you may depend upon it you 

will leave your people in darkness. Cicero, 

one of the greatest ancient orators, said long 

ago, — " No one can possibly speak clearly and 

B 



14 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

eloquently about a subject which he does not 
understand/' — and I am satisfied that he 
spoke the truth. Archbishop Whateley was 
a very shrewd observer of human nature, and 
he said rightly of a vast number of preachers, 
that "they aimed at nothing, and they hit 
nothing. Like men landing on an unknown 
island, and setting out on a journey of explora- 
tion, they set out in ignorance, and travelled 
on in ignorance all the day long." 

I ask all young ministers especially, to 
remember this first hint. I repeat most 
emphatically, " Take care you thoroughly 
understand your subject. Never choose a 
text of which you do not quite know what 
it means. 1 ' Beware of taking obscure passages 
such as those which are to be found in unful- 
filled and emblematic prophecies. If a man 
will continually preach to an ordinary congre- 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 15 

gation about the seals and vials and trumpets 
in Revelation, or about Ezekiel's temple, or 
about predestination, free will, and the eternal 
purposes of God, it will not be at all surprising 
to any reasonable mind if he fails to attain 
simplicity. I do not mean that these subjects 
ought not to be handled occasionally, at fit 
times, and before a suitable audience. All 
I say is, that they are very deep subjects, 
about which wise Christians often disagree, 
and it is almost impossible to make them 
very simple. We ought to see our subjects 
plainly, if we wish to make them simple, and 
there are hundreds of plain subjects to be 
found in God's Word. 

Beware, for the same reason, of taking up 
what I call fanciful subjects and accom- 
modated texts, and then dragging out of 
them meanings which the Holy Ghost never 



16 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 



intended to put into them. There is no 
subject needful for the soul's health which is 
not to be found plainly taught and set forth 
in Scripture. This being the case, I think a 
preacher should never take a text and extract 
from it, as a dentist would a tooth from the 
jaw, something which, however true in itself, 
is not the plain literal meaning of the inspired 
words. The sermon may seem very glittering 
and ingenious, and his people may go away 
saying, " What a clever parson we have got ! " 
But if, on examination, they can neither find 
the sermon in the text, nor the text in the 
sermon, their minds are perplexed, and they 
begin to think the Bible is a deep book which 
cannot be understood. If you want to attain 
simplicity, beware of accommodated texts. 

When I speak of accommodated tenets, let 
me explain what I mean. I remember hearing 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 17 

of a minister in a northern town, who was 
famous for preaching in this style. Once he 
gave out for his text, "He that is so im- 
poverished that he hath no oblation, chooseth 
unto him a tree that will not rot (Isa. xl. 20). 
"Here," said he, "is man by nature impoverished 
and undone. He has nothing to offer, in order 
to make satisfaction for his soul. And what 
ought he to do ? He ought to choose a tree 
which cannot rot, even the cross of our Lord 
Jesus Christ." — On another occasion, being 
anxious to preach on the doctrine of in- 
dwelling sin, he chose his text out of the 
history of Joseph and his brethren, and gave 
out the words, "The old man of whom ye 
spake, is he yet alive ? " (Gen. xliil 7). Out 
of this question he ingeniously twisted a dis- 
course about the infection of nature remaining 
in the believer, — a grand truth, no doubt, 



18 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

but certainly not the truth of the passage. 
Such instances will, I trust, be a warning to 
all my younger brethren. If you want to 
preach about the indwelling corruption of 
human nature, or about Christ crucified, you 
need not seek for such far-fetched texts as 
those I have named. If you want to be simple, 
mind you choose plain simple texts. 

Furthermore, if you wish to see through 
your subjects thoroughly, and so to attain the 
foundation of simplicity, do not be ashamed 
of dividing your sermons and stating your 
divisions. I need hardly say this is a very 
vexed question. There is a morbid dread 
of "firstly, secondly, and thirdly" in many 
quarters. The stream of fashion runs strongly 
against divisions, and I must frankly confess 
that a lively undivided sermon is much better 
than one divided in a dull, stupid, illogical 



way. Let every man be fully persuaded in 
bis own mind. He tbat can preach sermons 
which strike and stick without divisions, by all 
means let him hold on his way and persevere. 
But let him not despise his neighbour who 
divides. All I say is, if we would be simple, 
there must be order in a sermon as there is in 
an army. What wise general would mix up 
artillery, infantry, and cavalry in one confused 
mass in the day of battle ? What giver of a 
banquet or dinner would dream of putting on 
the table the whole of the viands at once, the 
soup, the fish, the entries, the joints, the salads, 
the game, the sweets, the dessert, in one huge 
dish ? Such a host would hardly be thought 
to serve his dinner well. Just so I say it is 
with sermons. By all means let there be order 
—order, whether you bring out your " firstly, 
secondly, or thirdly," or not — order, whether 



20 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

your divisions are concealed or expressed — 
order so carefully arranged that your points 
and ideas shall follow one another in beautiful 
regularity, like regiments marching past before 
the Queen on a review day in Windsor Park. 

For my own part, I honestly confess that I 
do not think I have preached two sermons in 
my life without divisions. I find it of the 
utmost importance to make people under- 
stand, remember, and carry away what I say, 
and I am certain that divisions help me to do 
so. They are, in fact, like hooks and pegs 
and shelves in the mind. If you study the 
sermons of men who have been and are suc- 
cessful preachers, you will always find order, 
and often divisions, in their sermons. I am 
not a bit ashamed to say that I often 
read the sermons of Mr. Spurgeon. I like 
to gather hints about preaching from all 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 21 

quarters. David did not ask about the sword 
of Goliath, Who made it ? who polished it ? 
what blacksmith forged it ? He said, " There 
is nothing like it;" for he had once used it to 
cut off its owner's head. Mr. Spurgeon can 
preach most ably, and he proves it by keeping 
his enormous congregation together. We ought 
always to examine and analyze sermons which 
draw people together. Now when you read 
Mr. Spurgeon's sermons, note how clearly and 
perspicuously he divides a sermon, and fills 
each division with beautiful and simple ideas. 
How easily you grasp his meaning! How 
thoroughly he brings before you certain great 
truths that hang to you like hooks of steel, 
and which, once planted in your memory, you 
never forget ! My first point, then, if you 
would be simple in your preaching, is, that you 
must thoroughly understand your subject, and 



22 SIMPLICITY IN PREA.CHING. 

if you want to know whether you understand 
it, try to divide and arrange it I can only say 
for myself that I have done this ever since I 
have been a minister. For forty years I 
have kept blank MS. books in which I put 
down texts and heads of sermons for use when 
required. Whenever I get hold of a text, and 
see my way through it, I put it down and make 
a note of it. If I do not see my way through 
a text, I cannot preach on it, because I know 
I cannot be simple, and if I cannot be simple, 
I know I had better not preach at all 

IL The second hint I would give is this: 
Try to use in all your sermons, as far as you 
can, simple words. In saying this, however, I 
must explain mysel£ When I talk of simple 
words, I do not mean words of only one syllable, 
or words which are purely Saxon. I cannot in 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 23 

this matter agree with Archbishop Whateley. 
I think he goes too far in his recommendation 
of Saxon, though there is much truth in what 
he says about it. I rather prefer the saying of 
that wise old heathen Cicero, when he said 
that orators should try to use words which 
are "in daily common use 1 ' amongst the 
people. Whether the words are Saxon or 
not, or of two or three syllables, it does 
not matter so long as they are words 
commonly used and understood by the people. 
Only, whatever you do, beware of what the 
poor shrewdly call " dictionary " words, that is, 
of words which are abstract, or scientific, or 
pedantic, or complicated, or indefinite, or very 
long. They may seem very fine and sound 
very grand, but they are rarely of any use. 
The most powerful and forcible words, as a 
rule, are very short. 



Let me say one word more to confirm what 
I have stated about that common fallacy 
of the desirableness of always using Saxon 
English. I would remind you that a vast 
number of words of other than Saxon 
origin are used by writers of notorious 
simplicity. Take for instance the famous 
work of John Bunyan, and look at the 
very title of it, "The Pilgrim's Progress." 
Neither of the leading words in that title is 
Saxon. Would he have improved matters if 
he had called it " The Wayfarer's Walk " ? In 
saying this I admit freely that words of 
French and Latin origin are generally inferior 
to Saxon, and, as a rule, I should say, use 
strong pure Saxon words if you can. All I 
mean to say is, that you must not think it a 
matter of course that words cannot be good 
and simple if they are not of Saxon origin. 



In any case, beware of long words. Dr. Gee, in 
his excellent book, " Our Sermons M (Longman), 
very ably points out the uselessness of using 
long words and expressions not in common 
use. For example, be says, "Talk of happiness 
rather than of felicity, talk of almighty rather 
than omnipotent, lessen rather than diminish, 
forbidden rather than proscribed, hateful rather 
than noxious, seeming rather than apparent, 
afterwards rather than subsequently, call out 
and draw forth instead of evoke and educe." 
We all need to be pulled up sharply on these 
points. It is very well to use fine words at 
Oxford and Cambridge, before classical hearers, 
and in preaching before educated audiences. 
But depend upon it, when you preach to 
ordinary congregations, the sooner you throw 
overboard this sort of English, and use plain 
common words, the better. One thing, at all 

c 



26 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

events, is quite certain, without simple words 
you will never attain simplicity in preaching. 

III. The third hint I would offer, if you wish 
to attain simplicity in preaching, is this : take 
care to aim at a simple style of composition. 
I will try to illustrate what I mean. If you 
take up the sermons preached by that great 
J and wonderful man Dr. Chalmers, you can 
hardly fail to see what an enormous number 
of lines you meet with without coming to 
a full stop. This I cannot but regard as 
a great mistake. It may suit Scotland, 
but it will never do for England. If you 
would attain a simple style of composition, 
beware of writing many lines without coming 
to a pause, and so allowing the minds of 
your hearers to take breath. Beware of 
colons and semi-colons. Stick to commas 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 27 

and full stops, and take care to write as if you 
were asthmatical or short of breath. Never 
write or speak very long sentences or long para- 
graphs. Use stops frequently, and start again, 
and the oftener you do this the more likely 
you are to attain a simple style of composition. 
Enormous sentences full of colons, semi-colons, 
and parentheses, with paragraphs of two or 
three pages' length, are utterly fatal to simpli- 
city. We should bear in mind that preachers 
have to do with hearers and not readers, and 
that what will "read" well will not always 
"speak" well A reader of English can always 
help himself by looking back a few lines and 
refreshing his mind. A hearer of English 
hears once for all, and if he loses the thread 
of your sermon in a long involved sentence, 
he very likely never finds it again. 

Again, simplicity in your style of composi- 



tion depends very much upon the proper use 
of proverbs and epigrammatic sentences. This 
is of vast importance. Here, I think, is 
the value of much that you find in 
Matthew Henry's commentary, and Bishop 
Hall's Contemplations. There are some 
good sayings of this sort in a book not 
known so well as it should be, called " Papers 
on Preaching by a Wykehamist." Take a 
few examples of what I mean: "What we 
weave in time we wear in eternity." "Hell 
is paved with good intentions." " Sin forsaken 
is one of the best evidences of sin forgiyen." 
" It matters little how we die, but it matters 
much how we live." " Meddle with no man's 
person, but spare no man's sin." " The street 
is soon clean when every one sweeps before his 
own door." u Lying rides on debt's back : it is 
hard for an empty bag to stand upright." "He 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 29 

that begins with prayer will end with praise." 
" All is not gold that glitters." " In religion, 
as in business, there are no gains without 
pains." "In the Bible there are shallows 
where a lamb can wade, and depths where an 
elephant must swim." "One thief on the 
cross was saved, that none should despair, and 
only one, that none should presume." 

Proverbial, epigrammatic, and antithetical 
sayings of this kind give wonderful per- 
spicuousness and force to a sermon. Labour 
to store your minds with them. Use them 
judiciously, and especially at the end of para- 
graphs, and you will find them an immense 
help to the attainment of a simple style of 
composition. But of long, involved, compli- 
cated sentences always beware. 

IV. The fourth hint I will give is this: if 






30 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

you wish to preach simply, use a direct style. 
What do I mean by this? I mean the practice 
and custom of saying " I " and " you." When a 
man takes up this style of preaching, he is often 
told that he is conceited and egotistical The 
result is that many preachers are never direct, 
and always think it very humble and modest, 
and becoming, to say " we." But I remember 
good Bishop Villiers saying that " we " was 
a word Kings and Corporations should use, and 
they alone, but that parish clergymen should 
always talk of "I" and "you." I endorse that 
saying with all my heart I declare I never 
can understand what the famous pulpit " we " 
means. Does the preacher who all through 
his sermon keeps saying "we" mean himself 
and the bishop ? or himself and the Church ? 
or himself and the congregation ? or himself 
and the Early Fathers? or himself and the 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 31 

Reformers ? or himself and all the wise men 
in the world ? or, after all, does he only mean 
myself, plain "John Smith" or "Thomas 
Jones " ? If he only means himself, what 
earthly reason can he give for using the plural 
number, and not saying simply and plainly 
" I " ? When he visits his parishioners, or sits 
by a sick bed, or catechises his school, or orders 
bread at the baker's, or meat at the butcher's, 
he does not say "we," but "I." Why, then, 
I should like to know, can he not say "I" 
in the pulpit ? What right has he, as a 
modest man, to speak for any one but 
himself? Why not stand up on Sunday 
and say, "Reading in the Word of God, 
I have found a text containing such things as 
these, and I come to set them before you " ? 

Many people, I am sure, do not understand 
what the preacher's "we" means. The ex- 



32 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

pression leaves them in a kind of fog. If you 
say, "I, your rector; I, your vicar; I, the curate 
of the parish," come here to talk of something 
that concerns your soul, something you should 
believe, something you should do — you are at 
any rate understood. But if you begin to talk 
in the vague plural number of what "we" 
ought to do, many of your hearers do not 
know what you are driving at, and whether 
you are speaking to yourself or them. I charge 
and entreat my younger brethren in the 
ministry not to forget this point. Do try to 
be as direct as possible. Never mind what 
people say of you. In this particular do not 
imitate Chalmers, or Melville, or certain other 
living pulpit celebrities. Never say "we" 
when you mean " I." The more you get into 
the habit of talking plainly to the people, in 
the first person singular, as old Bishop Latimer 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 33 

did, the simpler will your sermon be, and 
the more easily understood. The glory of 
Whitefield's sermons is their directness. Bat 
unhappily they were so badly reported that 
we cannot now appreciate them. 

V. The fifth and last hint I wish to give 
you is this. If you would attain simplicity in 
preaching, you must use plenty of anecdotes 
and illustrations. You must regard illustra- 
tions as windows through which light is let in 
upon your subject Upon this point a great 
deal might be said, but the limits of a small 
treatise oblige me to touch it very briefly. I 
need hardly remind you of the example of Him 
who "spake as never man spake," our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ. Study the four 
Gospels attentively, and mark what a wealth 
of illustration His sermons generally contain. 



34 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

How often you find figure upon figure, parable 
upon parable, in His discourses. There was 
nothing under His eyes apparently from which 
He did not draw lessons. The birds of the 
air, and the fish in the sea, the sheep, the goats, 
the cornfield, the vineyard, the ploughman, the 
sower, the reaper, the fisherman, the shepherd, 
the vinedresser, the woman kneading meal, the 
flowers, the grass, the bank, the wedding feast, 
the sepulchre, — all were made vehicles for con- 
veying thoughts to minds of hearers. What 
are such parables as the prodigal son, the good 
Samaritan, the ten virgins, the king who made a 
marriage for his son, the rich man and Lazarus, 
the labourers of the vineyard, and others, — 
what are all these but stirring stories that our 
Lord tells in order to convey some great truth 
to the souls of His hearers ? Try to walk in 
His footsteps and follow His example. 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 35 

If you pause in your sermon, and say, "Now 
I will tell you a story," I engage that all who 
are not too fast asleep will prick up their ears 
and listen. People like similes, illustrations, 
and well-told stories, and will listen to them 
when they will attend to nothing else. And 
from what countless sources we can get illustra- 
tions I Take all the book of nature around us. 
Look at the sky above and the world beneath. 
Look at history. Look at all the branches of 
science, at geology, at botany, at chemistry, at 
astronomy. What is there in heaven above or 
earth below from which you may not bring 
illustrations to throw light on the message of 
the Gospel ? Bead Bishop Latimer's sermons, 
the most popular, perhaps, that were ever 
preached. Bead the works of Brooks and 
Watson and Swinnock, the Puritans. How 
full they are of illustrations, figures, metaphors, 



36 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 



and stories! Look at Mr. Moody's sermons. 
What is one secret of his popularity? He 
fills his sermons with pleasing stories. He 
is the best speaker, says an Arabian proverb, 
who can turn the ear into an eye. 

For my part, I not only try to tell stories, 
but in country parishes I have sometimes put 
before people familiar illustrations which they 
can see. For instance — Do I want to show 
them that there must have been a first great 
cause or Being who made this world ? I 
have sometimes taken out my watch, and have 
said, "Look at this watch. How well it is 
made! Do any of you suppose for a moment 
that all the screws, all the wheels, all the pins 
of that watch came together by accident? 
Would not any one say there must have been 
a watchmaker ? And if so, it follows most 
surely that there must have been a Maker of 



SIMPLICITY IN PBEACHING. 37 

the world, whose handiwork we see graven on 
the face of every one of those glorious planets 
going their yearly rounds and keeping time to 
a single second. Look at the world in which 
you live, and the wonderful things which it 
contains. Will you tell me that there is no 
God, and that creation is the result of chance?" 
Or, sometimes I have taken out a bunch of keys 
and shaken them. The whole congregation, 
when they hear the keys, look up. Then I say, 
" Would there be need of any keys if all men 
were perfect and honest? What does this 
bunch of keys show ? Why, they show that 
the heart of man is deceitful above all things, 
and desperately wicked." Illustration, I con- 
fidently assert, is one of the best receipts for 
making a sermon simple, clear, perspicuous, 
and easily understood. Lay yourselves out for 
it. Pick up illustrations wherever you can. 

D 



38 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

Keep your eyes open, and use them well. 
Happy is that preacher who has an eye for 
similitudes, and a memory stored with well- 
chosen stories and illustrations. If he is a 
real man of God, and knows how to deliver 
a sermon, he will never preach to bare walls 
and empty benches. 

But I must add a word of caution. There 
is a way of telling stories. If a man cannot 
tell stories naturally, he had better not tell 
them at all. Illustration, again, after all I 
have said in its favour, may be carried too far. 
I remember a notable instance of this in the 
case of the great Welch preacher, Christmas 
Evans. There is in print a sermon of his 
about the wonderful miracle that took place 
in Oadara, when devils took possession of the 
swine, and the whole herd ran down violently 
into the sea. He paints it so minutely that 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 39 

it really becomes ludicrous by reason of the 
words put in the mouth of the swineherds who 
told their master of the loss he had sustained. 
" Oh ! sir/' says one, " the pigs have all gone ! " 
" But," says the master, " where have they 
gone ? " " They have run down into the sea." 
" But who drove them down ? " " Oh ! sir, that 
wonderful man." " Well, what sort of a man 
waa he ? What did he do ? " " Why, sir, he 
came and talked such strange things, and the 
whole herd ran suddenly down the steep place 
into the sea." " What, the old black boar and 
all ? " " Yes, sir, the old black boar has gone 
too; for as we looked round we just saw the 
end of his tail going over the cliff." Now 
that is going to an extreme. So again Dr. 
Guthrie's admirable sermons are occasionally 
so overladen with illustrations as to remind 
one of cake made almost entirely of plums and 



40 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

containing hardly any flour. Put plenty of 
colour and picture into your sermon by all 
means. Draw sweetness and light from all 
sources and from all creatures, from the 
heavens and the earth, from history, from 
science. But after all there is a limit. Tou 
must be careful how you use colour, lest you 
do as much harm as good. Do not put on 
colour by spoonfuls, but with a brush. This 
caution remembered, you will find colour an 
immense aid in the attainment of simplicity 
and perspicuousness in preaching. 

And now bear in mind that my five points 
are these : 

First: If you want to attain simplicity in 
preaching, you must have a clear knowledge 
of what you are going to preach. 

Secondly : If you would attain simplicity in 
preaching, you must use simple words. 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 41 

Thirdly: If you would attain simplicity 
in preaching, you must seek to acquire a 
simple style of composition, with short sen- 
tences and as few colons and semi-colons as 
possible. 

Fourthly : If you would attain simplicity in 
preaching, aim at directness. 

Lastly: If you would attain simplicity in 
preaching, make abundant use of illustration 
and anecdote. 

Let me add to all this one plain word of 
application. You will never attain simplicity in 
preaching without plenty of trouble. Pains and 
trouble, I say emphatically, pains and trouble. 
When Turner, the great painter, was asked by 
some one how it was he mixed his colours so 
well, and what it was that made them so 
different from those of other artists; "Mix 
them? mix them? mix them? Why, with 



42 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

brains, sir." I am persuaded that, in preach- 
ing, little can be done except by trouble and 
by pains. 

I have heard that a young and careless 
clergyman once said to Richard Cecil, " I think 
I want more faith." "No," said the wise 
old man : " you want more works. You want 
more pains. You must not think that God 
will do work for you, though He is ready 
to do it BY you." I entreat my younger 
brethren to remember this. I beg them 
to make time for their composition of 
sermons, to take trouble and to exercise 
their brains by reading. Only mind that 
you read what is useful. 

I would not have you spend your time in 
reading the Fathers in order to help your 
preaching. They are very useful in their way, 
but there are many things more useful in 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 43 

modern writers, if you choose them discreetly. 
Read good models, and become familiar with 
good specimens of simplicity in preaching. As 
your best model, take the English Bible. If you 
speak the language in which that is written, 
you will speak well. Read John Bunyan's im- 
mortal work, the " Pilgrim's Progress." Read 
it again and again, if you wish to attain sim- 
plicity in preaching. Do not be above reading 
the Puritans. Some of them no doubt are 
heavy. Goodwin and Owen are very heavy, 
though excellent artillery in position. Read 
such books as Baxter, and Watson, and Traill, 
and Flavel, and Charnock, and Hall, and 
Henry. They are, to my mind, models of 
the best simple English spoken in old times. 
Remember, however, that language alters with 
years. They spoke English, and so do we, 
but their style was different from ours. Read 



44 SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 

beside them the best models of modern English 
that you can get at I believe the best English 
writer for the last hundred years was William 
Cobbett, the political radical I think he 
wrote the finest simple Saxon-English the 
world has ever seen. In the present day I do 
not know a greater master of tersely spoken 
Saxon-English than John Bright. Among old 
political orators, the speeches of Lord Chatham 
and Patrick Henry, the American, are models 
of good English. Last, bat not least, never 
forget that, next to the Bible, there is nothing 
in the English language which, for combined 
simplicity, perspicuousness, eloquence, and 
power, can be compared with some of the 
great speeches in Shakespeare. Models of this 
sort must really be studied, and studied "with 
brains," too, if you wish to attain a good style 
of composition in preaching. On the other 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 45 

hand, do not be above talking to the poor, and 
visiting your people from house to house. Sit 
down with your people by the fireside, and 
exchange thoughts with them on all subjects. 
Find out how they think and how they express 
themselves, if you want them to understand 
your sermons. By so doing you will insensibly 
learn much. Tou will be continually picking 
up modes of thought, and get notions as to 
what you should say in your pulpit. 

A humble country clergyman was once asked 
" whether he studied the fathers." The worthy 
man replied that he had little opportunity of 
studying the fathers, as they were generally 
out in the fields when he called. But he 
studied the mothers more, because he often 
found them at home, and he could talk to 
them. Wittingly or unwittingly, the good 
man hit a nail right on the head. We must 



46 SIMPLICITY IN PBEACHINQ. 

talk to our people, if we would understand 
how to preach to them. 

(a) I will only say, in conclusion, that what- 
ever we preach, or whatever pulpit we occupy, 
whether we preach simply or not, whether we 
preach written or extempore, we ought to aim 
not merely at letting off fireworks, but at 
preaching that which will do lasting good to 
souls. Let us beware of fireworks in our 
preaching. "Beautiful" sermons, "brilliant" 
sermons, "clever" sermons, "popular" sermons, 
are often sermons which have no effect on the 
congregation, and do not draw men to Jesus 
Christ Let us aim so to preach that what we 
say may really come home to men's minds and 
consciences and hearts, and make them think 
and consider. 

(6) All the simplicity in the world can do no 
good, unless you preach the simple Gospel of 



SIMPLICITY IN PREACHING. 47 

Jesus Christ so fully and clearly that everybody 
can understand it. If Christ crucified has not 
His rightful place in your sermons, and sin is 
not exposed as it should be, and your people 
are not plainly told what they ought to be and 

do, TOUR PREACHING IS OF NO USE. 

(c) All the simplicity in the world, again, is 
useless without a good lively delivery. If you 
bury your head in your bosom, and mumble 
over your manuscript in a dull, monotoQOus, 
droning way, like a bee in a bottle, so that 
people cannot understand what you are 
speaking about, your preaching will be in vain. 
Depend upon it, delivery is not sufficiently 
attended to in our Church. In this, as in 
everything else connected with the science of 
preaching, I consider the Church of England 
is sadly deficient. I know that I began 
preaching alone in the New Forest, and 



48 SIMPLICITY IN PEEACHING. 

nobody ever told me what was right or wrong 
in the pulpit The result was that the first 
year of my preaching was a series of experi- 
ments. We get no help in these matters at 
Oxford and Cambridge. The utter want of 
any proper training for the pulpit is one great 
blot and defect in the system of the Church 
of England. 

(d) Above all, let us never forget that all 
the simplicity in the world is useless without 
prayer for God's blessing, and without a life 
corresponding in some measure to what we 
preach. Be it ours to have an earnest desire 
for the souls of men, while we seek for sim- 
plicity in preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 
and let us never forget to accompany our 
sermons by holy living and fervent prayer. 

London : William Hunt and Company. 



gelecttb Ifiat of fSStotk* 
BY THE RIGHT REV. JOHN C. RYLE, D.D., 

LORD BISHOP OF LIVERPOOL. 



Expository Thoughts on the Gospels. 

Designed for Family and Private Beading, -with the Text com- 
plete, and copious Notes. Thirteenth edition. 

St. Matthew. Extra cloth. 6s. 

St. Mask. Uniform with the above. 6s. 

St. Lukb. Vol. I., 6s. 6d. Vol. IX, 7s. 

St. Johv. Vol. I., 6s. 6d. Vol. II., 6s. 6d. VoL HI., 8s. 

IN EXTRA BINDINGS. The set complete, half moxoooo, gilt 
edges, £3 12a 6d. Whole Turkey morocco, £A 10s. Or 
each volume, half morocco, 4s.; Turkey morocco, 6s. 6d., in 
addition to the prices in cloth. 

Short Expository Readings on the Gospel of St. 

John. A Selection designed for Families, Mathers' Meetings, 
District Visitors, etc With the Text complete. Crown 8vo, 
extra cloth, 6s. 

" KNOTS UNTIED" SERIES. 

Facts and Men. 

Being Pages from English Church History, some Biographical 
and some Historical. Large post 8vo, extra cloth, 7s. 6d. 

E 



WILLIAM HUNT AND COMPANY, 



Holiness : 

Its Nature, Hindrances, Difficulties, and Boots. Being a Series 
of Papers on the Subject. With Preface, Introductory Essay, 
and Supplementary Extracts from Old Writers. Large post 8vo, 
extra cloth, 7s. 6d. Uniform with " Knots Untied. " 

Practical Religion. 

Being Plain Papers on the daily duties, experiences, dangers, and 
privileges of professing Christians. Extra cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Old Paths. 

Being Plain Statements on some of the weightier matters of 
Christianity from the Standpoint of an Evangelical Churchman. 
Second Edition. Extra cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Knots Untied. 

Being Plain Statements on Disputed Points in Religion from the 
Stand-point of an Evangelical Churchman. Large Post 8vo. 
600pp. Fifth Enlarged Edition. Extra cloth, 7s. 6d. 



Home Truths. 

A re-issue of the Miscellaneous Writings of Bishop Byle, D.D., 
revised and adapted to this work. Complete in Four vols. Extra 
cloth, red edges, 18s. 

Home Truths. 

Being the Miscellaneous Writings revised and corrected especially 
for this work. Sixth edition. Fcap 8vo., extra cloth, lettered. 
Eight Series. Each illustrated with a Frontispiece and Vignette 
Title. Each volume, 8s. 6d. 
The same in sets only, eight vols., extra cloth, gilt edges, 25s. 



PATERNOSTER BOW. 



Hymns for the Church on Earth. 

By Bishop Ryle, D.D. An entirely New and Enlarged Edition 
of 400 Hymns. In various cloth bindings, 4s. 6cL, 6s., and in 
Morocco, 10s. 

Hymns for the Church on Earth. 

Being 300 Hymns, for the most part of Modern date. In large 
type. Tenth edition. 

In small 8vo., black cloth, red edges, 4s.; limp cloth, for invalids, 4s.; 
black antique, 4s. 6d. ; violet and extra cloth antique, gilt edges, 6s. ; 
Turkey Morocco, 10*. 6d. Russia and other bindings for presentation. 



The Additional Hymn-Book. 

Being Three Hundred Hymns for Public Worship, most of them 
not to be found in the Collections commonly used. Limp cloth, 
6d. ; extra cloth , 'chin boards, 9d. ; cloth boards, Is. 

Spiritual Songs. 

Colos. iii. 6. Being One Hundred Hymns, not to be found in 
the Hymn Books most commonly used. Selected by Bishop 
Byle. Fifteenth enlarged edition. Series L Glazed 'wrapper, 9d. ; 
fancy cloth, gilt edges, Is. Series n. Is. ; limp cloth, Is. 4d. 

Bible Inspiration: 

its Beality and Nature. Second edition. Copious Notes. Is. 6d. 

Coming Events and Present Duties. 

Being Miscellaneous Sermons and Addresses on Prophetical 
Subjects; arranged, revised, and corrected. Second edition, 
enlarged. Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d. 



WILLIAM HTOT AND COMPANY, 



Bishops and Clergy of Other Days. 

With an Introduction on the Real Merits of the Reformers and 
Puritans. Crown 8vo., extra cloth, 4s. 

Church Reform. 

Being Papers on the Subject, with full Notes and Introduction. 
Crown 8vo. Extra cloth, limp, 2s. 6d. 

Worldly Conformity. 

What it is not, and what it is. doth boards, Is. 

Assurance. 

(2Ti . iv. 6, 7, a) With Notes and Extracts from Writers of the 
17th century. Seventh edition, enlarged. Cloth, Is. 

Church Principles and Church Comprehensiveness. 

With Introduction and Appendix. Grown 8vo, 68pp., quarter- 
bound, Is. 

Dogma. 

A Paper for the Times. Being Thoughts on the Importance of 
Distinct and Definite Views of Religious Truth. Grown 8vo. 
With tinted wrapper. 8d , or 2s. 6d. per dozen. 

Boys and Girls Playing. 

And other Sermons for Children. With Six Illustrations by 
Dalziel and others. Extra cloth. 2s. 6d. 



Young Men Exhorted. 

An Address to Young Men. Tenth edition. Fcap 8vo, 68pp., 
tinted wrapper, 6d. ; cloth extra, Is. 



PATERNOSTER ROW. 



Eternity ! 

Thoughts on 2 Cor. iy. 18 Spoken in Peterborough Cathedral, on 
December 23rd, 1877. With a Postscript containing some remarks 
on Canon Farrar*B " Eternal Hope." 82pp , demy 12mo, 2d. 



TRACTS IN PACKETS. 



BY THE RIGHT REV. JOHN 0. RYLE, D.D., 

LORD BISHOP OF LIVERPOOL. 

Assorted Tracts. 

A Classified Re-issue, in Packets, of Tracts. Each packet, la. 

Packet 1.— "The Lord Jesus Christ, His Work, Offices, Character." 

2.—** Justification, Forgiveness, Faith, Repentance." 

8.—" The Holy Ghost and His Work ; Conversion, Regene- 
ration." 

4.— "Exhortations, Earnest Appeals, Searching Enquiries." 

5.- " Holy living, Practical Duties." 

6.— "Means of Grace, Bible, Prayer, Sacraments.*' 

7.— "Experimental Points, Assurance, Growth in Grace." 

8.—" Prophecy, Controversy." 

9.—" Foundation Truths." 

10.— "Doctrinal Truths. 1 ' 

11-—" Practical Truths." 

12.—" Useful Inquiries." 

la— "Church Subjects." 

14.—" Cardinal Points." 

F 



WILLIAM HUNT AND COMPANY. 



Expository Tracts. 

Twenty-four eight-page Tracts, in large type. Selected from the 
Gospel of St. MATTHEW. Prioe Is., in packet 

Expository Tracts. 

Selected from the Gospel of St. MARK. Prioe Is., in packet. 

Our Sundays. 

First Series. Being 40 short large-type Tracts. Price Is. 

Plain Speaking. 

First and Second Series. Each containing 40 short large-type 
Tracts. Price Is. each. 

Seed Corn. 

Being an assorted Packet of 100 Hand Bills, containing 48 sorts. 
Price 8d. 

Thoughts for Heads and Hearts. 

First and Second Series. Each containing 40 short large-type 
Tracts. Price Is. each. 

Words for All. 

Forty short Tracts in large type. Four and eight pages. In 
packets. Is. 

Boys and Girls Playing, 

and other Addresses for Children. Fourteen assoreed, in tinted 
glazed ©overs, in packet, Is. 



A classified List of all the Works of Bishop Byle may be obtained on 

application to the Publishers, 



