
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 





1 


1 




^^k 




^^^1 

^^j 


^kb. 



SIX LECTURES. 



SIX LECTURES 



FUNDAMENTAL TEUTHS 



CONXECTED WITH 



THE CHUKCH OF GOD. 



BY 

W. KELLY. 



LONDON: 
W. H. BROOM, 34, PATEENOSTER EOW; 

G. M011EI8H, 24, WARWICK LAXE, PATERNOSTER ROW; 
E. CROCKER, 112, PENTOXVILLE ROAD, N. 

1865. 



/^^ 



/•^' 



SYNOPSIS, 



LECTUEE I. 

ONE BODY. 

Difference of God's dealings with His people in the past and present 
dispensations, 1 ; Adam, 2 ; Ahraham, 3 ; Israel as a nation, 5 ; 
death and resurrection of Christ introduce a new thing, 6 ; the 
body composed of Jew and Gentile, 7 ; the cross, showing the 
complete ruin of man, removes the barrier to God's free action, 8 ; 
God's thoughts set upon the glory of His Son, 9 ; first shadow of 
the Church's union with Christ precedes the entrance of sin, 10 ; 
Ephes. i. is then adduced to show l^at God develops His counsels 
of grace before mentioning man's sin, 11 ; the cross not merely 
meets the desperate need of m&n, but unites in one body Jew 
and Gentile, 12 ; a new man thus created, 13 ; a habitation in 
which God could dwell, 14 ; Christ, God's true temple while on 
earth, 15 ; the truth of the one body claims the attention of all 
Christians, 17; human and divine relationships, 18; Satan's 
grand object to hinder the present operaticm of God in the 
saints, 19 ; and succeeds at man's weak point in that man likes to 
be something, 20 ; and so easily falls a prey to the working of the 
enemy, 21 ; the glory of Christ's Person as maintained by the 
Holy Ghost, the mainspring of the life and conversation of a 
Christian man, 22 ; difficulties met with in reasoning about the 
Church on Old Testament analogy, 22 ; Christ Head of His body 
in resurrection, 23 ; consequently the body is heavenly as is the 
Head, 24; "Christian.'' means more than " Saint," 25; bearing 



IV SYNOPSIS. 

of the Gospels and Epistles on the one body, 26 ; servants and 
children, 27 ; a Jew could never have put the Old and Xew Testa- 
ments together, 28 ; the cross the foundation of a new revelation, 
29 ; what is the unity of the Spirit ? 30 ; Christians act on this 
unity only when gathered to the name of Christ, 31 ; God's 
grace in reviving this truth in view of the Lord's speedy 
coming, 32 ; exhortation to younger brethren and sisters, 33 ; 
the word of God the only standard, 34 ; " the world," and " within 
and without," 35 ; my place as a Christian, 36 ; separation, 37 ; 
conclusion. 



LECTUEE n. 

ONE SPIBIT. 

Personality of the Holy Ghost, 39 ; work of the Holy Ghost in 
former dispensations, 40 ; Jewish and Gentile view of Christ, 41 ; 
disappointment of Jewish hopes, 42 ; Holy Ghost sent down from 
heaven is, next to Christ, the central truth of the New Testa- 
ment, 43 ; disciples prepared for the doctrine of the Spirit, 44 ; 
Holy Ghost not merely a power, but a Person, 45; why He 
cannot be known by the world, 46 ; the Holy Ghost sent by the 
Father in Christ's name,' and sent by Christ from the Father, 47 ; 
God glorified in exalting the Man Christ Jesus, 49 ; the righteous- 
ness of God, 50 ; Peter's boldness by reason of a purged con- 
science, 51 ; in the Trinity, subordination of Persons unscriptural, 
52 ; the double relation of the Holy Ghost — ^to the world and to 
the saints, 53 ; communication of risen life by the Holy Ghost, 
54; Holy Ghost on earth in the absence of Christ, 55 ; miraculous 
tokens of the Spirit's presence at the outset, 56 ; grieving the 
Spirit, 57 ; the testimony of the Acts to the working of the Holy 
Ghost, 58 ; the teaching of the Epistles as to His presence both 
in the individual and in the Church, 59 ; the opening of 1st 
Corinthians shows the perpetuity of the Holy Ghost's action in 
the Church so long as it is here bebw, 60 ; reason for the dis- 
continuance of miracles, 62 ; God's wisdom in withholding them 
now, 63 ; the Spirit the pledge of God's delight in the work of 
His Son, 64 ; Christ's twofold reception of the Holy Ghost, 64 ; 
practical importance of these truths, 65 ; how the Holy Ghost 



SYNOPSIS. V 

works in the asaemUy, 66 ; duty of a Christian to he where the 
H(^y Ghost is owned, 67 ; why the Church is so weak, 68 ; 
owning the Holy Ghost does not hinder individual ministry, 69 ; 
true reason of meeting is to please the Lord Jesus, 70 ; charge of 
bigotry weighed, 71 ; why ask people to come with me, while 
I do not go with them ? 72 ; search the word of Grod for yourself, 
73; conclusion. 



LECTURE m. 

THE ASSEMBLY, ASTD MINISTRY. 

Assembly and ministry alike flow both fix)m the accomplished work of 
Christ, 75; "Assembly," rather than "Church," 76; the Rock 
upon which it is built, 77 ; Christ the Son of the Living God, 78 ; 
building of the assembly future in Matt. xvi. 79 ; the baptism of 
the Spirit, 80 ; consideration of the term " invisible Church," 81 ; 
no Church till the death of Christ, 82; the congregation of 
Jehovah, 83 ; position of " such as should be saved," 84 ; 
critical remarks upon Acts ix. 31, 85 ; authority for the same, 86 ; 
the case of the trespassing brother, 87 ; grace in action instead of 
law, 88; a mistake often made about what love is, 89; the 
ordering of the assembly by the Holy Ghost, 90 ; tests — ^not as 
to who are Christians, but what is of the Holy Ghost, 91 ; two 
things maintained by the Holy Ghost — ^the glory of Christ as to 
His Person, and the Lordship of Christ as to His place, 92; 
assembly not dependent upon age or country, 93; the infant 
Church at Corinth, 94 ; their new-bom exuberance, 96 ; how to 
use a gift, 96 ; the meaning of the term " prophesying," 97 ; all 
to be done to edifying, 98 ; a revelation not possible now, 99 ; 
the canon of Scripture closed, 100 ; the presence of the Holy 
Ghost in the assembly, 101 ; a member of the Church of God a 
member everywhere, 102 ; difference between a Church and the 
Church, 103; letters of commendation, 104; our duty not to 
form a new church, but to cleave to the old, 105 ; Jesus in the 
midst, 106 ; where were you last Lord's Day ? 107 ; how God 
can bless even Roman Catholics, 108 ; what the faithful are to do 
who meet on God's principles, 109 ; unintelligence of those who 
hare never felt the cost of separatioii iiom \ki& xvmi «x^\£sA> W^ \ 



VI SYX0P8IS. 

duty of a Christian in the event of an assembly departing from 
the word of God, 111 ; action to be taken slowly, and with much 
waiting on the Lord, 112; Ministry, 1 1 3 ; the Lord calls, sends, and 
controls, not the assembly, 114 ; preachers sent by men an usurpa- 
tion of the Lord's prerogative, 115 ; the case of Philip, 116 ; Paul 
and ApoUos, 117 ; difference of judgment recorded without cen- 
sure, 118; case of Barnabas and Saul, 119; co-operation in 
ministry allowed so long as there is no bondage, 120 ; subjection 
to chief men, 120 ; review of the two lines of truth sketched, 121 ; 
fluctuation in the Church, none in Christ, 122 ; conclusion. 



LECTUEE IV. 

WORSHIP, BREAKINQ OF BREAD, AKD PRAYER. 

What is worship ? 123 ; state of soul needed for worship, 124 ; sin and 
shame of man's interference with the worship of God, 125; our 
privilege to say "We know," 126; man, unless bom of God, 
incapable of worshipping Him, 127; the great principle of worship 
shown in the word to the Samaritan woman, 128 ; under the law 
God hid Himself, 129 ; under grace He revealed Himself, 130 ; 
three things necessary to worship, 131 ; where ought men 
to worship? 132; God's title of Father not made knoivn to 
Israel, 133; God the Father in quest of worshippers, 134; the 
Jewish lamp replaced by the brightness of the Father's glory, 135 ; 
do not forget that our Father is also our God, 136 ; what am I to 
do if asked to join in worship? 137 ; fleshly worship suits a fleshly 
state, 138 ; what happens when Christian worship is unknown or 
forgotten? 139 ; preaching the Gospel not to be confounded with 
worship, 140; worship founded on Christ (dead, risen, and 
ascended), and carried on by the power of the Holy Ghost, 141 ; 
position of the unbelievers present where the assembly is 
gathered, 142 ; who can sing, and say Amen ? 143 ; how many 
may take active part in the assembly? 144; on giving out 
hymns, 145 ; criticism, 146 ; breaking of bread, 147 ; the Lord's 
Supper, 148 ; characteristics of the first day of the week, 149 ; 
prime object of the Supper is to remember the Lord's death, 150 ; 
when should the bread be broken ? 150 ; strangeness of procedure 
to those habituated to rigid forms, 151 ; thoughts sometimes ex- 



SYNOPSIS. VU 

pressed by those who have broken bread, 152 ; what happened 
awng the Corinthians through not duly apprehending the 
character of the Lord's Supper, 153 ; the practice of appointixig 
particular officials considered, 154 ; the character of the Sqpper 
impugned if any official be appointed by man to nilmiiMgfaw 
it, 155 ; the Supper leaves no room for human display, 166 ; what 
is the meaning of 1 Cor. xi. 29 ? 157 ; the Lord's Supper a sweet 
privilege as well as a solemn duty for all His own, 158 ; Prayer — 
Scripture does not speak of a " gift of prayer," 159 ; the apostle 
lays down as a rule, that the men ptay everywhere, 160 ; con- 
clusion. 



LECTURE V. 

GIFTS AJn) LOCAL CHARGES. 



Dryness of subject imless connection seen with Christ, 161 ; gifts are 
for the glory of Christ, not the aggrandisement of men, 162 ; 
indifference to this a deep dishonour done to Him, 163 ; " gifts of 
the Lord," not " gifts of the Spirit," 164 ; gifts consequent upon 
the ascension of Christ, 165 ; contraband ministry, 166 ; " He 
descended first," 167; ''He ascended that He might fill all 
things," 168 ; the world can admire Christ and Christianity if 
altered to suit the age's taste, 169 ; Christ, only as risen, the 
Church's Head, 170; gift;s in Ephesians and Corinthians com- 
pared, 171 ; gifts in Corinthians became a snare, those in Ephe- 
sians are for perfecting, 172 ; " apostles and prophets," 173 ; not 
prophets and apostles, 174 ; character of ministry in the Church 
quite distinct &om that which obtained while the Lord was on 
earth, 175 ; the mission of the twelve to Israel, 176 ; earthly glory 
of Messiah fades and is eclipsed by heavenly glory, 177 ; who laid 
hands on the apostles ? 178 ; Saul's call when going, not to, but 
from Jerusalem, 179 ; Paul a sample of one whom the Lord calls to 
be a minister, 180 ; how God has made the great apostle the witness 
of non-siiccession, 181 ; the service of tables, 182 ; as far as the New 
Testament speaks, no one was ever ordained by man to preach the 
gospel, 183; Acts xiii., 184; Archbishop Potter on Church 
Government, 184 ; the separation of Barnabas and Saul by the 
Holy Ghost for special work, 186 ; if Paul and Barnabas were 
ordained in the current sense, then tke \&^%^t csc^jmi^ '^Os^^ 



Vm SYNOPSIS. 

greater, 187 ; what this laying on of hands signified, 188 ; the 
silence of Scripture respecting the laying of hands on piesby- 
ters, 189 ; the absolute necessity of having a real commission 
from the Lord, in order to appoint to office, 190 ; Christendom 
while fighting for its own order has missed God's, 191 ; qualifi- 
cations for eldership, 192 ; an unruly house a disqualification for 
eldership, 193 ; the word of God nowhere hints at the continuance 
of an ordaining power, 194 ; the case of Titus, 195 ; man's ordi- 
nation puts one off the ground of faith in, and deference to, the 
word of God, 196 ; fooliifaness of making a bad imitation of what 
was written exclusively to Timothy or Titus, 197 ; elders never 
mentioned as giving gifts, 198 ; deprecation of the thought that 
the Holy Ghost can be conveyed by ordination, 199; how to 
judge of the possession of a gift, 200 ; gifts to be proved by their 
power, according to the word of God, 201 ; gifts, sooner or later, 
sure to be recognised, 202 ; difficulties of one who has used a gift 
for a livelihood, 203 ; dissent is religious radicalism, 204 ; the value 
of the word of God for guidance as to ministry and Church 
office, 205 ; persons having qualification for eldership may still 
be found, 206 ; but no power to ordain them as such, 207 ; 
Scripture has provided for this defective condition of the 
Church, 208; exhortation to esteem those who labour, 209; 
elders not mentioned in the Corinthian and Thessalonian 
flssemblies, 210; but those who possessed spiritual power in 
guiding and directing, found in both, 211; no new invention 
needed to meet the difficulties of the day, 212 ; fulness of bless- 
ing in Christ for the Church now as in Pentecostal times, 213; 
plenty of room in an assembly for numerous gifts, 214; gifts 
always sure, because Christ is the Head and source of supply, 215 ; 
conclusion. Note on Acts xiv. 23, 216. 



LECTUEE VI. 

THE BESOUBCE OF THE FAITHPX7L IN THE BTJINS OF 
CHBISTENDOM. 

Solemnity of the subject, 222 ; Christ's words of light require no 

tapers of man to make them more distinct, 223 ; dishonour to the 

name of Jesm in Christendom, 224 ; difference between owning 



SYNOPSIS. IX 

the ruin and endeayouring to reinBtate the Church, 225 ; the Church 
of God the greatest work, next to the cross, that God has ever 
wrought on the earth, 226 ; to slight it is worse than any evil 
of former days, 227 ; the days of Noah followed by the flood, and 
the days of Lot followed by the destruction of Sodom, types of 
the day when the Son of Man shall be revealed, 228 ; Christen- 
dom's danger seen in Rom. zi. 229 ; its non-continuance in God's 
goodness, 230 ; its excision, 231 ; its apostacy apparent from the 
first, 232 ; the man of sin, and the Man of righteousness, 233 ; 
Antichrist, 234 ; Cain, Balaam, Core, 235 ; he who defends 
Christendom, gives the Lord the lie, 236 ; deprecation of the 
apology, that tJie Lord will set all right, 237 ; unsparing judg- 
ment His action when He comes, 238; the Lord's pro- 
vision for the faithful in the dark day, 238; the Lord's own 
weight of authority attached to "two or three" gathered to 
His name, 240 ; no wonder men shrink from Church discipline, 
seeing how it has been abused, 241 ; the duty of a believer, 
to renounce every tie not connected with Christ, 242; which 
is best, your rules or God's word? 243; how is it that the 
doctrines of men have taken the place of the word of God ? 244 ; 
electing a minister, wholly at variance with Scriptiure, 245 ; evils 
resulting frK>m the dissenting and parochial systems, 246 ; advice 
to saints taking their place with the "two or three," 247; 
how to detect and exclude what is not of God, 248 ; the great 
house, and who to separate from, 249 ; " He that departeth from 
evil maketh himself a prey," 250; "The Christian world," or 
evil with the name of Christ attached to it, 251 ; trusting 
the Lord for eternal life, and denying Him for a bit of bread, 252 ; 
what to flee and what to follow (2 Tim. ii.), 253 ; Christ addresses 
Himself to hearts, grieved at the dishonour done to His grace and 
truth, 254; illustration of a rightly and wrongly constituted 
assembly, 255 ; Christ the centre and rallying point, 256 ; no 
ground for fear, if the Lord be the helper, 257 ; conclusion. 



"ONE BODY." 

Eph. it. 
LECTURE I. 



The subject on which I propose, with the Lord's 
help, to enter to-night, is the one body, the body 
of Christ ; and this, too, not only as a great doc- 
trine which the Holy Ghhost has laid down with 
the ntmost clearness, and throughout a considerable 
part of the New Testament, but also, as far as I am 
able in a short space, deducing some of its practical 
consequences, and showing its bearing upon the 
communion and the conduct of every member of 
it, that is, of every Christiaii. 

Now, in order to develop the special characteristics 
of Christ's body, it will be necessary to explain how 
it differed fix)m that •which God revealed, or set up, 
in past dispensations ; for there are distinctions, and 
even contrasts, between the past dealings of God 
and that which He is now accomplishing to the 
honour of Hie beloved Son. "Wiwifi ^<bT^ n^^&^ ^*l 



*Z ONE BODY. 

course, always the only true God; while He had 
in times past those He loved upon earth ; while He 
ever wrought by His Spirit ; while there was neces- 
sarily faith at work in order to the blessing of souls ; 
yet for all that, there are essential and deeply impor- 
tant diflferences, which none can overlook without 
loss to himself, without sure weakening of his testi- 
mony to others, and, above all, without coming 
short of the just perception of what God Himself 
has nearest to His own heart — His own glory in 
Christ. 

Now, it is perfectly plain, if we take up the Old 
Testament, that when man fell into sin, God gave 
certain revelations of blessing, all of which find their 
centre in the Lord Jesus. We see this from the very 
beginning of Genesis. When sin entered, not only 
righteous government, but grace instantly followed. 
God was there ; and in the presence of the guilty 
pair, and in defiance of the serpent, the mercy of 
God spoke of that same blessed One, of whom we 
are about to hear farther and deeper glories. In due 
time God brought out, in a distinct and personal 
manner, blessings in connexion with Abraham and 
his seed. There we have the domain of promise — 
not only revelation and mercy, but distinct promise 
to a given person, and to his seed. This had not been 
the case in the garden of Eden. Man fell there ; and 
it is evident that fallen man could not possibly be 
the object of the promise of God. There are pro- 
mises/or such : there could not be a promise to such. 
TFien Abraham received the promise, he was not a 



ONE BODY. 3 

fallen man merely, but a believing man. It was as 
one elect, oaUed, and Mthfiil, that God made him 
the depository of promise. But it was when Adam 
feU, before there was anything of the operation of 
divine grace in him ; it was when he and Eve had com- 
pletely separated themselves from GFod, that mercy, 
entirely irrespective of their condition or desert, held 
out a revelation of grace in the person of Christ. 
The womou's seed was presented more particularly 
as the destroyer of him that had wrought this deep 
and, as far as it went, irreparable mischief — ^irrepar- 
able to the creature, but only furnishing the oppor- 
tunity for God to bring out His own grace to the 
glory of Him who, bruised Himself, was to bruise 
the serpent's head. 

The effect of the promise to Abraham was that a 
family was set apart unto God, and, in due time, a 
nation. Next, we find that, as this nation was full 
of confidence in its own powers, God was pleased, in 
the wisdom of His ways, to try them by the law, 
as we all know, given at Sinai. I need not enter into 
the details, but just state the general outline of the 
divine dealings, for the purpose of clearing my sub- 
ject. But the issue of that trial, however long God 
might delay, was not doubtful for a moment ; for at 
the very moimtain where God spoke, the children of 
Israel set at nought the authority and the glory of 
God, and bowed down to the work of their own hands : 
that is, the law, as a moral question between God 
and man, was overthrown from its very foimdations at 
the outset Qod lingered — ^long lingereOi— m^^^'^^n 
B 2 



4 ONE BODY. 

and meanwhile brought out His ways in every pos- 
sible variety. The crowning experiment of all was 
the presence of Christ, the seed of the woman, and 
the seed of promise, too ; for now came the Person 
who answered to aU the revelations and promises, the 
ways, and types, and prophecies of God. He came, 
in whose Person was foimd all that was worthy of 
God, and that was suited to man. But the coming 
of Christ brought out the awful truth, not only that 
man is himself corrupt, depraved, and loves his own 
will, but that he hates goodness — ^yea, divine goodness 
— in a man. He is the enemy of God when manifest- 
ing Himself in the most blessed manner — ^in His own 
Son ; when manifesting Himself, not only in power — 
for we can imderstand a guilty creature alarmed at holy 
power — ^but in perfect love, coming down in humilia- 
tion, putting Himself at the foot of man, beseeching 
man ; for this is in truth not a figure or exaggeration 
of man's mind, but God's own word. Hear His 
description of it : " God was in Christ, reconciling the 
world unto Himself, not imputing their trespasses 
unto them, and hath committed unto us the word of 
reconciliation. Now, then, we are ambassadors for 
Christ, as though Ood did beseech hy tw," &c. This 
love beseeching sinners was the attribute of divine 
grace in the person of Christ. What was the 
result ? That man proved there was no possibility 
of extricating himself by any means that God put 
at his disposal : that if it were a question of man's 
delivering himself, no matter what might be the 
merejr or the hleBsingy no matter how deep and full 



ONB BODY. 

the grace displayed in a living person, man was too 
fer gone — ^nay, so truly dead in sin, that, so far from 
being won by Ghxl's love, he only took advantage of 
it, and when Jesns put Himself at the foot of man, 
he lifted up his heel and trod on Him, the Son of Ghod. 
But if man thus, under Satan's malicious guidance, 
oast out and oruoifled Christ, Gtxl in the cross not only 
demonstrated His love (herein is love, indeed !), but 
wrought out redemption, a work suited even for those 
that crucified Jesus, capable of blotting out the foulest 
sin man was ever guilty of. God has triumphed even 
where man did his worst against Him. 

But this is not all. In the previous dealings of 
Gk)d, when He had given His law, God had separated 
the nation that was called out of Egypt — ^had marked 
them off in the most distinct and positive manner 
from all others. It was needful. Men might have 
complained that there had been no fair trial; the 
corrupt examples of others might have led them 
astray. God set Israel apart by their institutions, 
rites, ordinances, services, and His law; and by 
that law, and by those rites. He severed them from 
all others; so that it would have been sin against 
Otxl for a Jew to have communion with a Gentile, 
no matter how godly and disposed to respect the law 
of Gtxl. No doubt there might be such a thing as 
being brought out of Gentilism, at any rate to a 
certain extent ; but still, all through the system of 
God's dealings by His law with the Jewish people, 
there was the express and total severance of His 
people from all others. I do not sje^Jt oi ^<5i ^n^s^ 



6 ONE BODY. 

of it, working upon the corrupt heart of man against 
others — ^the pride of men's heart, who despised 
others because of their divinely isolated position ; but 
apart firom the evil use that Israel made of their 
separation, faithfulness to God then required it, and 
His will was in the thing itself. God was proving 
before the whole world the painM and humbling 
truth, that let a nation have ever such mercies, ever 
such privileges, ever such wisdom directing their 
movements, outward and inward, nay, everything 
pertaining to them, the issue of all is increasing 
enmity against God Himself. 

The death and resurrection of Christ introduced a 
new thing in every sense. Now, Christians admit 
this in general, as to the work of Christ in its appli- 
cation to the need of the soul. There is no person, 
of ever so little spiritual intelligence, who does not 
confess, with more or less clearness and thankfulness 
of heart, the all-importance of the cross of Christ 
for his need before God. There may be a scanty 
perception of the extent of the deliverance ; there 
may be feeble enjoyment of the perfect peace that 
has been made by the blood of Christ's cross; but 
there is no believer who does not in some measure 
hold it, and enjoy it, and thank God for it. 

But there is more than the sinner's need met in 
the cross ; and I direct your attention to what the 
Holy Ghost gives us in Eph. ii., as showing the place 
of the cross in the ways of God — ^not merely in the 
salvation of the soul. At the 13th verse it is written, 
^^Ye who sometimeB were far oflf, are made nigh by 



ONE BODY. 7 

the blood of Chrifit. For He is our peace, who hath 
made both one, and hath broken down the middle 
wall of partition between us; having abolished in 
Eis flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments 
contained in ordinances; for to make in Himself of 
twain one new man, so making peace ; and that He 
might reconcile both unto Ghod in one body by the 
cross, having slain the enmity thereby." Now, it 
is evident from this Scripture, that not only is the 
cross the basis of peace for the soul, but it is the 
foundation also on which rests the " one body " that 
God is now making of Jew and Ghentile before Him- 
self. And we see this most plainly if we only look back 
to our Lord's own presence upon earth. He forbids 
His disciples going into the way of the Gentiles — 
forbids their entering any city of the Samaritans. 
Need it be said that it was from no lack of love ? It 
was not that His heart did not yearn over the most 
reprobate of Samaritans ; it was not that He did not 
appreciate the Mth of a Gentile — ^He had not seen 
<<8uch faith, no, not in Israel.'' Notwithstanding, 
they were to go only to the lost sheep of Israel, 
because to such only He was sent, and so were they 
too. Now, here we find at once, that while there was 
this perfectness of grace in Christ, there was the full 
maintenance of the holy order of God. There was 
a state of things essentially different from what we 
have described in Eph. ii. There was a positive bar- 
rier even during His lifetime, the very thing being 
formally prohibited, which, after He died and rose, 
was not merely a duty, but the deiigYA. oi \<3s^,*^^ 



8 ONE BODY. 

only adequate answer in the saints to that death and 
resurrection. (See Matt, xxviii. 19.) 

How comes this to pass ? On what is so mighty a 
change founded P Upon the cross. It brings out the 
worthlessness of man, and most of all, the worthless- 
ness of favoured, privileged, religious man — of man 
under God's law. For if man under God's law 
failed, what other law could avail? The law of 
God was the wisest, the best, the holiest, and the 
justest dealing that it was possible to bring to bear 
upon man's natural state. And here was the total 
failure of man : not as if God did not know it &om 
the first, for He took care that in the earliest book 
of Scripture, and aU through, embedded in the very 
law itself, there should be plain words as well as 
shadows, showing that man would sin, and that 
only Christ, by His blood-shedding, by His death, 
oould avail. The very first revelation of the garden 
of Eden is a witness of both. Faith had no other 
expectation. But nevertheless there was a fall, 
patient, long-suffering trial whether it was possible 
to get any good out of man, in the dealings of the 
only wise God with man. And now it was demon- 
strated in the cross that all was ruined in man, and 
that the highest advantages, short of the cross of 
Christ, brought out the ruin most distinctly. Now 
there was room for God to work ; and, beloved friends, 
it is upon this that it is my joy to speak a little to- 
night. 

We have come down the stream ; we have seen 
what man was when it was a question of his work- 



ONE BODY. 9 

ing for God : we shall now look briefly at God 
when He puts forth His glorious power to work, 
not merely for man, but for His Son ; for oh I we 
never get the Ml blessing until we see this great 
and glorious truth, that God has at heart His Son — 
that God is thinking, not merely of a blessing for 
you, for me, for any of those that lore Him — ^yea, and 
in sovereign grace, for those who love Him not, if 
they repent and beEeve the Gospel — but that He has 
His eye upon Him who did all and suffered all for 
His glory, and has bound up that glory of Cfod with 
the ftdlest, richest, everlasting blessing of aU who 
believe in His name. And now, then, as the firoit 
of the cross of Christ (where we have the weakness of 
Gk)d, where nevertheless we have the triumph of God 
— God Himself coming down lower and lower still 
in love, not merely, so to speak, beseeching man, but 
laying all the weight and burden of an upon the Lord 
Jesus, thereby meeting the desperate need of sinners 
by His Son suffering for them), what do we find ? 
That in the cross He has given the death-blow to sin ; 
He has " put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself," 
as we are told. But, besides, by it all the distinctiouB 
of Jew and Gbntile pass away, and Gtxl brings out 
that to which He had always locked onward — ^that 
which was in His coimsels not only Jram the founda* 
tion of the world, but before it, and which conse- 
quently He had shown before there was a question 
of law, and before there was a question of sin. For 
it is remarkable, that the magnificent type which 
the apostle applies in Eph. v. to the mystery of 



10 ONE BODY. 

Christ and the OhiLrch, was brought in before sin 
entered (GFen ii.). In truth, it was a counsel that 
flowed out of what God was and is. It was God in 
His own love ; it was God working from what was 
in Himself. No doubt, the entrance of sin has given 
occasion for God to bring out His grace in blessed 
ways ; but, for aU that, we must ever remember that 
there were thoughts and coxmsels of grace in God 
Himself. There was that which He ever had in 
His own mind, for the revelation of which, no doubt, 
sin might fiimish the fit occasion. But sin was 
in no wise the suggestive spring any more than the 
measure. On the contrary, it was God indulging, 
so to speak, in the activity of His own perfect love ; 
at any rate, it was God thinking of^ filled with, 
working for. His own Son. And I think it is of 
deep interest to observe the fact just referred to — ^the 
shadow of the Church's imion with Christ preceding 
the entrance of sin and the provisions of grace in 
view of sin. 

And observe further, that as we see in the types 
of Genesis, so it is in the epistle to the Ephe- 
fiians. Where is it that you have the coxmsels 
of God traced out P Is it after man's sin has been 
portrayed in chapter ii. ? No ; but in the earliest 
verses of chapter i., where God gives the richest de- 
velopment of the coxmsels of His grace, entirely 
passing over and ignoring in the first instance all 
question of man's sin and of man's need. This we 
have afterwards and in the profoxmdest way. There 
IB, perhapB, no part of the word of God which shows 



ONE BODY. 11 

US the depth of human evil more than Ephesians ii. ; 
but this is not at all the first thought. Hence we 
find in the first chapter, ^^ Blessed be the GFod and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us 
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in 
Christ, according as He hath chosen us in Him before 
the foundation of the world, that we should be holy 
and without blame before Him in love." And then 
it is only just by the way that the apostle alludes to 
the fact of their sins, and in a single verse (the 7th), 
where we read, "In whom we have redemption 
through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according 
to the riches of His grace." With the exception of 
that incidental notice of the fact of our needing 
redemption, the remission of sins, you would not 
know from the first chapter of the epistle that the 
saints of God, these blest ones, had a single evil, or 
a particle of sin connected with them. That is, it 
is God perfectly acting from Himself, in and for His 
own Son; delighting in Him, putting honour upon 
Him, giving Him what was suited to Him out of His 
own resources of love, and hence boimdlessly to the 
saints, the body of Christ, as the end of chapter i. 
describes them. It is thus that the Holy Ghost is 
pleased to introduce these astonishing coimsels of 
grace. 

Then, in the second chapter, we have man's state 
looked at most thoroughly. We see him "Weighed 
and foimd wanting as in no other part of Scripture. 
We have him here, not as an active being, alive 
in sin, but as a lost being dead m %\si-— ^^ ^^'^ 



12 ONE BODY. 

in trespasses and sins." He is, therefore, hopelessly 
lost and utterly powerless in sins. The whole case 
is closed against him ; and it is to this condition of 
manifest moral death and subjection to Satan, that 
the grace of God applies itself, in His quickening, 
raising, heavenly power in Christ Jesus. 

But, again, we find that in the latter part of Ephe- 
sians ii. the cross of Christ is taken up, not merely 
in connexion with God's counsels, as in chapter i., 
nor even in view of their desperate need who 
are the objects of His counsels, as in the begin- 
ning of chapter ii., but in contrast to the previous 
ways of God upon the earth. He is addressing 
Gentiles. Was it not a suitable occasion for God to 
unfold to them the one new man, the mystery of 
Christ and the Church, the body of Christ ? They 
were hitherto ignored, evidently outside all that 
God had been doing of old. God had taken up a 
separated people and had tried them. The Gentiles 
were as non-existent, so to speak, before God. Not, 
of course, that the secret providence of God did not 
watch and work — ^not that the grace of God did not 
act as to individuals ; but, regarded as Gentiles, they 
were outside. But now these are the very objects of 
heavenly grace; toward Gentiles the call goes out 
loud and large. Not that they alone were brought 
into the Church, for it consists of Jews also ; but it 
was Gentiles whom it seemed meet to God to bring 
into relief, in contrast to the condition in which they 
were once, so as to make more manifest the blessing 
wbjoli His grace now confers on both, in Christ the 



ONB BODY. 13 

Lord. " Wherefore remember, that ye being in time 
past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called Unciroum- 
oision by that which is called the Circumcifiion in the 
flesh made by hands ; that at that time ye were with- 
out Christ, being aliens firom the commonwealth of 
Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, 
haying no hope, and without Ghod in the world : but 
now, in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were £ar oflf 
are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For He is 
our peace, who hath made both one." 

There we have another £EU)t, not only that they are 
made nigh to Gk)d, but both made one — Jew and 
Gtentile that now believe made one body, as is 
explained more fully afterwards, the middle wall of 
partition broken down, the enmity abolished in Hiff 
flesh, " even the law of commandments contained in 
ordinances, for to make in Himself of twain one 
new man." It is not merely a new life, but Christ 
and the Church form one new man, a condition of 
things that had never before existed — "one new 
man, so making peace ; and that He might reconcile 
both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain 
the enmity thereby : and came and preached peace 
to you which were afar offi and to tibem that were 
nigh." Thus the Gentiles had been dispensationaUy 
afar off, the Jews were comparatively nigh ; but now 
they were taken completely out of their old condition. 
It is not, you will observe, that the Gentiles who 
believe are raised up merely to the privileges which 
the Jews used to possess, but that there is now " one 
new man," wherein is neither Jew hot Qj^viNSl^^j. ^<^*^ 



14 ONE BODY. 

oonsequently , quit their previoufl states for a new and 
most blessed position of oneness in Christ, which had 
never existed before, save in the counsels of Groi. 

Here, then, is the Church, the body of Christ ; 
this is what God is working out. He is not only 
saving souls, He is gathering ; not only is He gather- 
ing into one, but He makes the believing Jew and 
Gentile, while they are on earth, though previously 
by His own command the most separate, now to be 
one new man in Christ, even His one body. 

There is another truth connected with tiie Church, 
revealed at the end of the chapter, which I merely 
notice by the way. Not only is there a body 
formed — one body in Christ, but there is a building 
upon earth, in which God dwells. Although it is 
not my business to-night to take up the subject of 
the dwelling or habitation of God, yet I cannot deny 
myself the joy of saying a few passing words on this 
wonderftd place which God has given to His Church. 

And first of aU, it is to be noticed, in the Old 
Testament there was no such thing as a building or 
dwelling of God, imtil there was a type of redemp- 
tion. No matter what might be His mercy or 
condescension to those He loved. He could not dwell 
with man imtil there was a basis of blood-shedding, 
by which He could righteously abide with him. 
Hence, all through the book of Genesis, for instance, 
God does not dwell with men ; nay. He never speaks 
of it, or promises it. But the moment the blood of 
the passover is shed, and you have Israel passing 
through the Bed Sea — ^the combined types of redemp- 



ONE BODY. 16 , 

tion (one answering to the blood of Christ, the other 
to the death and resurrection of Christ, in which a 
complete redemption is set forth in figure) — ^immedi- 
ately you hear of God having a habitation: God 
could now dwell in the midst of His people. It is 
not because the people were better: who could 
imagine that? Look at Israel at the Eed Sea; 
what were they to be compared with Abraham or 
Isaac, or even Jacob P Yet He who only visited 
the fathers can now dwell among the children, and 
put this word into their lips, " I will prepare Him a 
habitation/* How comes this P Ah, beloved friends, 
how little any of us estimate the mighty change and 
the wondrous effect of redemption? It is not a 
question of comparing men, or their faith, or their 
faithfrdness. God's estimate of redemption is the 
point ; and He shows that if there be only a type 
of redemption. He can come down typically, He 
can then dwell in the midst of His people. I admit 
this was only a preparatory thing. There was a 
visible token of it, suited, of course, to an earthly 
people ; but still there was the great distinct fact in 
Israel's history, as the very centre of their blessing, 
that God Himself deigned then to dwell in their 
midst. 

The same thing is foxmd here far more blessedly 
for the Church on earth. On earth — and mark, not 
before the cross, but since — God is pleased to make 
His people to be His habitation. He came down 
in the Person of Christ, but Christ abode alone as far' 
as the direlling-plaoe of God was ooxiXieraR^- '''''X^^- 



16 ONE BODY. 

f 

stroy this temple;" He was the only true temple. 
But when He died and rose, what then ? Eedemp- 
tion was aocomplished ; and now God oould desoend 
holily, righteously, suitably to His own character, 
and could dwell in His people. It is not because 
the New Testament saints axe more worthy in them- 
selves than those of old. He that knows himself and 
redemption, knows that such an idea is a fallacy 
and a falsehood ; knows that human nature is good 
for nothing as before Gbd ; knows that, in His pre- 
sence, there is no question of flesh, or what flesh can 
glory in, ^^ but he that glorieth, let him glory in the 
Lord." But this is not all; not only is there a 
Lord to glory in, but now we have actual redemption 
in Christ through His blood. What does God think 
of the precious blood of His Son P What does He 
feel about those on whom that blood is put by faith — 
those who are washed in it ? Does He not as it were 
say, " I can come now and take My place in their 
midst P" This is, indeed, one of the precious charac- 
teristics of the ChurcL It especially is, even now, 
the habitation of God. In virtue of this it is that 
the Church is called the " house of God," and TTia 
"temple" in different parts of Scripture. But I 
must not dwell longer on this, because my subject 
is " the body." 

We find, then, in EpL iv., that the Spirit of God 

presses this exhortation, " Endeavouring to keep the 

unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace." Next, He 

explains, "There is one body and one Spirit, even as 

jre are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, 



ONE BODY. 17 

one feith, one baptism ; one GFod and Father of all, 
who is above all, and through all, and in you all." 

Will it be imagined that this grand truth of the 
" one body '* does not affect the judgment and conduct 
of the Christian as well as his affections P We have 
been brought, I will suppose, to the knowledge of 
Christ ; we have foxmd in Him the Son of God, the 
Saviour ; we rest upon Him as our peace before God ; 
we caJl on Him as our Lord. But have I no relation- 
ahip with others on earth P Am I left here simply 
and solitarily to look up to Gk)d P Have I to thread 
my way through the mazes of this world, only using 
the word of God with prayer P I repeat. What are 
my relationships P Am I only a child of God with 
other children of His here and there P What am I 
to feel, as I look round upon those that name the 
excellent name — ithat call upon the Lord Jesus Christ, 
both mine and theirs P The One Body is the answer. 
GK)d has formed it ; He has formed it for Christ, it 
is His body. " We are members," as it is said, " of 
His body, of His flesh, and of His bones." It is not 
for you, it is not for me, to define, even in our natural 
relationships, our brothers and our sisters. Thank 
God, we are not asked : God does it; He gives what 
suits Him, even if it be only in the domain of earth 
and flesh. He does not give us what we might choose. 
We know our folly in this respect. He assigns each 
man a place — ^puts the high and the low according 
to His own wisdom. And in that which He is doing 
for His beloved Son, has He less to do or less to 
teach us P Is God's will of leas iaomfeTi\, ^ii^x^^*^5ci3Ksi 

c 



18 ONE BODY. 

in the mere outward world? Nay, my brethren, 
nay : even moral men dispute not the will of God as 
to natural relationships. We know what human 
lust may do — ^how it may break through every line of 
demarcation ; but still, after all, poor man finds even 
for himself, without thinking of God, the need and 
the value of owning the relationships which have been 
established in nature here below. Now, is it not a 
most solemn thought, and is it not a fact which ought 
to shame every Christian heart, that in that Church 
which is so near to God, in that which is the fruit of 
Hifl own perfect love, in that which He is creating for 
the everlasting glory of His beloved Son, what God 
orders, what God wills, what pleases God, is regarded 
as of infinitely less accoimt to Christians than even 
their natural relationships to each other ? Is it or 
is it not the fact ? Is it or is it not a grievous sin ? 

How do you account for this ? Whence the ter- 
rible triumph of the enemy P Why is it that there 
is such darkness over the whole subject of the " one 
body " now ? Is it because God has not revealed TTia 
mind? What can be plainer in Scripture? Only 
a portion of the proofs has been produced from a small 
portion of God's word ; but what can be clearer than 
that, founded upon the cross of Christ, a new condi- 
tion has been introduced and established of God ; that 
He is now calling out the Jews and Gentiles who 
believe, and forming them into " one body ? " — ^that, 
as He owns no other body than Christ's, so this is His 
will about us, and our obligation to Him, even as it 
is ibe evident and only meaning of His word that 



ONE BODY. 19 

speaks of His Church ? How is it, then, that such a 
truth escapes the thoughts of man — ^that you may 
search in vain to find it in writings new or old — ^that 
we have, some of us, long lived as Christians, and 
many of us once churchmen and dissenters so called, 
yet aU utterly ignorant of its character? But if 
so patent, and with such a ftdness of truth about it 
in God's word, how comes it to have been a forgotten 
tiling? 

It is not because there has not been sincerity — 
"godly sincerity" if you will — among Christians. 
But whatever is near to God, whatever is the present 
operation of God, is always that against which Satan 
sets himself with all his might and subtlety. And 
this, because it is bound up with Christ, because it is 
the special actual will of God for His people. There- 
fore Satan seeks to thwart and mar. He does not now 
try so much to darken other truths, but he takes up 
that which most nearly concerns the glory of Christ 
as now displayed; whatever that may be at any 
given time, there is the battle-field, there the arena, 
where no means is xmtried to blind and hinder God's 
children from understanding and doing the will of 
their God and Father. When God is gathering out 
His Church, then is the enemy's season of active, 
unceasing eflfort, to oppose, confound, and obscure 
all the truths connected with it. 

Besides, there is another question. How comes 

it that Satan finds it possible to succeed in the face 

of such evidence as the New Testament affords? 

Alas ! the reason of this, too — tiie moT^JL t^^js>q^--A& 

c 2 



20 ONE BODY. 

evident. The children of God may be the more readily- 
deceived, because the doctrine of the Church, the 
body of Christ, brings God too close to us — sets TTi« 
grace too richly before our souls — ^makes us feel (if our 
souls believe, bow, and enter into it), the vanity of all 
things here. Alas! our hearts shrink &om the feeling. 
We naturally love ease ; we like position in this 
world ; we are fond of a little reputation, it may not 
be, perhaps, in the vulgar world, but in the so-called 
Church — something, at any rate, for self, something 
outside the portion of Christ and the cross. The 
body is only for the Head, for the glory of God, that 
the Son of God may be glorified thereby. Man in 
nature disappears; his glory wanes and vanishes; 
his will is judged as sin. We do not like a doctrine 
and practice so peremptory, and withal so heavenly. 
Men like to do something, and be somebody. Man 
has in himself, wherever this is allowed, that which 
exposes him to the power of sin, to the malice and 
wiles of Satan ; and hence it is, that this great truth 
was no sooner revealed, than it began to fade. There 
is no testimony to it whatever in the early fathers, 
and of course a position more and more distant and 
antagonistic as you descend. Take up any writings 
you please : — ^Papists and Protestants, Episcopalians, 
Presbyterians, Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians — 
all ignore it. It is not that you will not find enough 
truth asserted and preached for souls to be saved by ; 
but the bare salvation of souls is not the whole truth, 
nor that part of the truth which reveals the Church 
of God. Were not souls saved before Christ ? Was 



ONE BODY. 21 

not salvation of the Jews P Were there not faithM 
souls before Gbd had a people upon earth ? Was it 
not so from the very beginning, before the flood and 
after it ? Most clearly and certainly. 

But there comes in another thing which was not 
true before, which God had not revealed or esta- 
blished till the rejection of the Messiah, and for which 
He had reserved the sending of the Holy Ghost from. 
Heaven. Now, in the cross of Christ, God has laid 
a foundation for this new work, and is gathering 
together out of Jews and Gentiles His assembly, 
made in Christ one new man. Man likes to be of 
importance to himself, and in this world. Just in 
proportion as he allows this, he falls a prey to the 
working of the enemy ; and the more easily does he 
deceive himself, because up to the cross of Christ 
there was room left for man more or less. Bis toted 
ruin, his enmity to God, his hatred of grace in the 
revealed person of the Son, were never brought out 
in their fulness xmtil then, Till that, God was not, 
could not be, known as He now is. But the only- 
begotten Son declared Him, and this in respect 
both of sin and of His righteousness — a new kind of 
righteousness, which, by all means and on every side, 
dears and blesses the guiltiest who now believes in 
Jesus. 

Now, if there is to be a heart growing up into the 
revelation which God has made of Himself in Christ 
according to His grace towards the Church, the one 
body of Christ, there must be the judgment of nature, 
root and branch — ^the judgment oi tlcLej^oA^m^^ftsNiScL 



22 ONE BODY. 

man arrogates some place to himself. The Church 
of God is based on the proved ruin of man, and is 
for the glory of God in His Son, as maintained by 
the Holy Ghost. Now, this will show the immensely 
important place of this truth as a matter for the 
soul, both in communion and in conduct. Away with 
what does not touch upon practice and the soul's 
relationship to God ! But the fact is, that so far 
from the truth of the Church leaving out heart and 
conscience, intercourse with God, worship and service, 
there is nothing which brings them out so much, and 
binds them so fast together, save only the truth of 
Christ's own Person; there is nothing more com- 
manding, comprehensive, and penetrating for the life 
and conversation of a Christian man. 

Take, for instance, all the difficulties men gather 
from the Old Testament : on what are they founded ? 
I speak now of the legitimate difficulties — at any rate 
what seem to be legitimate and authoritative to the 
mind of an uninstructed .believer. What, after aU, 
is their gist ? Eeasoning founded upon Old Testa- 
ment precejft or practice. But is the analogy just P 
How can we reason in an absolute way, if there be this 
" one new man" ? — ^if the Church is a novel, special 
thing which did not even exist then ? It is evident 
that conduct, for instance, foxmd in a David, or a 
Solomon — ^in an Abraham, or an Isaac, or a Jacob, 
may not apply now, but, on the contrary, be out of 
harmony with the ways God looks for in His Church. 
I am not speaking of those moral landmarks which 
always condemn falsehood, corruption, or violence: 



ONE BODY. 23 

no Christiaii is supposed to produce the sin of any of 
these men to justify his own evil. I speak of what 
was right and according to the will of God as then 
revealed. The moment the doctrine of the Church, 
the body of Christ, is seen, all such reasonings and 
difficulties have no more a place. God has now His 
Son in His presence as the risen meCn. There 
could not be such a thing as the body of Christ till 
Christ was there, not only as the Son, but as man, 
the Head of the body; Christ could not be there as 
man till the work of redemption was accomplished. 
Of old He had the title of the Son of Man given, 
looking onward to His assumption of himianity, when 
He who was God, and the Son of God, became a real 
man. But how could He take this place in Heaven P 
He was bom a man on earth. He was not a man 
until He was bom into the world. How take this place 
in Heaven ? Christ was not Head, still less was there 
the body, the Church, till then. " The Church, which 
is His body," assumes that Christ had become man, 
and, more than this, that He is Head, as the risen and 
ascended man. It is only after He died, as we know 
by His own figure of the com of wheat, that He pro- 
duced fruit (John xii.). But more than that. Not 
to stand upon figures only, but to take any Scripture 
that speaks in precise terms upon it, what do we find? 
Eead the end of Ephes. i. : " What is the exceeding 
greatness of His power to us- ward who believe, accord- 
ing to the working of His mighty power, which He 
wrought in Christ when He raised Him from the dead^ 
and set Him at His oton right hand m tKe lieooeul^ 



24 ONE BODY. 

places, far above all principaliiy , and power, and might, 
and dominion, and ereiy name that is named, not 
only in this world, hut also in that which is to come : 
and hath put all things under His feet, and gave Him 
to be Head over all things to the ChurchP Thus He 
has been given to the Churdi Head over all things; 
but it is after He was raised from the dead, and set 
at God's right hand. The risen man is Head 
there : even He never was Head till after redemption. 
He took His place there and thus. 

What IB the consequence of that, beloved friends P 
The body of Christ is heavenly, as the Head of the 
Church is. Man does not relish this — nay, many a 
Christian man finds it too high and hard. If he is 
a heavenly man, where is the room for the plans 
and designs and pursuits of literature, d science, of 
politics P Where are all these things that fill the 
mind and the appetites and the desires of men P Are 
they in heaven P Are warlike schemes — are courtier 
dreams iu heaven P You have, no doubt, the battle 
against the devil, who is turned out of heaven, as 
the Lord wars by the angels of His power by-and-by . 
But I need not say there is no place in His body 
for the pride, ambition, or energy of man. 

What, then, is the great idea of the Church of 
God P It is the body of Christ, after He has accom- 
plished redemption; and consequently, sin, as fetr 
as God's judging the believer, is completely gone, 
put away, in such sort as to glorify God and justify 
the believer. Founded upon this, those who believe 
are consequently not only regenerate of the Spirit, 



ONE BODY. 25 

and justified from their sins by the blood of Christ, 
but united to Him, their blessed Head, at the right 
hand of God. The Church of Gtod accordingly does 
not consist merely of the redeemed or saints. A 
"Christian** means more than a "saint" — ^much 
more ! I am aware therearemany who think it means 
much less, and would count my doctrine strange; 
because they consider everybody in these lands a 
Christian, and but very few on earth a saint — ^per- 
haps none till they get to heaven. But it is to me 
most evident — ^nothing more certain — ^that a Chris- 
tian is a saint, and a good deal more ; and that good 
deal more is, that he is a saint after G-od effected 
redemption in the blood of Christ ; that he is a saint 
united to Christ at God's right hand ; that he is a 
saint who has God dwelling in him, by the Spirit, 
for God now can dwell there. The atoning work is 
done : the blood has been shed and sprinkled. God 
can take up His abode there — does! How do I 
know it ? Because God has told me so in His word. 
One may have poor enjoyment of it, of course — ^that 
is another thing; but the enjoyment of the truth 
depends upon the measure in which our souls first 
rest upon it, believingly ; and then, unless we judge 
the flesh that hinders the realization of it, we cannot 
enjoy it either long or much if at all. 

God shows, then, in His word, that the Church is 
the union of believers — one with Christ, by the Holy 
Ghost, after He died, rose, and went to heaven. 
The consequence is, that we must consult what God 
enjoins on the members of that "body/^ ^^ ^^^i^\ 



26 ONE BODY. 

know how we are to walk and worship ; how we are 
to act and feel towards the other members of Christ ; 
and how to behave ia " the house of God." 

The New Testament occupies itself with these sub- 
jects, more particularly the epistles of St. Paul. It 
could not be formally or definitely in the Gospels, 
because they are devoted for the most part to a 
living Christ, closing with the facts of His death, 
resurrection, and ascension. You may find there 
preparations for the new work and testimony — ^not a 
few intimations of what was going to be done ; but 
all show that the building of the Church was not yet 
begun. In the epistles, on the other hand, we have 
revelations altogether foxmded upon the great fact 
that the building was going on, the body was being 
formed. And mark another thing, which I hope to 
develop on the next occasion I address you, namely, 
that along with the body of Christ goes the presence 
of the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. It is 
only just referred to here, to show the connexion : 
we shall find its importance afterwards. Those who 
have not examined fully the testimony of Scripture, 
will feel the weight and value of the instruction 
there ftimished, when that point comes more at 
length before us. But this at least is plain, that 
though it is a new work, entirely distinct from all 
that God had wrought before, there are great moral 
principles, as already hinted, which always abide. 
In every part of Scripture, in that which speaks of 
the times before the law, or during the law, as well 
as now under the Gospel, God is the righteous, 



ONE BODY. 27 

holy, almighty, faithful One, a God of longsuffering, 
goodness, truth : all this remains ; and as to it, the 
difference is, that all these attributes of God shine out 
more gloriously, and, in consequence, deepen the 
revelation of God, in addition to there being ways 
and workings of God which were not and could 
not be expressed before. What an accession of light 
when Christ, the true light, shone ! What an infinite 
display of God Himself in His Person ! And what 
shaJl we say of the cross, and death, resurrection and 
glorification of Jesus as the manifestation of God I 

Hence, in this new man, all the moral glory of God, 
of course, abides ; but now, in presence of that infi- 
nitely fuller manifestation, and the accomplishment 
of eternal redemption, is there to be no answer in 
the thoughts, and hearts, and ways of His children to 
what the God and Father of Christ is doing ? If, for 
instance, God calls a person into the place of a servant, 
there are certain responsibilities that attach to a ser- 
vant. But suppose these servants turn out thoroughly 
unfaithful, and end in rebellion, and God says, " I 
wiU have no more of this ; I will create a family and 
adopt children to Myself; I will bring people, accord- 
ing to My sovereign pleasure, out of the old condition 
into this new place." What then ? It is evident that 
to go back to what was true of the servants might be 
a most misleading guide when it became a question 
of the children ; and, m point of fact, it is and must 
be so. It is on this ground that Christians meddle 
with the world — occupy themselves with those things 
that please the flesh and give mgoxWiQfe \ici ^ss^sssn.. 



28 ONX BODY. 

In Gontraat with this^ Gh3d has given ns the glorionB 
truth that He has, as it were, bat one man (the 
first Adam being done with, and pronoimced to be 
mined, dead, buried in the grave of Christ). We, 
Christians, belong to the second Man, the Lord firom 
Heaven (1 Cor. xv.). There is "one new man," not 
only in contrast with old distinctions^ but as uniting 
all, Jewish or (Jentile saints, in one bodv — ^His body ; 
ibr that is the way in whidi it is presented in 
Ephes. ii. 

The consequence is, that we need, and Qod gives 
us, a new revelation ; He furnishes firesh instructions 
which had no place before. Supposing you had the 
New Testament in Old Testament times, what would 
have been (I will not say the worth, but) the effi^ 
of it then ? Perplexing beyond measure ! A Jew 
would not have known what to do with it. He 
might have been struck with the wisdom, beauty, 
holiness^ and love of it all ; but how to act upon it 
and reconcile it with the law given by Moses, it would 
not have been possible for him to know. He wonld 
have been commanded by the Old Testament to keep 
wholly apart firom the Gkntiles ; he would have been 
told by the New Testament that they formed one 
body, and that they were all one in Christ — that both 
had access by one Spirit unto the Father. He could 
not have put these things together ; and no wonder : 
they were not meant to be tc^;ether. They belong 
to distinct times and to totally diiforent states. The 
confusion of the two is one way in ii^ch Satan 
Aas teVzmphed in the professing Church. Alas I it 



ONE BODY. 29 

wa4S not otherwise under God's dealings with the 
Jews. While He was standing by His law, they 
were breaking it; while He was holding up the 
unity of the Godhead, they were set upon idols and 
going after the gods of the nations. They were 
utterly unfaithfal to their testimony ; but I am per- 
suaded that a Jew, dark as he was and Uttle versed 
in the mind of God, would have perceived that the 
instructions of the New Testament were irreconcilable 
with his calling. But God never gave it thus. 
When the work of atonement was finished on the 
cross, God brought out these new revelations by 
degrees. Why P Because there was a new state of 
things — " one new man" — ^that did not exist before. 
Consequently, there was a new word of God suited 
to bring out the due relationship of Christians to 
one another, and the working of God in the Church, 
the body of Christ. 

Let me notice, briefly, before I close, the practical 
effect — " endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit 
inthe bond of peace." What interest this has, if really 
appKcable in the face of our divisions ! Consider for 
a moment the case of a Christian ; he is awakened, 
finds peace, but questions what he is to do. How 
truly it has been the fact that many of us have been 
perplexed in such circumstances. We may have 
known very little of the word of God ; but still we 
found difficulties in reconciling that word with what 
we saw aroxmd us — especially such a word as this, 
"endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit." 
But it is really a plain and bunbl^ ^«4ii, \ \^s^^ 



30 03rE Bomr. 

BfAlnng to do with matiiig the nmtr; I haTe not to 
set np somethiiig, or jom what others make. What 
then?' I am to be diligent in keeping the nrnty of 
the SpinL In other words, God the H0I7 Ghoet 
has made a imitj ; and the basinees of the belierer 
is to observe that raiitj — to keep it What an 
ftmfl^ng relief for a humble soul, that feels his 
liabilitj to mistake, in danger of being either too 
lax on the one hand, or too narrow on the other ! 

What is the miitT of the Spirit? Where does it 
begin and end ? What is its nature and diaracter ? 
Scripture tells us that He has establidied a unity 
among men, jet apart from and abore them. What 
is it ? The answer is, It is in the Church, which Qod 
has made the bodj of Christ What a comfort it is 
(or a believer that he has simplj to judge by tiie word 
of God where the unity of the Spirit is I But how? 
I come to a place, and I am at a loss to know where 
to turn. Where shall I find the unity of the Spirit 
of God? How do I know it? God has left land- 
marks ; He has given clear, distinct light in His 
word. I search and see that He is gathering 
tc^;ether the children of Ghod into one ; He gathers 
them unto the name of Christ, assuring them that 
where they are thus. He is in their midst I never 
get the key to any spiritual difficulty without Christ 
Do I merely look for the unity of Christians ? It is 
a delusion and a danger without Christ Christians 
— where shall I n^ find them? In what pit of error 
may I not discover some stray child of God? If I 
^ m quest ot the children of God, I may easily 



ONE BODY. 31 

see them in this form of worldliness or in that; I 
may know them unattached here, close and bigotted 
there ; I may find them gathered together according 
to human rules, and for entirely minor objects ; I 
may hear them setting up the names of men, certain 
special doctrines, favourite views, as their centres of 
union. Is this the uniiy of the Spirit ? What, then, 
is His unity, and how is it to be kept ? It is that 
which H^ forms for the glory of Christ. 

Christians, of course, are those that compose the 
iHiity ; yet keeping it consists not in the bare fact 
that they are Christians, but that they are gathered 
unto Christ — ^gathered not to His bodily presence, but 
unto His name, now that He is in heaven ; none the 
less, however, for that, but the more counting on Hia 
presence with them, though unseen, faithful to Hia 
own word. If I isolate myself where I may thus 
meet, I am indifferent to that which was an object of 
the death of Christ (John xi. 52), and I am setting at 
nought the unity of the Spirit ; if I value the one 
and am diligent to keep the other, I shall meet on that 
ground and on none other. Many members of Christ, 
no doubt, are elsewhere now, who ought to be there, 
as truly as any that are gathered to that name ; but 
am I to hold aloof, who know my Master's wiU, 
because others see it not, or are faithless if they 
see it ? Am I to say His wiU cannot be done ? 

Therein lies part of the ruin of Christendom ; there 
is the painful fact, that what Christ died for, Satan 
has set himself to oppose, and has succeeded in it. 
"Wonder not; for everything that QfO^i \m!\et\siks?^ *^ 



32 oisB Bomr. 

first of all put into man's hand, who is reiponsiUe 
to use it for Him. Alas ! thoe is hot one iasne-^die 
utter fidfane of man; and thcsre wiUbenoieTeraalof 
the tale till Jesus oomes again. Xaj, erai then will 
be another trial of man, to show whether he naes 
ibe coming and kingdom of Jesos for God's g^oij ; 
and the end of the millenHiimi will prore that, as it 
was heksKy so it will be then. NerertheleBB, taiOi 
orenxones at all tbneBw See that joa hold ^he trotli 
tuL Let none cheat yon out of Ae Herring wUdi 
€iod has given, and caDs yon to eigoj. Foonded oo 
the dooB, miited to Christ, waiting iar His letmiiy 
Ae Cbnvch is Ae predoos fruit of €rod's gnceu 
Afier His people departed from its power, and even 
let sl^ Ae bare fixm of tins great truth. He has 
brought it be£ase tibem anew. I eannot doobt that 
its leeoieiy, in any measure, m TonchsaJfiBd of God 
in Tiew of Ae Ixsd's ipecdy eoming: else how do 
yon aeeoimt fiv it that God has been pleased to recall 
the bride to pot herself as it weie, in readincas tar 
the Kidegroom, signally bringing ont agacn that 
maas of heaifcnly tEsdmoi^ which had been deqiSBd, 
deserted, and fixgotten? Hs^py are they who 
not only bow and receife die grace of Crod in ikf 
but keep the treasme frithfiilly ! ~ Beiitalsl. I ccme 
quickly; hold that £Kt winch dvia haetL that no 
man take thy cxown.'' Be aassred, Is^thnsi, diaft 
we are in tiae same danger as nbai €t&^ wgk" in, of 
letting ^f that which God has giren. ws^; and that 
€W&T engine which Satan can de-Tke to- iimg ns 
£WM^—uiing adiantage of cBEek&B&esE^ ddScoltBe^ 



ONE BODY. 33 

trials, or anything that can tax us to the utmost — 
will all be put in force, because he hates, not only us, 
but Christ and His truth. But as the Lord has been 
pleased to raise up again a testimony to His person, 
work, and heavenly glory, so I pray and beseech you, 
especially the younger of my brethren and sisters, 
who are here — all who may not have felt its force 
and preciousness — ^more particularly you who have 
been trained from your earliest perceptions of truth, 
brought in, as it were, rather than out, at compara- 
tively little cost, and who have not known (as some 
others) the wrenching of many a tie, with a deep 
disciplinary work in the heart, realizing gradually 
the true condition of Christendom; — ^I call upon you 
all to beware lest Satan should, in any insidious 
way, lead you from the only solid divine rock, in the 
midst of the rising surges of apostasy. Fully do I 
admit, that all who are brought into this glorious 
place, the body of Christ, ought to walk and carry 
themselves in a way suitable to such a position. It 
is a deep shame where there is no devotedness beyond 
what existed before this further measure of truth 
dawned on our souls ; not only a shame to us, but a 
serious hindrance to the truth, and a reproach upon 
the grace of God that revealed it and brought our 
souls into it, that after all there should be such an 
unworthy manifestation of its power. But how are 
we to deal with this ? Are we therefore to slight or 
doubt the truth ? Are we, because of our unfaith- 
frdness, to put aside the plain word of God, that 
oondemnB us, for a lower ground oiiNi\ii!fi!cL^^ ^'axi 

D 



34 ONE BODY. 

rest more consistently and comfortably ? Are we to 
yield to that which the fleshly mind has often sought 
and fallen into — ^to set up other centres than Christ, 
other ministry than that of the Spirit ? Are we to 
abandon the only place and principle which the New 
Testament allows for the members of Christ's body, 
on the unbelieving plea, that, as to walking according 
to this heavenly light, it is a thing impracticable 
in such a world as this ? There are, beyond ques- 
tion, difficulties and perils neither few nor small in 
maintaining it. There is constant need of self- 
denial, most surely, if it is to be walked in with 
God. 

But how are we to judge, if not by the word of 
God? Are we prepared to surrender His word as 
our only standard of judgment ? Now, while that 
word of course condemns deeply the shortcomings 
of those who are thus privileged of God — ^not only 
brought into the imity of the Spirit, as all saints 
are, but brought into the conscious knowledge and 
faith of it ; while the failure of such is, in a certain 
sense, more inexcusable than that of any others, yet at 
least such are justifying God and His word and 
Spirit against themselves in a humbling way. Taking 
our stand upon this, that no one should glory save 
in the Lord, we shall find, and painfully too, that 
we are brought into this place to learn our faults as 
we never knew them — ^the shortcomings of others as 
we never suspected them. We may be astonished 
at the manifold failures, trials, hairbreadth escapes, 
and deep occasions of shame; but how come these 



ONE BODY. 35 

to be BO seen and felt P Because it is not the ground 
of the Church ? Nay ! but because it is. And one of 
the most comforting things to our faith, in that which 
naturally might perplex, is, that we learn the present, 
permanent value of the Scriptures as we never 
proved it before. Take all the ways of God in dis- 
cipline: they did not apply while we were mixed 
up with the world-church ; but how precious, profit- 
able, and indispensably needed when we endeavour 
to keep the Spirit's unity! Take again all the 
warnings about the world : we hardly knew what it 
was. Is it not with Christians a constant question 
what the world is ; or is not the answer that they give 
us the proof of an unsuspected, blinding influence? 
They have something or other which they avoid doing, 
and this they call " the world." But the moment we 
see the body of Christ, the world acquires a plain 
meaning : if we realize what it is to be among those 
"within," those "without" are no longer a vague, 
uncertain thing. 

Let us not fear, then, to quit all for the honour of 
God in this world ; let us look to Him for grace that 
we may bear all rather than abandon it. There may 
be only two or three ; but yet if they contemplate 
the body of Christ, shutting out none save according 
to His will, not for any feelings of their own, it is the 
only thing that is, or ever was, divinely large in this 
selfish world, as far as men are concerned. I do not 
mean that any who blaspheme Christ, or who make 
light of blasphemers in their deeds, if not in their 
words, should be sanctioned. "0 toj ^ovil^ ^iRscjkfe 

D 2 



36 ONE BODY. 

not thou into their secret ; unto their assembly, mine 
honour, be not thou united.'* It is vain to argue 
that the Spirit's imity can make so light of Chrifit 
and His glory. I say not that individually such 
may not be Christ's : we know what Satan may do 
even with one who really loves the Lord — ^how 
he may ensnare him into denying his Master, and 
denying Him with oaths, too ; but who would con- 
tend for justifying such sin, or having communion 
with the guilty, till it was put away ? 

I repeat, then, if there be only two or three, and 
they endeavour to " keep the unity of the Spirit in the 
bond of peace," with them is my place as a Christian. 
My heart should go out to every Christian, in what- 
ever circumstances, whether nationalist, dissenting, 
or, if there be such, in popery ; my heart should go 
out, spite of the error and evil — ^yea, the rather 
because of these things, in intercession. But then, 
am I to give up diligent observance of the Spirit's 
imity ? Am I to follow and join them in what I 
know to be unscriptural and sinful, because there is a 
Christian or many Christians there P Surely not! "We 
ought to get them out, with and for the Lord. How 
is this to be done ? Not by plunging ourselves into 
the mud, but, on the contrary, by taking our stand 
resolutely on the rock outside of it; and there, 
seeking grace from God that, by the manifestation of 
the truth in every man's conscience, and by holding 
out the light of Christ in the word — ^pressing, too, the 
responsibility of Christ's body on His members, they 
maj- be turned irom the error of their way. Never 



ONE BODY. 37 

deny that they are members of the body of Christ ; 
remind them of that very fact and of its gravity — 
that they are members of His body: why should 
they value any other body? If members of that 
'* one body," why not own it, and own it always, 
and nothing else P If they belong to the unity of 
the Spirit, why not endeavour to keep it ? God is 
now raising a question, not about Popery and 
Protestantism, but about Christendom's denial of 
His Church, Christ's body. Our business is not to 
originate a Church of the present or future, but to 
cleave to the Church God has made, and consequently 
to confess the sin of all rivals — to repudiate them 
and come out from them. Let us put away every 
human invention in the things of God, and keep 
ourselves from idols. The word of God at all times 
calls upon His children to be subject to Himself and 
to His will. Are we so doing ? On the one hand, " If 
ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them ;" 
on the other, " To him that knoweth to do good and 
doeth it not, to him it is sin." Surely, if there be 
one thing in which, more than another, human will is 
most evidently sin, it is in tliat place where God 
exalts the Lord Christ ; where He has sent down the 
Holy Ghost that He may be a spring of power in 
His people's obedience. 

Though this be merely an introductory lecture, and 
therefore I cannot be supposed to enter into all the 
proofs now — only laying down a kind of foundation, 
for the Buhjeota which we hope to ig\3Ji«vxa\ ^^V\.^^ 



38 ONE BODY. 

trust that enough has been said to make plain, even 
to the least mature of those *who hear me, the im- 
mense importance of their seeking from God to 
realize that they are not only saints, but Christians, 
resting upon redemption, united to Christ, and re- 
sponsible to act as members of His body, diligent 
in keeping the unity of the Spirit and none other in 
this world. This is a divine obligation, superior to 
any changes in the Church's state here below. It is 
no question of numbers, but a duty always binding, 
even though there were only two or three who saw 
the truth. 



"ONE SPIEIT." 

1 Coa. xii. 1—13. 
LECTURE II. 



My task to-night is that which I am persuaded 
ought to be the business of every Christian man, 
not in word only, but in deed and in truth — to 
assert the rights of the Spirit of God in the Church 
of Q-od. I say, to assert His rights, for I assume here 
the personality of the Holy Ghost. It is needless 
now to give any proofs of this any more than of Hi> 
Deity. These truths can be taken for granted, not as 
if there were not abimdant proofs in the word of 
God, but because they are at present uncalled for. 
But it is another thing, beloved Mends, when we 
speak of the rights of the Holy Ghost — ^His proper 
sovereign action in the Church, flowing from His 
personal presence as sent down from heaven. On 
this subject many, find difficulties and obscurities; 
and great ignorance exists even among the children 
of God, and those, too, who may have been greatly 



40 ONE SPIRIT. 

blessed ; in and by whom the Holy Ghost may have 
acted powerfully for the good of souls. Unless, 
however, we know this truth from God, unless we 
have it as a divine certainty in our souls, it is dear 
that, whatever grace may do in givin'g one practical 
subjection, yet there must be much lost, if we do not 
know the special ways in which it is the wiU of God 
that the Holy Ghost, present both in the individual 
and in the Church of God, should be honoured. On 
this theme — a large one for a single discourse — ^I 
propose now to enter. 

Here, too, as in treating of the "one body," I 
would show from God's word that which was always 
true of the Spirit, and which, therefore, has no 
special connexion with the present time, in order 
that we may the better discern in what God is now 
manifesting Himself, and how it is that Christians 
— for of them I speak — are apt to be mistaken as to 
this. A mistake here is so much the more serious 
a thing, as it is a question of duly recognizing a 
divine Person. If we maintain the title of the Holy 
Spirit to act as He will in the Church, no question is 
raised about His work in souls from the beginning. 
No person intelligently acquainted with the Scrip- 
tures doubts the fact or its importance ; neither is 
there the least thought, wish, or motive to do so. The 
Holy Spirit has always been the direct agent in 
whatever God Himself has undertaken. If we look 
at creation, the Spirit had His part there. If we look 
again at the elders who obtained a good report 
through faith, no believer questions for a moment 



ONE SPIRIT. 41 

that it was only by the operation of the Holy Ghost 
that man beKeved then as now. He wrought in 
Abel, Enoch, Noah, and in all others whom the 
Scriptures testify as the line of saints. So, again, 
when Q-od espoused His people Iferael, if He wrought 
in any especial fashion suited to the display of His 
glory in their midst, it was the Spirit of God who 
was the energetic power behind and within. It was 
He that wrought, for instance, from a Moses down 
to a Bezaleel, from Samson up to David. When 
we come to the prophets, it need scarcely be said 
it was imder the power of the Holy Ghost that holy 
men of Qt)d spoke ; the Spirit of Christ made them 
. to be witnesses beforehand of His sufferings, and of 
His glories that were to follow, little as they might 
themselves understand His sufferings. Thus, there 
is no disposition whatever in those who stand for 
present privileges, to obscure, but on the contrary 
to give the fullest value to, aU that the Holy Ghost 
has ever wrought ; for in truth there never was any- 
thing of God in which He did not work. 

But when we come to the New Testament, a new 
thing comes to view. A despised, crucified, depart- 
ing Son of man was a strange sound (John xii. 34). 
They looked for Christ to abide for ever, and to reign 
in glory and righteous blessing upon earth. But 
gradually, as man, and Israel especially, rejected Him, 
the truth — ^astonishing to the Jew — dawned more 
and more, that He, the Messiah and Son of God, was 
going to leave the earth. Gentiles, I am aware, 
think little of this; but do they, ttiei^feit^^ ^<:s^ 



42 ONE SPIRIT. 

superior wisdom P To the Jew it was a most start- 
ling aimouncement, and at first sight irreconeileable 
with the law and prophets. They had looked for 
Him, the promised One, and their hearts delighted 
in His presence : it* was what kings and prophets had 
desired most earnestly. God had put the desire 
into their souls ; but now that it was gratified in His 
coining. He is going to leave them, to sink down in 
sorrow and shame and death — ^the death of the cross 
— ^under man's, ay, and under God's, hand ; and not 
merely this, but when He rose again (instead of 
maintaining His glory from the throne of His father 
David, and filling the earth with the blessedness 
that was foretold, and accomplishing, and more than 
accomplishing, aU that their hearts had so fondly 
hoped was just about to dawn and for ever brighten 
this world), He was about to leave the world in its 
darkness; at any rate, He was about to retire again to 
the heavens whence He came. But if He was about 
to go on high, it was not as He came down ; for as 
the Son of God, He had come down to become man — 
"the Word was made flesh;" and now as man, 
risen from the dead. He was leaving the world to 
take His place at the right hand of God ; and during 
His absence on high, He would send down the Holy 
Ghost in a way never before known. The Old 
Testament prepares the heart for a present Messiah, 
and the outpouring of the Holy Ghost as the needed 
appropriate meed paid to the reign of the Messiah 
over the earth ; but the Messiah, on His death and 
reBuireetioJi, disappearing from the view of the world 



ONE SPIRIT. 43 

that had cast Him out, entering into a new and 
heavenly scene, and the Holy Ghost sent down 
personally in His absence to be here while He was 
there — ^aU this was something wholly unexpected by 
the Jew. If Gentiles do not turn aside and wonder 
at the great sight, it is certainly not from excess of 
spiritual feeling or intelligence. We may find, of 
course, the wonder of stupidity ; but there is such a 
thing as no wonder, just because there is no real 
thought about it. I beKeve this is the reason why, 
if there be, on the one hand, the wonder of men 
who are surprised, there is a lack of wonder in others, 
because they are too engrossed in earthly things to 
be really concerned. 

Now this, next to Christ, is the central truth of 
the New Testament ; but so far from its being the 
solid ground on which Christians are now walking, 
in point of fact, aU is reduced in their minds to a 
mere continuation of the influence which the Holy 
Ghost has always exerted. The consequence is, that 
all men who reject His special presence in Person on 
earth, as a consequence of redemption, are driven into 
the most painful expedients in order to evade the 
plainest Scriptures. I may just mention one case: it 
will perhaps startle some that such assertions should 
be made, and especially by a person of large reputa- 
tion for spiritual knowledge. It will show where 
want of faith, as to the great truth of the actual 
presence of the Holy Ghost in a way never experi- 
enced before, lands those who oppose it systematically. 
In order to escape the clear intimatioii oi ^ixs^ «sAl 



44 ONE SPIRIT^ 

incomparable blessing in the shape of the Comforter, 
they allege that the Holy Q^host, who had alwajrs 
been given, depeirted from the earth when the Lord 
was here, in order that the Lord should give Him 
once more on His own ascension to heaven. Thus, 
the time of the Saviour's presence on earth would be, 
not a bright and happy feast, but dearth, as regarded 
the Spirit of God ! I just name the thought, in order 
that you may see the excessive violence, not to say 
folly, to which unbelief reduces even intelligent men 
of Q-od. Need I say, on the contrary, that those who 
surrounded the Saviour, and were blessed by TTi> 
teaching, had all the Old Testament saints ever 
enjoyed, and a great deal more ? The Holy Ghost 
had quickened their souls, like their predecessors, by 
giving them faith in Christ. Besides, the disciples 
had the Messiah's presence, and the manifestation of 
grace and truth in Him and all His words and ways. 
No doubt there was much they could not then bear, 
as the Lord HimseK told them ; but still they were as 
truly believers as any had ever been before them. 
The fact is, such reasoning is the puny eflfort of man 
to escape from the solemn truth of God. 

The New Testament is most explicit. Our Lord first 
of all brings out the.doctrine of the Spirit; and this, as 
fully meeting the need of man to be bom of the Spirit 
and to have the Holy Ghost in order that he should be 
able to worship the Father in spirit and in truth. But 
more than this. He prepares the disciples for the 
mighty work in spreading the truth and the grace of 
Ood. The Holy Ghost was necessary for this ; and 



ONE SFIRIT. 46 

accordingly we have it in chap. vii. — ^a Scripture which 
it is impossible to escape. The Lord had put it in a 
figurative way, that out of the belly of him who 
believed should flow rivers of living water. " This 
spake He of the Spirit," which should not only be 
given to a person in order to make him believe, but 
"which they that believe should receive; for the 
Holy Ghost was not yet [given], because that Jesus 
was nofryet glorified." Lengthy reasoning on such a 
Scripture would be a dishonour to the word of God. 
Where there is an obscurity, we may try to explain and 
illustrate ; but where the language employed is plainer 
than any that could be substituted in its stead, I feel 
that it is due to Scripture simply to press that plain 
meaning. 

In the later chapters of the same gospel, again, 
we have our Lord bringing out, not merely the fact 
that after the glorification of Jesus the Holy Ghost 
was to be given, as He had not been before; but, 
besides, we have His personal action, when sent and 
come, entered into fully and definitely. Hence in 
John xiv. He is spoken of as the Comforter. Mark 
the importance of this. We may reason about the 
Holy Ghost being given, as if it meant no more than 
a spiritual power, but we camiot thus attenuate the 
sent Comforter. Who is He but the Holy Ghost 
Himself? No one can say that " Comforter " means 
a miracle, or a tongue, or any operation you please. 
Doubtless He works in all these various ways ; but 
it is a real Person who replaces the Messiah when 
He leaves the eartL Just read a terw Ner^<&^ ^l *^^ 



46 ONE SPIRIT. 

chapter, in order to make this still plainer : " I will 
pray the Father, and He shall give you another 
Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever." 
There, again, we have what is most evident. Mirades 
have been ; tongues cease ; prophecies and knowledge 
pass away ; but here we have a divine Person, who 
abides with the saints for ever — " even the Spirit of 
truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it 
seeth Him not, neither knoweth Him : but ye know 
Him ; for He d welleth with you, and shall be in you." 
The world was bound to receive Jesus, and after 
an outward manner it had Him there ; but here we 
find One who, not having become incarnate, could not 
in any way be brought before the eyes of the world. 
I admit, of course, the world does not really receive 
Jesus in a spiritual manner any more than the Holy 
Ghost ; but stiU there is a pointed reference to the 
manner of the Holy Ghost's presence here below, 
which excludes Him from all apprehension on the 
world's part, as an object either of sight or of 
knowledge. 

Again, in John xiv. 26, we read, " the Comforter, 
which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send 
in my name. He shall teach you all things, 
and bring all things to your remembrance, what- 
soever I have said imto you." It is not a gift 
or power or influence merely, but a Person sent, 
and a Person who teaches all things, and brings 
all the Lord's sayings to their remembrance. Then, 
in chap. xv. 26, " but when the Comforter is come," 
it IB not merely in this case " sent " (because one 



ONE SPIRIT. 47 

might argue, perhaps, about the sending of an in- 
fluence), but ^^ comeJ^ "When the Comforter is 
come, whom I will send imto you from the Father, 
even the Spirit of truth [in every way guarding this 
most weighty theme], which proeeedeth from the 
Father, He shall testify of me : and ye also shall bear 
witness, because ye have been with me from the be- 
ginning." Assuredly we have the Holy Spirit's 
comings presented with solemnity and distinctness. 
In the former chapter the Father sends Hitti in 
Christ's name ; in this, Christ sends Him from the 
Father. In the one case, He is said to bring all 
things Christ had spoken to their remembrance ; in 
the other. He comes down from the Son, and bears 
witness of Him. They had been conversant with Him 
upon earth, and were to attest it as witnesses ; also 
the Spirit from Him in Heaven comes down, that 
there should be, as it were, these joint witnesses of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

Then in the sixteenth chapter of John we have the 
truth stiU further unfolded, and, if possible, with 
increasing energy, as it is indeed of the deepest 
interest and importance. In chapter xiv. the Lord 
had told them that they ought to rejoice, because 
He went to the Father. He was leaving a scene of 
humiliation and suffering to be in the home of the 
Father's love and glory. Had their love been simple, 
had they been thinking of Him, not of themselves, 
they would have rejoiced because He was going to 
the Father. But now, in chapter xvi. He puts it 
upon other ground : " It is expedieiA fet you \;«xA 



48 ONE SPIRIT. 

not only, as it were, for me] that I go to the Father." 
What! expedient for those poor, weak, trembling 
disciples that He had watched over, in the face of all 
Israel who despised Him and would not be gathered 
to Him ? Surely imder His wing He had gathered 
those little ones, and sheltered them; yea, in the 
very hour of His own rejection He had turned His 
hand upon them. And now He must leave them. 
Yet it was expedient for them that He should go to 
the Father. How could this be ? There is but one 
answer ; and it is the answer that the Lord gives. 
It is what, in His mind, made it expedient. Blessed 
as it was to have the Messiah, His presence, just be- 
cause He was a man upon earth with a group of 
disciples around Him, was necessarily limited. He 
could not thus be, as man, everywhere throughout 
the earth. The Holy Ghost had not, like the Son, 
taken human nature into union with His Person. 
But more than that, when redemption was eflfected, 
He could, in the most intimate way, bring into the 
hearts of the disciples all the value that flowed from 
Christ and His work — Christ exalted to heaven and 
estimated of God the Father there. 

Thus, then, were the great foundations of truth 
laid. The Lord Jesus would not leave this world 
or go to the Father, until every question that God 
had with guilty man was settled for ever. When 
sin was put away by the sacrifice of Himself on the 
cross, when righteousness was established in Christ 
risen from the dead and exalted on high, it was 
not merely all pure grace, as before, but now it be- 



ONE SPIRIT. 49 

came a question of God's righteousness through the 
work of the Saviour. The efficacy of His blood 
turned the scale in favour of man ; for it was the man 
Christ Jesus who had thus glorified God about sin. 
No doubt, He was His own beloved Son, the inesti- 
mable gift of His own grace ; and man could boast 
nothing, for He was despised and rejected of man — 
hated without a cause. Still, there was the fact, that 
God had so looked down upon earth, more especially 
upon the cross, to find the man who suflFered all, that 
God Himself might be glorified. This truth changed 
everything. Now, it became a question, so to speak, 
for Qt)d : what could He do for this blessed man ? If 
He was God's Son, was this a reason why He should 
love or exalt Him less ? He raises up from the grave 
the man Christ Jesus, and sets Him at His own right 
hand. That was not only a personal act in honour 
of Christ, but for believers it is the measure, in 
infinite grace, of acceptance which is now theirs in 
virtue of Him. All heaven was filled with wonder 
and praise at the sight of man, made a little lower 
than the angels, taken up in the Person of Christ, far 
above all principalities and powers, to sit on the 
throne of God. Tea, God Himself from that moment 
has made it His business and delight to show His 
value for the man who, in the face of sin, death, 
Satan, and divine judgment, retrieved all His cha- 
racter, and brought glory to His name in delivering, 
by suffering for, the guilty to the uttermost. Before 
that, man had been the constant public agent in 
dishonouring God. Never was God so di^litfc^, W 

E 



60 ONE SPIRIT. 

suited, provoked by any of His oreatureB as by man. 
Satan, when he left his first estate, once and for ever 
forfeited his place. There might still be a more 
terrible judgment awaiting him ; but there was no 
mercy — ^no beam of hope pierced through the dark- 
ness into which sin plunged a fallen angel. But now, 
after man had preferred darkness to light, after his 
manifold course of rebellion against God was run, 
the tide was turned in the death of Christ, and God 
was placed by His work under an obligation, so to 
say, to man to bless him through and in Christ the 
Lord. 

Hence that expression of which St. Paul is so full, 
" the righteousness of God." If man was more than 
ever proved to be lost, God now had a debt to pay. 
As a part of His discharge of it. He sets the Lord 
Jesus, as man, at His own right hand ; He justifies 
freely and fully every believer ; and He sends down 
the Holy Ghost, in order that He might be the 
divine link between that blessed Man in glory and 
those who believed in Him, even such as had trem- 
bled at the thought of His departure. What a 
change there is now! It was not only that there 
was intelligence, but there was power. Peter, who 
had denied the Lord, could now stand boldly for- 
ward and say, " But ye denied the Holy One and 
the Just." They were all dumb. His denial was 
completely gone, and I might venture to say, more 
gloriously to the Lord, than if he had never uttered 
it. There was a positive strength and triumph in 
hiB BOvH ; there was a knowledge, not only of his own 



ONE SPIRIT. 61 

weakness and worthlessness, but of God and His 
grace — a sense of what Christ was for him, that was 
beyond all he had ever known before. I do not say 
beyond grace, unless Peter had done what he did ; 
but surely there was immense force in his words. 
They knew well what he had done, publicly done, 
in the high priest's hall, and before people ready 
enough to see the faults of a disciple. Yet this 
repeated and recent denier of his Lord was so fiill 
of courage, through abundance, of grace, as to stand 
forth and confront and tell them that it was they 
that "denied the Holy One and the Just." His 
conscience was purged ; he had no more conscience 
of sins (Heb. x.) ; all was blotted out that could be 
against him before God. Yea, he was justified from 
aU things. 

This was merely one fruit, precious as it was ; and 
what did it grow out of? Peter had been a believer 
before, and had already eternal life : what, then, 
was its spring ? It was part of the result of the 
great salvation made good in the power of the Spirit 
of God come down from heaven, and thus working 
in Peter. No doubt there was previous moral exer- 
cise, deep penitence for his sins, and the restoration 
of his soul ; but then there was more than all this, 
there was the positive power of the Spirit. It is 
here, though not here only, that the Church shows 
its weakness through imbelief. To the believer it 
is not a mere negative question now, but one of real 
present power; as was said of Timothy — who needed 
to be Teminded of it — ^that it was not a ^^mV oi i<s»2t 
E 2 



52 ONE SPIRIT. 

he had received, but of power, and of love, and of a 
sound mind. 

But now we must return to the great fact : the 
Lord Jesus, in John xiv., xv., xvi., shows what was 
to replace His personal presence upon earth — a real 
divine Paraclete — ^He whom we call the third Person 
in the Trinity. I do not, however, admire the ex- 
pression "second" or "third" Person; and for this 
reason, that it tends to bring in a subordination in 
the Godhead where Scripture does not. Tou cannot 
have a secondary God. You may bring human 
reasonings into the subject, and talk about a son, 
and his subjection to his father ; but therein is the 
very thing which is so dangerous, and of which, to 
my mind, the devil has taken great advantage. The 
Scripture shows that the Father is God, the Son 
is God, the Holy Ghost is God ; that they are, one 
and all, equally Jehovah. Subordination in respect 
of Deity is only a means of undermining the proper 
Godhead of the Son and the Spirit. The notion of 
subordination is true only when we look at the place 
of manhood the Son deigned to take, or at the oifice 
the blessed Holy Ghost is now filling to the glory of 
the Son, just as the Son served and will yet reign to 
the glory of God the Father. 

To return, however. The Lord Jesus tells us it 
was expedient that He should go away — " For if I 
go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you ; 
but if I depart, I will send Him imto you. And when 
He is come. He will reprove the world of sin, and of 
TigbteomneBSf and of judgment : of sin, because they 



ONE SPIRIT. 53 

believe not on me ; of righteousness, because I go 
to my Father, and ye see me no more ; of judgment, 
because the prince of this worid is judged." Any 
particTilar notice of this Scripture is not the point 
now, but rather the general truth. This was the 
twofold purpose of the Holy Ghost in coming here 
below. He proves that the world was imder sin ; 
that there is no righteousness here, but only in the 
Just One with the Father ; and that as to the prince 
of this world, he is judged — ^the sentence not executed, 
but he judged. There was hope for the world with 
the Jew ; but now, from the point of view in which 
the Lord speaks of His own going and the Holy 
Ghost's coming, the world is evidently lost, and the 
Spirit here is but its reprover. Next, this same 
Holy Spirit should lead the disciples into the truth, 
taking of the things of Christ, and glorifying Him. 
There is thus a double relation of the Holy Ghost — 
to the world, as a system outside and condemned ; to 
the saints, whom He leads, telling them of things to 
come, yea, of all things pertaining to Christ and His 
glory. Such is the plain doctrine of the Apostle 
John as to the Spirit. 

Thence we come to the Acts of the Apostles : is 
there anything there that, as a matter of fact, an- 
swers to our Lord's promises ? There need not be a 
doubt. Li chapter i. the disciples are with the Lord, 
entering but very feebly into that which had filled 
His heart before He goes away. They were still 
looking for the kingdom, and great things for 
the earth and for Israel. Tkey ^et^ tlqX.^ '"^ S& 



64 ONE SPIRIT. 

true, sunk so low as the unbelieving thoughts of 
Gentile Christendom — ue., a miUennium without 
Christ ! the shame of those who boast so proudly in 
our day; but stiU they were not far raised above 
the ordinary thoughts of Jews. They did not yet 
enter into the precious Christian hope, and for this 
simple reason : the thoughts of the Christian are the 
thoughts of heaven. They are the communications 
of the Holy Ghost, that suit the Father, because 
centring in the Son and His heavenly glory. Into 
that communion we are brought ; and truly it is not 
merely with the prophets and with their blessed 
visions of coming glory for the earth, but " with the 
Father and with His Son Jesus Christ." But as for 
the disciples in Acts i., the power of entrance was 
not yet there, for the Holy Ghost was not personally 
come ; and yet they had not only life at this time, 
but life in resurrection. The Lord had actually 
breathed upon them the very day He rose, and said, 
" Receive ye the Holy Ghost." Of course, this was 
not the gift of the Comforter, as such, the promised 
One that was to take the place of Christ upon earth ; 
but rather the communication, by the Holy Ghost, 
of His own risen life. Therefore, I believe, did He 
breathe upon them : a clear allusion to the Lord 
God breathing on Adam. Of old, it was the breath of 
natural life given to Adam. Here was One upon 
earth who was both Lord and God (as acknowledged 
by Thomas a little after), and also the risen man or 
last Adam, the quickening Spirit. Accordingly, He 
oommunicateB this life, as life must always be com- 



ONE SPIRIT. 66 

munioated, by the Holy Ghost; and therefore it is 
said, " Eeoeive ye the Holy Ghost." But for all 
that, we know from Acts i. that the Spirit, the 
Comforter, was not yet come. Indeed, we ought to 
gather it from the simple fact, that the Lord was 
not yet gone. " And if I go not away, the Comforter 
will not come." He was seen there ; and He com- 
mands them, when assembled together, that they 
should not depart from Jerusalem, but should wait for 
the promise of the Father. Whatever the blessing, 
then, they had received on the resurrection-day, it was 
not the accomplishment of the promise of the Father. 
The next chapter shows us the Holy Ghost act- 
ing on earth in the absence of Christ ; and this in 
various ways. It records that extraordinary display 
of divine grace in the gift of tongues, which, without 
removing, surmoimted the confusion that man's sin 
and divine judgment had brought into the world in 
the various nations, and tribes, and tongues, which 
have subsisted since Babel to this day. Now the 
Spirit was going out with the news of God's wonder- 
ful works of grace to all, just as they were proving 
that where sin had abounded, grace much more 
abounded. At the same time let us not forget that 
new tongues, although the magnificent fruit of the 
Spirit's operation, are not the same thing as His 
presence ; they were an effect and characteristic sign 
of a crucified but now exalted Lord, the witness of 
gospel grace and its universal testimony, in contrast 
with the law, but not the same thing as the gift of 
the Holy Ghost Himself. This is eoLee^^ftix^^ \ssi- 



66 ONE SPIRIT. 

portant, because the unbeKef of some has gone so 
far as to think and say, that if the tongues exist no 
more, the Holy Ghost is absent. What blindness to 
the Saviour's promise! What a lowering of the 
Spirit's presence ! What denial of Christianiiy and the 
Church ! The truth is, that the tongues and the other 
powers in which the Spirit of God was pleased then 
to work, were but the miraculous tokens that befitted 
His presence, and inaugurated the gospel and the 
Clhurch. It was all a new and unprecedented state 
of things. When the Son was on earth, miracles 
followed His steps and word, as it was only meet, 
and the accomplishment of prophecy. Another 
Divine Person being come, was it not suitable there 
should be proofs of it, more especially as He took 
no permanent form, as the Son of God had done, so 
as to be visible ? It was, therefore, the more needed 
that there should be palpable effects and tokens, 
arresting the mind, and causing the heart of man to 
weigh what God is and is doing, not only as displayed 
in the Son, but as witnessed by the Holy Ghost pre- 
sent upon earth. 

This is the cardinal truth upon which all hinges 
that we find in the great body of the New Testament. 
There was now before men a fact without precedent, 
altogether unknown to the world, if it did not sur- 
prise even those that had been taught* by the Lord 
Himself to expect it — ^the wondrous fact that the Holy 
Ghost had come down in person, making His pre- 
sence known by a signature of gracioua power, so as 
to be tiien known and read of all men. Accordingly, 



ONE SPIRIT. 67 

throughout the Acts of the Apostles you have ever 
and anon the testimony not only to His action and 
its results, but to the glorious truth that He Himself 
was there. Look at the first outbreak of the world's 
religious rancour in chapter iv., and His answer to it in 
verse 31. Take, again, the first public sin and scandal, 
where Ananias and Sapphira were charged on the 
spot with lying not to man but to God. But how 
was this proved ? They had lied to the Holy Ghost 
who was there. The standard of judgment was that 
dishonoured Person who was in their midst. This 
measure of sin, let me say, is as true individually, as 
it is in the Church. Hence, in Ephesians iv. 30, it 
is not merely that you should not violate this or 
that command, but " grieve not the Holy Spirit of 
God, whereby ye are sealed imto the day of redemp- 
tion." Let us note it well. 

The more this is refiected upon, the more its 
immense moment will be felt by the children of God. 
Supposing you take the presence of one you most 
value and delight in, does not his or her coining 
affect all your ways and words, just in proportion as 
you realize and love their presence ? We might be 
ever so much at ease ; but still, if there be one staying 
with us, who draws out our honour and esteem, the 
influence is felt deeply and at once, except by a stone. 
Surely one does think of that which will give plea- 
sure, one does fear to woimd; the heart is on the 
alert and active, and it is a joy to do that which wiU 
gratify those we love. And so, in virtue of redemp- 
tion, the Holj Ghost is here, becavjia^ ^\& ^o^^^^^^a. 



58 ONE SPIRIT, 

regards each believer, that vras offensive to Gkxl ; and 
the saint stands in divine righteousness before Grod — 
made tliis in Christ How indeed could the Holy 
Ghost be ais-ay P He must have His part when that 
which \ms most precious to Ghxi and man was 
wrought If the Father accomplished His thoughts 
in and by the Son, could the Holy Ghost be absent 
or inactive ? And now Gkni had done His greatest 
work — ^tho atoning work of Christ, Where, there- 
fore, the blood of the accepted sacrifice is, the Holy 
Ghost not only can work, but must dwell. If Christ, 
by His 0W71 bicxxl, has entereil in once for all into 
the holies, having found an everlasting redemption, 
the Holy Ghost is come to abide with us for ever. 
All hangs on and is measured by this. Accordingly, 
the boi^k of the Acts is far more the acts of the Holy 
Ghost than of the apostles, important vessels of Hia 
power as they wer^ though not they only. We have 
seen, whei>? it was a question of sin. He judges by 
His presence, and acts upon this ground. We have 
seen that, when they were in danger of being alarmed 
by the threats of man, the Sjurit gave cheering 
evidence of His mighty pK«eno^ It was not merely 
Peter and John, or anybody else ; but the place was 
shaken whei>& they w«re. Whose presence ^*as this, 
or in whom paiticalarly P It was the ^^ooetseniv of the 
Holy Ghost not mei^ly in this or in that individual, 
hak m the mmmkij of God. M^m>^ than that^ the 
l^piiit of God in chiqit«r xiii. of the Acts takes am 
MtiTO pbMb and 8^ids out r*ul and Baruabaa. 
' He aaya, '^^Banuihas and Saul fiv the 



ONE 8FIB1T. % 59 

work whereimto I have called them." "So they, 
being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed," I 
am now referring to the ease, only to show that it is 
not a question of miracles, tongues, or powers, but of 
a real Divine Person, who was the chief agent as pre- 
sent in the Church of QxkI ; and that this personal 
presence of the Spirit in man was a new thing, pre- . 
viously unexampled in the word and ways of Gtod. 
(Compare also Acts viiL 29, 39 ; xv. 28 ; xvi. 7 ; xx. 
23; xxLll.) 

Now we come to the Epistles, passing by the 
Scriptures which attest the Holy Ghost's presence in 
the individual All-important as this is, it is not 
my subject, but His presence in the Church. Hence 
we must omit the Epistle to the Romans, which 
takes up our individual relation towards God, and 
for this simple reason, that there you have the chil- 
dren. We are brought out of the place of wrath and 
sin, made children of God, and if children, then 
heirs : the Holy Ghost gives the spirit of adoption, 
and fills the heart with- hopes of the inheritance 
which is to follow. But in the Epistles to the 
Corinthians you have not merely the state of man 
and the revelation of divine righteousness, with their 
consequences in sinners and saints, as m Bomans, 
but the Church of God, in a grievous state of sin, 
shame, and disorder, but still the Church of God. 
Accordingly, the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, as there 
dwelling, is shown as in its capital seat. The portion 
read (1 Cor. xiL 1 — 13) developes His action in the 
Church. What can he plainer ? "ELet^ ^^\mk^^ ^^ 



60 ^ ONE SPIRIT. 

Holy Ghost viewed as a real Person present and 
working, in gifts of outward sign, no doubt, as well 
as in ways of edification. But whatever might be the 
form of His action, the great truth was that He was 
there, and at work in the many members of God's 
assembly. The question is, was all this a temporary 
display, or was His presence for ever the substratum 
of it all ? Was that which we here read confined to 
a particular local assembly and a special epoch long 
past, or is there anything for us, for the Church of God 
at large, for this time and all times ? The answer 
cannot be doubtftd, if we are subject to the word of 
God. Certainly our Lord had, in John xiv., laid down, 
in contrast with His own temporary absence, that 
the Spirit of truth was to abide with His disciples 
for ever. • 

But, next, the First Epistle to the Corinthians 
could not open without the Holy Ghost's giving it 
the most enlarged application. In the first verse of 
the first chapter we read — " TJnto the Church of God 
which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in 
Christ Jesus, called to be saints, toith all that in every 
place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, 
both theirs and ours/' This is not said in the Second 
Epistle : indeed, I am not aware that there is any- 
thing exactly like it anywhere else in the New 
Testament. Are we to suppose this was a mistake ? 
Let who will be guilty of such a speech or thought, 
I trust there is no soul here that would not denounce 
it as a sin against God. A mistake in the word of 
God ! On the contrary, it seems to me to be the 



ONE SPIRIT. 61 

special wisdom and goodness of the Spirit, who fore- 
saw the unbeKef of Christendom ; it was the Spirit 
of God who knew that this Epistle would be treated 
as if it were of private appKcation, as if it belonged 
to a bygone time and place, and did not appertain 
to all that call upon the name of ^the Lord Jesus 
Christ — "both theirs and ours." This He has 
guarded against at the very threshold, and made 
such an objection to be plain fighting against the 
word of God. Thus it ceases to be a question of 
opinion. God has spoken, and has written, that we 
may believe Him ; and this epistle has a purposely 
enlarged scope, so that unbelief as to the perpetuity 
of the Holy Ghost's action in the Church, as long as 
the Church is here, should be treated as a sin, as a 
positive rejection of God's plain word. Is it not un- 
belief which makes nothing of the Holy Ghost's 
personal presence in the Church ? 

It is not at all contended that the Holy Ghost 
necessarily works in every way as of old, and still less 
in the same measure of power. In the latter part of the 
New Testament we do not read much about miracles 
— very little — ^less and less too as time passes on. We 
can understand that, in the opening of a new dealing 
of God, there should be, in His goodness, a won- 
derful working and display of these mighty powers 
to awaken the attention even of careless men. But, 
as the truth of His presence was established, and the 
new communications of God were gradually written, 
and there was thus not merely the evidence of 
outward tokens, but positive ScrigtviGC^ Q«mxK&Jy^ 



62 ONE SPIRIT. 

to human responsibility, we can easily see, that ex- 
ternal vouchers were no longer so requisite, and that 
the Spirit of God, grieved, as we know, by much 
found in those who professed the name of Christ, 
might gradually withdraw, not Himself, but the 
manifestation of mighty signs, and refuse to put out- 
ward ornaments upon that which dishonoured the 
Lord Jesus. 

It is certain and evident, at least, when we come 
to the churches of the Apocalypse, that we see or 
hear no more of the powers of the world to come. Not 
a doubt have I that there was the wisdom of God in 
thus ordering, in view of the state of things that was 
fast coming in. I think we can readily discern by 
spiritual considerations why it would not have been 
suitable to the glory of God to continue those mira- 
culous powers. Supposing, for instance, God were 
to work now in the way of miracle, is it not evident 
that in one of two ways it must be? Either He 
must work wherever the name of Christ is preached 
and known at all ; and what would be the conse- 
quence of this? Miracles in Eome, miracles in 
Canterbury, miracles among Presbyterians, Inde- 
pendents, Wesleyans, Baptists, Peedo-baptists, Cal- 
vinists, Arminians, Lutherans : Greek Church, and all 
sects and denominations in Christendom would have 
their miracles I There may be those who would en- 
joy the sight, but I envy them not. Every one here, 
I trust, would feel deeply the anomaly of such an 
outward seal on such a mass of confusion. On the 
other hand, supposing God were pleased to say, He 



ONE SPIRIT. 63 

could not give these tokens of His power and glory 
where the church was thus in disorder and rebellion, 
but must single out — ^whom shall I say ? It could 
not be, it ought not to be : Grod forbid that ourselves 
should desire it, as things are. But let us, for the 
moment, imagine the Lord looking on the unworthy 
children of God here present, and saying, "I see 
where My people are subject to My word, and where 
I find two or three here and there gathered unto My 
name, there I will work miracles." What would 
be the consequence ? "We should not know how to 
behave ourselves : so weak are we, so foolish, so apt 
to be full of ourselves, even now in the face of con- 
tinual weakness, as well as hatred and contempt, that 
we should not be able to contain ourselves if we 
had these displays of divine power. Besides, what 
a slight to those we own to be as truly members of 
Christ, and as truly indwelt of the Spirit, as any of 
us! I am persuaded, then, there is perfect grace 
and wisdom as to this in the ways of God. He no 
longer works thus. But here is the truth on which 
I take my stand this night: the Holy Ghost was 
given, not merely as a display of power in the earth, 
but, if I may so say, as the sign and substance of 
the divine value for the cross. God the Father gave 
the Holy Ghost as the seal of that redemption which 
is always unchangeably perfect, and infinitely eflGlca- 
dous. I dare to say it, and yet say it with all rever- 
ence, that if the Holy Ghost were now taken from 
the poorest, feeblest of His saints upon earth, it 
would not be a dishonour to Him. w) ixvm<^ ^&\i^ ^^ 



64 ONE SPIRIT. 

Son of God and His atoning work. It would be 
virtually to say that the ruin of the Church has made 
the blood of Christ less precious ; but will Grod ever 
confirm a lie ? And here is the stronghold of faith, 
in this we can be confident, not only that the Lord 
Jesus has expressed the mind and intentions of 
God, but that we, through His grace, can and ought 
to enter, in measure, into its ground, reason, charac- 
ter, and aim, as well as meaniag. 

All this we may by faith appreciate and enjoy, for 
He has explained it to us. Wherefore, indeed, is 
the word of God given, if it be not that we should 
understand His mind, feel His love, and be sure of 
His truth, wisdom and goodness ? Hence we are sure 
that God, in sending the Spirit to abide always, 
whatever may be the sorrowful condition of believers 
individually and collectively, did not give a mere 
token of approving them, but rather the only ade- 
quate pledge of His delight in the personal work of 
His beloved Son. The Holy Ghost, we know, de- 
scended on Christ when He was upon earth without 
blood, because He was always sinless, as perfect 
here morally as He was and is in heaven, no less 
absolutely holy as man than as God. It is not, of 
course, that He was not made perfect in another 
sense, as becoming captain of salvation, and author of 
salvation, and consecrated as heavenly priest. It is 
clear that there was a work to be done, and an official 
place of glory to be taken ; but nothing ever did 
or could add to His moral perfectness. Hence, I 
repeat, He could and did receive the Holy Ghost 



ONE SPIRIT. 65 

for Himself as maiiy without blood. But when Christ 
went up on high, He received of the Father the 
promise of the Holy Ghost. What amazing comfort, 
confidence, and rest should this give us ! Had the 
Holy Ghost been given directly to us, we might well 
think that, if we did not carry ourselves as we ought, 
there mi^t be a revocation. We can understand 
a soul troubled with such a thought ; but, thanks be 
to God, the Father gave the Holy Ghost a second 
time to Christ. When He went on high, He received 
of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, and 
shed forth that which was seen and heard at Pente- 
cost. Thus the gift is entirely in virtue of Christ, 
after He had blotted out our sins and received it as 
a consequence. There we have the firmest and 
sorest ground on which the perpetuity of the pre- 
sence of the Holy Ghost in the saint and in the 
Church rests before God — ^His love to Christ, and 
His estimate of Christ's work for us, not to speak of 
His immutable word. 

And now for a few practical words on this before 
I have done. We shall have other applications and 
results of it in subsequent lectures, so that the less 
may be said now. If there be a Divine Person on 
earth who is now with each saint individually, and 
with all as the Church of God, I ask, can this be a 
secondary consideration? Is this a truth that can 
be subordinated to circumstances P Is it something 
that can be pushed aside for the sake of not disturb- 
ing oneseK or others ? Can men wlao bo ^SoceSb., «sA 

F 



66 ONE SPIRIT. 

speak, and act, beKeve in the reaKty of the Spirit's 
personal presence and present operation according to 
Scripture ? Do they believe that the Holy Ghost is 
really in the Church on earth ? I am not now, of 
course, alluding to His divine glory whereby He 
fills all things, because it is always true; as true 
before Christ came as it has been since, and equally 
true of all the Persons in the Trinity. But as the 
Son came down from heaven, and was here a man 
for some thirty or more years upon the earth, 
and as He is gone, so now the Holy Ghost is 
come down personally to abide with and in us, in 
such sort as was unknown before, save only in Christ. 
The Holy Spirit, I say, has come now to be in 1319 
personally ; and just as Christ was God's only true 
temple, so now the Church is the temple of God ; for 
both these truths are taught in the word of God. 
But if this be believed, if it be received as God's 
truth, what can compare with it in importance as a 
present practical thing, as well as privilege, for the 
saint and for the Church P Accordingly the responsi- 
bility of Christians, if we apply it to their meeting, 
is that their assemblies should be governed by the 
truth that the Holy Ghost is there. 

But how does the Holy Ghost work when owned 
as there P That we have answered, if it were only 
in the Scripture already read. He distributes, or 
divides, to every one severally as He will. Is Hir 
presence, then, not to be recognized ? Is His work- 
ing not to be respected P What do we find, if we 
test preaent facts in Christendom by the word of 



ONE SPIRIT. 67 

God ? It is far fix)m my desire needlessly to trouble 
aay one, nor is it my wish to provoke controversy ; 
but there are truths which manifestly admit of no 
compromise — ^indeed, all divine truth refuses such 
unworthy dealing. How, then, I would ask, is it 
with our souls in the feeling, in the faith, in the 
allegiance that we pay to this truth, so vital to the 
Church, so essential to the right honouring of the 
Holy Gf^host, and of the Lord Himself? Do you 
doubt that the Church of God is in disorder P Where 
is the serious-minded Christian that does not own it, 
more or less P Is there a spiritual man who would 
maintain that the present state of the Church answers 
to what we read in the New Testament ? Atti I not 
to feel and to humble myself before God for my own 
sin in this grave matter P Must I not seek to be where 
the Holy Ghost's presence is owned P It matters not 
where I have been ignorantly; I have doubtless 
been where there was not even the show of owning 
His presence and action according to the Scriptures ; 
I may have joined others in praying God to pour out 
again the Holy Ghost, as if He were not come and 
in the Church of God. And do you caU such prayer 
as this a Scriptural recognition of His presence? 
What can be conceived a more decided or more 
evident ignoring of the truth that the Holy Ghost is 
there ? Were it prayed that the Spirit of God might 
not be grieved, or that the saints might be filled 
with Him, it were Scriptural. What would it 
have been for a disciple, in the presence of Jesus, to 
have asked the Pather to send Hia Son? — ^^ xaisfe 
F 2 



68 ONE SPIRIT. 

up the Messiah when the Messiah was actually there P 
Is it not the spirit of the world, which cannot receive 
the Spirit because it seeth Him not, neither knoweth 
Him? But we know Him, at least we ought to 
know Him. Well, if we do know that He is here, is 
it a light thing whether or not we are subject to His 
operation in the Church P It is in vain to say, " I 
acknowledge the truth of His presence;" so much 
the worse, if I am not subject to the Scripture which 
leaves no doubt how He acts for Christ's glory. 
Mere words do not suffice : God looks for faithftd- 
ness, for subjection to His word, for practical recog- 
nition of the presence of the Holy Gf^host. 

"We come together, it may be ever so few : what do 
we count onP We are weak and ignorant, but 
we have One in our midst who knows all things, and 
is the source of all power. Are we content with 
HiTYi p Can we confide in Him in the face of dangers 
and difficulties ? Why is it that the Church is weak P 
Why is it that there is such want of power and joy 
and peace and comfort among the children of God P 
Can it be wondered at ? What I wonder at is rather 
the mercy and astonishing patience of God, blessing, 
as He does, in spite of so much unbelief. Do you 
really suppose that it can be an indifferent thing to 
GodP Does He not call for my unhesitating ad- 
hesion to His will, duly owning His Spirit's presence 
and free action P What about your bowing down to 
the great present fact that, in virtue of redemption 
and in honour of the Lord Jesus, the Holy Ghost is 
here personally in the Church on earth P This puts 



ONE SPIRIT. 



the soul to the test ; indeed, it seems to me the great 
test for Christians. Christ, of course, is the practical 
touchstone for everything and every person; but 
still if He is known and valued by my soul as the 
way, the truth, and the life, is it nothing to H™ 
that my ways in the Church of God should be 
on the ground He has given me — ^faith in the pre- 
sence of the promised Holy Ghost? Is it not the 
truth God HimseK presupposes as the very soul, 
so to speak, of the Church P 

This does not in the slightest degree touch God's 
working by individuals. He sends out one to preach 
the gospel to the world. He raises up anoiier to 
edify the children of God. This is another branch 
of truth ; and I refer to it now only to show that, 
when we contend for the Church's inalienable obliga- 
tion to own the presence of the Holy Ghost, this does 
not in the least interfere with the individual action 
of the Spirit in ministry. Granting this in all its 
integrity and importance, I would put the question 
to the conscience of each before me, Wbere is there 
an assembly of God's saints coining together, and 
His Spirit left perfect liberty of action that He may 
employ whom He will as the vessels of His power ? 
Are there any Christians here present who never thus 
find themselves in the only assembly which God's 
word sanctions ? If there are, I can only say. Ponder 
that word with prayer, and ask your soul, how comes 
this ? Tou, a member of God's assembly, yet you 
never know that assembly gathered according to 
Scripture, or the action of the Spirit ■gxo^^'t \ft^^ 



70 ONE SPIRIT. 

You, a member of Christ's body, yet the Holy Gf^host 
never allowed to use you, or other members of it, to 
the glory of Christ and the edification of your 
brethren I If it be so, how comes it P Why should 
you go on thus? Oh! there are serious questions 
here, and many obstacles ; and I am sure we ought 
to pray much for those that are thus perplexed and 
encumbered. Let me not disguise from them what 
it costs in this world to be true to the Lord and the 
unerring word of God. It is not for any one (the 
Lord keep us far from it I) to look lightly or coldly 
on those who are in this grievous trial : we may have 
known some of its bitterness ourselves. What do 
we desire for God's children? Nothing less than 
their deliverance, yea, of every one. Do not all 
saints who rest upon the redemption of Christ 
belong to the body? Has not God set them, 
as it pleased Him, in His Church ? And what ore 
we doing ? Are we gathering together to improve 
on the Spirit's action in the church of God ? God 
forbid : rather is it to honour the Lord in the assur- 
ance that He is in our midst. Our only true reason, 
if we have a divine reason at all, for meeting together 
in the name of the Lord Jesus, is that it is His own 
will and way ; it is to please Him. And if it has 
been done at cost, God blesses this greatly, and 
blesses it too to the softening of the spirit quite as 
much as to the exercise of faith : if it is not so, there 
is something wrong with our souls. Am I, then, as 
the centre of my church-action, cleaving to the pre- 
Benoe of the Holy Ghost ? If I am not, I have not 



ONE SPIRIT. 71 

got Gkxl's centre for mine, and am still under the 
dominion of tradition in some shape or another ; 
oonying on either what my father did, or something 
else that suits my mind better : but where is Grod in 
aUthis? 

Ton may be taunted, as we all know, with bigotry 
and exolusiveness. Did these censors ever weigh what 
either means ? I call bigotry an unreasonable attach- 
ment, without solid divine warrant, to one's own 
particular doctrine or practice in defiance of all 
others. Allow me to ask, Is it bigotry to give up 
one's most cherished associations because of Qod's 
word, in order to do His will ? Is it exclusive to 
abandon sects, one and all, in order to be always 
and only where I can meet all saints according to 
the word, and in dependence on the Holy Ghost, 
gathered unto Christ's name ? I am not assuming 
this for any one who does not own Scripture aa 
the unchanging truth of God; but I ask you 
who do, are you to allow yourselves to depart 
from the known ground of God, no matter what 
may be the trial within, or the temptation without 
you ? There are often attachments of other kinds 
that create difficulty. Friends may ask you to go 
here or there, for once at any rate; and it seems haxd 
to refuse, especially as they understand not the force 
of a divine conviction, which they lack themselves. 
You invite them, perhaps, to come with you, and 
you decline going with them. Does it not look 
proud and unbrotherly? WeU, it may seem sin- 
gular to them, but it ought to be -gerfedij ^liakcL\a 



72 OYE 8FU11T. 

70U ; it may be real hmnflitj, and lore too, haog^itjr 
and unkind as rash ignorance oonntB it. Let ns oon- 
oeive a godly chnrchman or dissenter to pnt this plain 
question : ^^ "Blow is it that yon, who are so free and 
hearty in receiving Christians in the name of Christ, 
will not come witii me to my church or chapel ? ** 
The answer is, "On your own principles, as a 
IV/testant Christian, you can come here with a good 
conscience, where we are sure the one desire is to be 
subject to the Lord and His word, in the unity of 
His body, and in the liberty of His Spirit. You 
surely acknowledge it is no sin to meet, as we do, 
according to Scripture, and therefore you can meet 
with us. But I, for my part, am clear that it is 
unscriptural to desert the Scriptural ground for that 
of dissent or Anglicanism, and therefore it is not 
want of love, but fear of sin that keeps me from 
going with you, who do not pretend to be meeting 
on the ground of God's assembly." Surely he is a 
bigot, or worse, who would urge or expect me to 
join him, against my positive conviction that, in so 
doing, I should sin against God. Sin is a man 
doing his own will, or another's, which is not God's. 
If you ask me to depart from what I know to be the 
will of God, it would of course be sin in me to 
comply. It is not only a thing that is sinM in 
itself, but it would be most especially a sin in me, 
because I know, if you do not know, that it is infi- 
delity to the Spirit's operation in the Church. 

Be not moved, then, by reproaches, any more than 
bjr fair speeches. For there is no real love, save in 



ONB SPIRIT. 73 

obeying Ghxi (1 John v. 2, 3). Never swerve firom 
what you believe to be HKs will. You may have 
oome in, at first little acquainted with the truth or 
with the solemn responsibilities it involves ; perhaps 
it was on that slender reason, that you were here 
converted : but how is it with you now P Have you 
been searching the word of God, to ascertain His 
mind and will ? Do you see the presence and action 
of the Holy Gf^host in the assembly to be the truth 
of Gbd P Is it not perfectly plain and sure that Gbd 
has sent down His Spirit, and that this truth has to 
be owned and acted upon by you and all Christians P 
That truth you cannot deny : you know very well it 
is of God ; you may not value it as you ought (who 
does P) but that is another thing. The Lord grant 
we may all value it more and increasingly. 

Search the Scriptures, examine the word of God 
for your own souls ; by this means we obtain true 
spiritual intelligence, but we get it in obedience, and 
do not want it otherwise. The intelligence that is 
gathered in disobedience seems to me perilous and 
untrustworthy; to learn the truth, step by step 
acting it out, is a happier and holier path, and of 
simple faith too. At the same time that we value 
intelligence, we must remember that there is another 
thing yet more important — singled-eyed subjection 
to the will of God, even if we are not very intelligent 
about much. " The fear of the Lord is the beginning 
of wisdom." That Scripture is not out of date ; and I 
believe such is the divine, and therefore the best, way 
as a beginning. There is blessednQ^ m ^£^&x^s!^ 



74 ONE SPIRIT, 

growing up into the truth of God, above all looking 
to this — ^that we walk in that which we know. 

For the present, I pray the Lord that the great 
truths of the " one body '* and " one Spirit," which 
have been before us, may be brought home by Hi> 
own power ; so that all of us who know them may 
be cheered and confirmed, and that those who are 
ignorant may be taught them of Himself. 



THE 

ASSEMBLY, l^B MINISTRY. 



1 OOA. XIT. 



LECTURE III. 



The two subjects which are now to come before us may 
seem, at first sight, to be rather widely separated ; 
but in truth, far as they appear to diverge, they 
equally flow from Christ. They are foimded, both of 
them, upon His work, as an accomplished fact. They 
are derived from Him in His present place of exalta- 
tion at the right hand of God; they are esta- 
blished for the express object of magnifying the Lord 
Jesus, even as they are now called to subserve, 
in a very direct way, His Lordship. And this 
last point is one of immense practical importance. 
For whatever may be the power of the Spirit in 
ministry, whatever may be the privileges of the 
assembly, still the Lordship of Christ is a truth of 
the utmost accoimt in the mind oi God., «X3l^ ^1 



76 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTEY. 

exceeding moment for the practical working of the 
Spirit of God, both in individual members, who are 
His servants, and in the assembly — ^the body of which 
He is the Head. Hence we can at once see that, 
whatever may be the different lines that either the 
ministry or the assembly may take, yet they spring 
jfrom a common source, and they are both intended 
of God to be subject to, and the means of exalting, 
the same Lord Jesus Christ. Now, it will be my 
business to-night to direct attention to the testimony 
we have in the word of God, as to both these sub- 
jects, in order to show, as far as limits permit, wherein 
they differ, wherein also a common principle binds 
them together; and, above all, their common end, 
aa well as the Christian's consequent responsibility. 

First of all, as to the assembly, we may be the 
more brief, inasmuch as we have had already the 
" one body '' before us, aa well as the " one Spirit." 
But I may direct you to a few scriptures which 
prove what I have just advanced, that the assembly 
of God is foimded upon the accomplished work of 
Christ, and His exaltation to heavenly glory. 

Let me premise that the Church has the same 
meaning with the assembly ; hence the word " assem- 
bly " is often used in order to avoid misimderstanding. 
There might be many questions raised as to the 
meaning of " church : " it is hardly possible to 
create difficulties as to the word " assembly." Now, 
the feet is, the Church is the assembly. Assembly 
Is tiie proper English word, rather than " church," 



THB ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTBY. 77 

which has become angKcized, no doubt, but it really 
conveys notions not only vague, but even opposite to 
different minds. 

Now, in the Acts of the Apostles, as compared 
with Matthew xvi., we find clear light. The Lord, 
at a very critical point in His dealings with the 
disciples, tells Peter, more particularly, but all Hir 
followers, in fact, that He was going to build Hia 
assembly. "Upon this rock," says He, "I will 
build My Church." The reason of this was that the 
unbelief of the Jewish people was complete, after He 
had given the fullest divine proof, both in miracles 
and signs, in accomplished prophecies, and, above 
all, in the moral power which ever himg around TTirn 
— a brighter crown of glory than anything in either 
miracle or prophecy. But when the Lord had, so to 
speak, exhausted all the means which even His good- 
ness and wisdom could suggest in acquiescence with 
the will of God the Father, and the result of His 
patient grace was, that the unbelief and scorn of the 
true Messiah became more and more decided, and the 
spirit of hostility more evidently deadly in its cha- 
racter. He brings all to issue, by asking who men 
said that He was. The answer showed the total 
uncertainty of Israel; nay, rather the only cer- 
tainty was that men, the best and wisest of them, 
humanly speaking, those that had seen most of Him, 
were completely wrong. He appeals, then, not to 
some great one, but to a heart that was true — ^to 
Simon the son of Jonas ; and from his lips falls that 
confession, for which the Lord Himja^ ^^ovi^^wcMiR^ 



78 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

him blessed — ^blessed because it was not of flesh and 
blood, with their mere weakness and opposition to 
God. It was the Father who was in heaven who had 
revealed to his soul the glorious truth, that under- 
neath that despised form — that outcast, the Naza- 
rene, was not only the Christ, but the Son of the living 
God. The Lord Jesus immediately lays hold of this 
confession, and with especial reference to the latter 
part of it — ^not merely His being the Messiah or 
Christ, but His being the Son of the living God, 
He says, " Upon this rock I will build My Church.'* 
The Messiah, in shame and humiliation, was a 
stumbling-stone to Israel ; but the Son of the living 
God confessed was the rock upon which the Church 
is built. This was a fuller confession, and a deeper 
one — ^in all its ftdness certainly new, and so treated 
of the Lord. Not but what, of course, Christ was 
the Son of the living God from all eternity ; but still 
for the first time He was so confessed by human lips, 
and by a heart taught of God the Father. The 
Lord Jesus, then, also for the first time, intimates 
that upon this confession His Church was to be 
built ; and immediately He forbids them to tell that 
He was the Christ, showing that it was no question 
now of being received and reigning as Messiah. He 
was to be rejected, and to sufier. Hence, on Hia 
rejection by the people, but the recognition of the 
higher glory of His Person by the remnant repre- 
sented by Peter, we have His sufferings and death 
at once annoimced. This it is which opened the 
door tor that new work of God — ^the Church that was 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTBY. 79 

to be built upon the confession of Jesus Christ, " the 
Son of the living God." Accordingly soon follows 
the Lord dying on the cross, and determined to be 
the Son of Gk)d with power by the resurrection from 
the dead then glorified, and in due time sending 
down the Holy Ghost from heaven. The second 
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, which shows the 
presence of the Holy Ghost, gives us, for the first 
time, the assembly as an existing fact on earth. This 
is worthy of all note. The Lord, in Matt, xvi., had 
spoken of His assembly as a thing that had yet to be 
reared up: "Upon this rock I mil build My Church." 
But now, in Acts ii., we find the Church is in process 
of being built ; as it is said in the end of the chapter, 
" the Lord added to the Church daily such as should 
be saved." 

This is a very important lesson, and fall of weighty 
results. It proves that the Church does not mean 
merely people that are saved, or in process of being 
saved. Salvation was true before the assembly. 
The Lord took such as should be saved, and brought 
them into the Church. If there had been no assembly 
to bring them into, this would not have negatived 
the fact that they were " such as should be saved." 

What is the meaning of " such as should be 
saved P " It means those in Israel destined to be 
saved — ^those Jews whom grace was looking upon 
and dealing with in their souls. In the approaching 
dissolution of the Jewish system God reserved to 
Himself a remnant according to the election of grace. 
There was always this remnant, w\n.o\i «k ^mia ^i ^<^ 



80 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

clension and ruin served but to define. Thus, during 
the Lord's lifetime the disciples were the remnant, or 
'^ such as should be saved.'' All those that were soon 
to confess Jesus as Messiah by the Holy Ghost were 
" such as should be saved ; " but there was no such 
thing yet as the Church to add them to. Now, at 
the time referred to in Acts ii., the assembly or 
Church was there to which they might be added. 
Coincident with the Holy Ghost's presence, we have 
the Church ; and this agrees with 1 Cor. xii. 13, where 
it is said that " by one Spirit are we all baptized into 
one body;" that is to say, the formation of the body 
depends upon the baptism of the Spirit. Acts i 
shows that the baptism of the Spirit had not yet 
taken place; Acts iL shows that it had; and im- 
mediately the fact is apparent that the Church was 
there as a thing actually foimd upon the earth, to 
which "such as should be saved" were being added by 
the Lord. That is, the Lord now had a house upon 
the earth. The stones were there before — ^living 
stones, but they were separate : there was no build- 
ing of God in this sense here below. 

Now the Lord acts upon His words, " Upon 
this rock I will build My Church." He brings the 
living stones together ; He builds them into one and 
the same house — the house of God, and this not by 
fiiith merely, but by the Holy Ghost sent down from 
heaven. We know that, before they thus entered 
the Church, there were at least a himdred and twenty 
names who are expressly mentioned in Acts i. They, 
too, were "such as should be saved." And I do not 



THB ASSBMBLT, AND MINISTBT. 81 

doubt that there were considerably more who really 
werebrethren. Thus, in 1 Cor. xv. 6, we hear of "above 
five hundred brethren " who saw the Lord after His 
lesuirection. Therefore, it is plain, there were pretty 
many believers in the land of IsraeL The " hundred 
and twenty " were those who, at or after the cruci- 
fixion, Uved in Jerusalem. But whatever might be 
tile number of the brethren throughout the land, or 
of the names in Jerusalem, there was no such thing 
as "the Church," the assembly of God, until the 
Holy G-host was sent down to give unity — ^to form 
them into one existing corporation, whether you 
regard it as the house of Qt)d, or as the body of 
Christ. There are very important diflFerences con- 
nected with these views of the assembly ; but stiU it 
is tiie presence of the Holy Ghost which makes it 
either Christ's body or the temple of God. In 1 Co- 
rinthians it is spoken oi as constituted by the Holy 
Qbost, present and operating in it ; there also it is 
called the body of Christ, as we see fix)m the scripture 
just referred to : " By one Spirit are we aU baptized 
into one body." 

Obviously this is extremely important, because 
what people think and talk about as the " invisible 
Churdi " — ^though Scripture never uses the expression 
— was substantially in existence before " the Church; " 
and, in fact, this invisible state of things is what the 
Lord was putting an end to, when He formed the 
Church. In Old Testament times, we all know, 
there was a nation which God accoimted and called 
His people, in the midst of whom liiere ^en^ \&^\afu^ 

G 



82 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

believers, as no doubt there were other beKevers 
among the Gentiles. Thus, there was Job, for 
instance, in early days; and every now and then, 
throughout the Scriptures, we have one Gentile and 
another who evidently manifested divine Hfe in them, 
and a looking for the Eedeemer, outside the limits 
of Israel. For all that, there was no such thing as 
" the Church " — ^no gathering together of the scat- 
tered believers into one, till the death of Chriist. The 
children of God had been scattered abroad, but then 
they were gathered together. Henceforth disciples in 
Israel were not only destined to salvation, but they 
were gathered into one upon the earth. This is 
the Church. The assembly necessarily supposes a 
gathering of the saints into one body, separate from 
the rest of mankind. There was no such body 
before. Hence, to talk of " the Church " in Jewish 
times, or in earlier days, is altogether a mistake. 
The mixture of believers with their unbelieving 
countrymen {i.e., what is called "the invisible 
Church") was the very thing which the Lord was 
concluding — ^not beginning — ^when He "added to 
the Church daily such as should be saved." 

The common error upon this subject is, that the 
aggregate of those that are to be saved composes the 
Church. But the contrary appears from this scrip- 
ture and many others. Up to this time "such as 
should be saved " were not in the Church. Now the 
Lord takes and adds them day by day together, 
making up one assembled body. Thus, it is quite 
evident that " the assembly " is one thing, and the 



tSE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 83 

being saved is another. Of course, salvation is true 
of those that are in and of the Church. The Lord 
does not leave "such as should be saved" in their 
old associations, but gradually builds them together 
into the Church. But the two ideas are so totally dis- 
tinct, that, all through the Old Testament, there were 
" such as should be saved," and yet there was no 
" Church of God," in the sense we are now deducing 
from Scripture. The assembly of Israel no doubt 
there was, and it is called the '' congregation of 
Jehovah " — ^the " assembly," if you wiQ, of Jehovah ; 
but then, that was merely the nation, the entire 
mass of the Jewish people. It was out of this very 
nation that the first nucleus of " the Church " was 
taken; and the Holy Ghost having just come 
down to dwell in those that were already there, the 
Lord takes the others that were converted at Pente- 
cost or afterwards, and adds them to the existing 
body — ^the Church now in course of formation. Evi- 
dently, therefore, the first covenant state, that was now 
ready to vanish away, answers to what people mean 
when they speak of " a visible and invisible Church." 
They would call the Jewish nation the visible Church, 
and " such as should be saved " in their midst, the 
invisible Church. Well, let them so speak, if they 
will ; but all I now affirm, and wish to impress upon 
every one who is subject to the word of God, is 
that, as applied to what the New Testament calls 
" the Church of God," this kind of thought and lan- 
guage is condemned by the clear and positive state- 
ments of God's word. I would not speak «»o ^\xQrck!^ ^ 

G 2 



84 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTBY. 

if Soriptiire left the smallest shadow of doubt upon 
the point. But if the word of God is express, it 
seems to me criminal for a believer to speak doubt- 
fully. Not only is he not doing all he should do, 
but he is really helping on the spirit of infidelity 
in the world. We owe it to our God to be firm 
where His word is plain ; we owe it to Him to be 
uncompromising as well as obedient. If the word 
of God be thus explicit, that now"^ the first tune 
we have " the Church," formed bf ii» baptism of the 
Holy Ghost vouchsafed to believers, and that those 
who were destined to salvation, " such as should be 
saved," were taken out of Israel and added to that 
assembly, then I say that the Qhurch, in the 
New Testament sense of the word, never did nor 
could exist before — ^that it began there and then — 
that it consists of saved people taken out of the Jews 
first, and then out of the Gentiles afterwards, as we 
know, but both brought into one existing body upon 
the earth. That body is, and is called " the Church,*^ 
or the assembly of God. 

In due time the Lord began to extend the worL 
Thus, in Acts viii., we find Samaria receiving the 
gospel, and the Holy Ghost subsequently given to 
the believers. We have afterwards the Ethiopian 
eimuch brought to the knowledge of Christ. Then the 
great apostle of the Gentiles is so converted as to be 
the fittest witness of grace, as well as of the Church 
— one with Christ in heaven ; as indeed in Col. i. he 
styles himself not only minister of the Gospel, but of 
the Church. Only he treats of it as the body of Christ. 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 85 

By the way, in passing, I would remark that 
Acts ix. 31 has its force impaired, to say the least, 
in the common Gtreek text and English version. 
" Then had the churches rest," we read, " through- 
out all Judeea, and Ghdilee, and Samaria, and were 
edified; and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in 
the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied." 
Now the best copies and most ancient versions give 
"the Church,'' not "the churches." I admit fully 
there were churches in all these districts ; but there 
is nothing peculiar in this. But that which, I am 
persuaded, the Spirit of God wrote here, was " the 
Churchy Minds were perplexed very early indeed. 
The idea of the Church as a subsisting imited society 
upon the earth, is easily lost sight of, particularly 
when we look at different districts and coimtries, such 
as Judaea, and Galilee^ and Samaria. The true read- 
ing at once leads us back to the substantial unity 
that belonged to the Church, or assembly of God, 
here below. There might be ever so many assemblies 
throughout Judsea, and Samaria, and Galilee, but it 
was the Church. I admit that we often hear of the 
churches of Judsea, and of other coimtries, as Galatia 
for instance. No one questions the fact of many 
different assemblies in these different lands. But 
then there is another truth which has not been seen 
for a long while by the great mass of God's children 
— ^not only that God set up a body which did not 
exist before, but that wherever assemblies might be, 
it was all the assembly. Not only did He constitute 
this Church upon earth, susceptible oi dsily ^<y«^^ 



86 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

but while He extended the work, while He fonned 
jfresh assemblies in this or that district and country, 
it was nevertheless one and the same Church wherever 
it might be. This scripture, rightly read, fiimisheB 
a strong proof of it ; and I will now just add that 
the best authorities leave no doubt on my mind as 
to this. The word churches supplanted the Church at 
an early day ; and probably it is due to the fact that, 
very soon, the copyists, like other people, began to lose 
sight of the unity which God was establishing among 
His children upon the earth.* It is so much more 
natural to conceive merely of distinct churches, than 
to take in the precious truth of the Church wherever it 
is foimd upon the face of the earth. This may have 
led to assimilating the true phrase to another and 

* The external authority stands thus. The Alexandrian, the Vati- 
can, the Palimpsest of Paris, and the Sinai MSS. are documents of the 
highest value, which agree in reading "the Church," not "the 
churches." In this they are supported hy the most important cursiye 
extant, now in the British Museum, along with a fair number of 
others. Of the ancient yersions, there is not one of first-rate authority 
which does not confirm the singular — ^the Peschito Syriac, Coptic, 
Sahidic, Vulgate, ^thiopic, Armenian, and the Erpenian Arabic. 
The most ancient Uncial which gives the plural form is that of Land, 
in the Bodleian Library, of about the sixth or seventh century, sup- 
ported by two others of the ninth century, with the mass of cursives, the 
I^oxenian Syriac, and an Arabic version. But even here it is to 
be remarked that the weightiest, or Laudean copy, is unquestionably 
wrong in reading ** all the churches ;" and the others may have been 
influenced by Acts xvi. 5. It is certainly easier to suppose that the 
less usual form might have been changed by scribes to a common type, 
than that the very old authorities joined in an error, which the crowd 
of juniors escaped. Ordinarily, the tendency runs in a direction 
exactly opposite. 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTBY. 87 

more familiar one, especially when the sense of unity 
decayed and disappeared. 

From the historical account in the Acts of the 
Apostles, let us turn to the instruction which the 
rest of the New Testament affords as to the assembly. 
First, the Lord, in Mat. xviii., had laid down the 
spirit in personal matters that was to actuate the 
assembly, beginning with one of its members. He 
had shown there, that the legal spirit is quite out of 
plaoe. He had pointed out in the most beautiful 
manner how He Himself was the Son of Man that 
came " to seek and to save that which was lost " — 
not merely that He was the Shepherd of Israel, 
gathering His own people, but that He was come 
in quest of the lost, in the pure and simple and fiill 
grace of Gbd. Take a case which He knew might 
occur in the assembly He was going to build — ^the 
case of one brother trespassing against another: what 
was to guide P Not law, nor nature, but grace. The 
righteousness of man would say : '^ The man that has 
done the wrong must come and humble himself." 
" No," says grace, " go you after him." " What ! 
after the man that did me this wrong?" "Yes, it 
is exactly what the Lord has done." That is, the 
Lord puts His own grace as the pattern, and spring, 
and power that is to govern the individual, and of 
course also to be the Hfe-breath of the assembly. 
Consequently we find : " If thy brother trespass 
against thee, go and tell him his fault between 
thee and him alone." He that was trespassed 
against, becomes in grace the active ^^s!^'^. ^^ 



88 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTBY. 

goes, and for what purpose? To tell his brothear 
his fault. What a call for the painstaking and 
self-abnegation of love ! And if his brother hear 
him, he has ^' gained his brother." What a requital, 
even now from the Lord! It would be indeed a 
sorrow to the heart that he should go farther astray. 
Thus it is, that love, divine love, reproduces itself 
in those that the Lord is not shamed to call EUs 
brethren. He calls them to be the witnesses, not 
of the servant by whom the law was given, but of 
Himself, who was fall of grace and truth. Accord- 
ingly, then, grace is the energetic influence that 
works ; but truth is not set aside for a moment. Still 
less can the Christian entertain that pride of heart 
and indifference that would say, ^' Well, he has acted 
wrongly ; I am above it, and will take no notice of 
it." There would be, in this, a spirit of hard forget- 
fulness of Christ and His grace, as well as the world's 
indifference about one's brother. There is no allow- 
ance of either in our Saviour's words. Again, the legal 
principle, right as it is in itself, of dealing with a man 
as he deserves, is entirely excluded. Divine grace, 
as seen in the person and mission of the Saviour of 
the lost, works in the soul if we follow BKs voice. 
We know well how easily it might be forgotten, and 
how the heart might reason: ''Because he is my 
brother, he is the less excusable — ^he ought to know 
better." There is truth in this : no doubt, he ought 
to know it ; but if he does not, you may at least feel 
what is your place and privilege. " Gto and tell 
him," &o. Thus the Lord does not lay down a law 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. O^ 

for the wrong-doer to find his waj baok, but calls the 
man'that is in the right to go forth, not in the 
spirit of ligbt, but of grace, to win him who is 
wrong ; and if the latter hears, the former has gained 
his brother. If the wrong-doer refiises to hear, the 
thing is to be laid before others. " If he will not 
hear thee, take with thee one or two more, that in 
the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may 
be established." There would be, as it were, a com- 
bined action of grace brougtt to bear upon the 
■oflfender's soul, that he may hold out no longer. It 
was bad enough to refuse one : can he reftise one or 
two more? Well, but if he does neglect to hear 
them, what thenP The whole Church hear and 
speak ; all the objects and witnesses of divine grace 
who are in the place are intent and occupied with 
the trespasser. Can he reject the Church P If he 
•does, " let him be imto thee as an heathen man and 
a publican." 

Brethren, wliat sentence so terrible as the sentence 
of grace and truth rejected? And thereby is seen 
the sad mistake that is often made when men talk 
about love, but I am afraid with little appreciation of 
it. There must be a love in deed and in truth from 
Christ Himself, to begin and go on with such a work 
as this. But observe, the very same delight in and 
submission to Christ which can carry one afber a per- 
sonal offender thus, not as a bare duty, but with fervent 
desure to win him back — ^the self-same spirit of faith 
regards him, if refractory, " as a .heathen man and a 
publican." He may be really a converted man •, but 



90 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

he who rejects the grace of Christ thus flowing out 
according to the truth, is no longer to be coifnted as 
a brother. No matter whether he is really a brother 
or not before God, he is rejecting the Lord, as it 
were, in those that represent Him on earth in His 
assembly. ** Let him be unto thee as an heathen 
man and a publican." 

This, then, is the Lord's weighty and standing 
lesson before the assembly came into existence ; but 
we are not left only to these preliminary preparations 
of the Lord. In 1 Cor., and more particularly in the 
chapter that was read, is a very ftdl account of the 
way in which the Lord orders the assembly. Before 
calling your attention to this, let me refer first of all 
to chapter xii., where the subject of spiritual mani- 
festations begins. There you find the Holy Ghost 
in active operation. He is at work in* the various 
members of the assembly of God. For " there axe 
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit ; and there 
are difierences of administrations, but the same Lord ; 
and there are diversities of operations, but it is the 
same God who worketh all in all. But the mani- 
festation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit 
withal ; for to one is given by the Spirit the word of 
wisdom ; to another, the word of knowledge by the 
same Spirit ; to another, faith, by the same Spirit ; 
to another, the gifts of healing, by the same Spirit '* 
— and so on. But if we have here spiritual acting 
in the assembly, observe that the subject opens by 
tests that decide between the spirits that were not of 
God, and the Holy Ghost. It is not a question of 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 91 

settling who are Christiaiis and who are not, but of 
disoriminating what is of the Holy Spirit from the 
spirits that are opposed to Him — ^the spirits of the 
enemy. 

And what may these tests be P " No one speaking 
by the Spirit of God, says Jesus [is] accursed (or 
anathema) ; and no one can say Lord Jesus but by 
the Holy Spirit." Thus the Holy Spirit of God 
would never treat Christ as in His own person, or 
relationship to God, under a curse. This is a very 
simple and solemn test, and ought to be weighed by 
us — ^I think I may say, beloved brethren, by us 
especially. For in our own days a most audacious 
effort of the devil has been put forth. Have not men 
dared to assert that the Lord Jesus, in His own 
relationship to God, as a man upon the earth, was 
under the curse of the broken lawP — ^that He was 
under the effects, as between His soul and God, of 
man's distance from GodP At once we discern 
what spirit this is. " No man speaking by the Holy 
Ghost calleth Jesus accursed." On the other hand, 
" No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the 
Holy Ghost." When an evil spirit works, he may 
utter many fine things; he may appear to exalt 
Christ and His servants, as we see in the Gospels 
and in the Acts of the Apostles ; but he never owns 
Jesus as Lord. It is the sure mark of an evil spirit 
to lower Jesus by bringing Him, in some way or 
other, for Himself, under the curse. I am not 
speaking of His taking that place upon the Cross by 
grace, but of His own place as man with God^ a^art 



92 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

from atonement. The pretence may be thereby to 
increase His sympathy toward us, or to enhance Hia 
triumph over the difficulty, and His extrication from 
it ; but no one speaking by the Holy Ghost says Jesus 
is accursed. Then you have the counter-test, that 
those who own the Lordship of Jesus, own Him in 
the power of the Holy Ghost. This is no question 
of souls being saved, but a means of detecting what 
manner of spirit is active in the Church. It is the 
scriptural touchstone for discovering those that are 
under the power of an evil spirit, and those that speak 
by the Holy Ghost. What is of the Holy Ghost 
really exalts Christ, and gives Him His due place as 
Lord. The spirit of error as surely seeks to debase 
His Person and frustrate His work. 

The Holy Spirit invariably maintains two things 
— the glory of Christ as to His Person, and the 
Lordship of Christ as to His place : the one fitting 
for, and the other flowing from. His work. Now 
this at once prepares the way for the important and 
practical truth, that the great object of the assembly 
of Qx)d is the recognition of Christ as Lord. We 
are, therefore, at once cast upon the question. Has 
the Lord given regulations for His assembly, or has 
He left us to ourselves P Have we no directing prin- 
ciple for the manner in which the assembly of God is 
to conduct itself in this world P Is the Church wholly 
abandoned, as it were, to its spiritual instincts P Is 
it to be moulded by the particular age or country 
in which the saints may be found P I trust there 
is no person here who would endorse thoughts so evi- 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 93 

dently of mere nature as these. What! the Christiaa 
assembly dependent on age or country ! Can those 
who so speculate or act, really believe that the Church 
of Qt)d is a creature of the world after all ; that God 
has left it, like a foimdling, to be one thing here 
and another thing there P Institutions such as these 
might be good or bad churches of man, but certainly 
one is at a loss to conceive what pretensions they 
can set up to be the Church of God. It is of sJl 
consequence that, be it the simplest believer, his 
heart should understand and keep firm hold of this> 
so patent in Scripture, that if there be one thing 
that is precious to Qtod upon the earth, it is Bis 
Church ; that if there be one thing God is above all 
jealous of maintaining therein, it is the glory of 
Christ ; and that it is not in the world yet, but in the 
children of God, that God Himself is now active by 
His Spirit, for the purpose of glorifying Christ. But, 
as usual in His ways, whatever is set up on the earth 
is always first tried here, and then it is put into 
Christ's hands, by whom the divine counsels are 
accomplished in&Uibly. To-day is the time of trial 
"When Jesus comes, there will be no further trial in 
this respect. The Church will then enter into the due 
place which is reserved for it in the purpose of Gt)d. 
The hour of our responsibility will be over. But 
now is the time when the children of Qod are being 
put to the test. 

Remark, moreover, that one object of the First 
Epistle to the Corinthians is to show that theirs was 
an infant Church, an assembly o£ ■get^oaa Tio^* VKi% 



94 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

gathered out of the world, and hence in much prac- 
tical ignorance. You see them assailed by evils that 
in these days would not be ordinarily a trial among 
the children of God. There was certainly a very low 
state of moral thought and feeling, and, in one case 
at least, such grossness of outward conduct as was 
not heard of even among the Gentiles. It would 
seem that the devil had used particular pains to taJke 
advantage of the happy liberty of these young Chris- 
tians. They forgot all about the flesh, being so 
occupied with the power of the Spirit. They do not 
seem to have reflected upon their dangers. They did 
not walk in self-judgment. You must remember that 
they had few of the New Testament Scriptures as 
yet, and that the apostle had not been long teaching 
them. Of course, afterwards, there was an amazing 
advantage gained, through their very fall, by the in- 
struction which the Holy Ghost gave from it to others, 
and, we may trust, to themselves. Yet the epistle 
clearly shows that the infant church at Corinth had 
the responsibility of the Church of God. It is the 
only one that is expressly thus addressed — "the 
Church of God." At that time no apostles were 
there, nor, it would seem, elders either ; but I shall 
have an opportunity of adverting to this more ftdly 
by-and-by. There was, however, no lack of gifted 
people ; yet remark, spiritual order is not produced 
by such manifestations of power, but by subjection 
to Christ as Lord. It is not enough to be enriched 
in all utterance* and knowledge. Few churches had 
gifts more abundantly than the assembly in Corinth. 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 96 

It was, notwithstanding, a most disorderly spectacle ; 
and the reason was, that thej were exercising those 
powers without reference to the Lord's will and 
glory, and so for their own ends. They were pleasing 
themselves— exalting themselves. In their new-bom 
exuberance, they were giving the loose rein to all the 
spiritual energy that had been bestowed upon them, 
and the consequence was that there was the special 
need of bringing them back into the ways of God. 

Whatever may be the power of the Spirit by and 
in men on the earth, it should always be made sub- 
servient to Christ the Lord. The Corinthians did 
not understand this, and they are reminded of it 
from the very beginning of chapter i. — " Those that 
call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both 
theirs and ours." So, all through the epistle, you 
will find great emphasis laid upon His being Lord. 
We have it here in reference to the bestowal and 
character of these gifts. So, again in chapter xiv., we 
have the exercise of these gifts regulated in the 
assembly. The Church comes together into one 
place ; there the saints meet as the assembly of God. 
Did they then speak in a tongue P It was in vain to 
plead that the Spirit of God imdoubtedly enabled 
them so to speak. Again, there is no question raised 
as to the quality of the unknown subject-matter : it 
might be all true, sound, and good; but the Lord 
proscribes what does not edify the assembly. As 
a general rule, in the absence of one who could 
interpret, the exercise of these tongues is forbidden 
in the assembly. 



96 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

This is a most momentous matter for practice. No 
matter how truly a man has a power which comes from 
the Holy Ghost, he is not always to use it ; more than 
this, he is bound to use it in obedience to Christ. 
There are certain regulations laid down to which 
he must submit himself. The apostle takes up 
prophesying particularly, because it was the highest 
form of acting on the conscience ; as in mentioning 
the various gifts, he (chap. xii. 28) put diversities 
of tongues in the lowest place. Thus he rebuked 
the vanity of the Corinthians ; for what they made 
more of than anything else, the apostle reduces to the 
last rank. " God hath set some in the Church, first 
apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after 
that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, govern- 
ments, diversities of tongues." Then, after the most 
precious unfolding of love in chapter xiii., (how need- 
tvl in these matters !) he comes to the due exercise of 
gift in the assembly in chapter xiv. " If therefore, 
the whole Church be come together into one place, 
and all speak with tongues, and there come in those 
that are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say 
that ye are mad P But if all prophesy, and there 
come in one that believeth not, or one unlearned, he 
is convinced of all, he is judged of all ; and thus are 
the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so, fflHiTig 
down on his face, he will worship God, and report 
that God is in you of a truth." Observe the weight 
of the principle which the apostle here insists upon. 
God has formed the Church, the assembly, as a 
testimony to Christ upon the earth — a testimony to 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 97 

Hifl Lordship. The consequence is, whatever would 
give a false, or even a vainglorious testimony, what- 
ever would prompt men to say, " Ye are mad," is 
forbidden, no matter how certainly the power, thus 
misused, itseK might be of God. The gift of tongues, 
for instance, evidently was of the Holy Ghost and 
not of nature; but its use is subjected to divine 
legulations, as we see here. And this has a wide 
scope: indeed, I hold it to be the grand criterion 
for every Christian man to apply, both for his own 
conduct and for judging that of others. But when we 
speak of judging what others do or say, need I add 
fliat it becomes us to weigh all humbly and in love, 
seeing well to it that we are not thinking of ourselves 
but of the glory of the Lord ? But I do say that we 
are always bound to think of the glory of the Lord ; 
and therefore, no matter under what circumstances, 
no matter where, we are responsible to judge in 
subjection to Him. 

Prophesying here, evidently, does not mean pre- 
dicting, as some might suppose ; nor, as others say, 
mere preaching. There is a great deal of preaching 
which is not prophesying. Lideed, it might well be 
affirmed that the preaching of the Gospel is never, 
rightly considered, prophesying ; for this last is that 
character of teaching which lays the conscience bare 
in the presence of God, and brings God and man 
thus close together, if I may venture so to put it. 
Therefore this is what the apostle contrasts with the 
exercise of a tongue. The tongue was forbidden, if 
there were no interpreter; and for the -pVamT^^OTL^^^ 

H 



98 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTEY. 

otherwise it would not edify the Church. The object 
of all that is done there, must be " unto edifying." 
Whatever, therefore, does not edify, is not fit for the 
assembly of God, and ought not to be allowed there. 
It may be well meant ; it may be by the Holy Ghost, 
as regards power ; but whatever is not intelligible, 
and has not the character of building up the saints 
of God, is not fit for the assembly. These things 
might be very well out of the assembly ; nay, it was 
their proper place, as a testimony to unbelievers. 
But they had no business in the assembly, if their 
exercise did not tend to the instruction, exhortation, 
or comfort of the assembly ; and edify the assembly 
they could not, unless there was one who had the 
gift of the interpretation of tongues, and coidd, there- 
fore, turn them to present account in the building 
up the saints of God, in the grace and truth which 
came by Jesus Christ. 

This, then, is the rule by which all is to be go- 
verned. " If any man speak in an unknown tongue, 
let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by 
course ; and let one interpret. But if there be no 
interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church ; and 
let him speak to himself, and to God.'* But suppose 
you are prophets ; suppose you can speak to edifica- 
tion in this powerful way, " let the prophets speak 
two or three, and let the other judge." Here the 
apostle takes the example of the prophets in con- 
tradistinction to the tongues ; for everything the 
prophet said was for the express purpose of edifying. 
While, therefore, he admits them to be in the first 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTEY. 99 

rank of the gifts of edification, there is this other 
important guard asserted, that, precious and profit- 
able as prophesying may be, no more than two or 
three were to speak on the same occasion. Doubtless, 
they were to speak one after another ; they were to 
speak in order and by course ; mutually subject, but 
not more than two or three. Why so ? Because it 
would not tend to the very edification which was 
the great object of prophesying ; it would be over- 
doing, being more than the saints could really profit 
by; and therefore there are these defined limits. 
Gkranted that prophets give the highest character of 
Christian instruction; but only two or three were 
to speak, and the others were to judge. 

" If anything be revealed to another that sitteth by, 
let the first hold his peace." There might be then 
that which no longer exists, any more than speaking 
in a tongue ; that is, revelation. This must be care- 
fully remembered. The truth of God may be brought, 
in the most powerful manner, by the Holy Spirit, to 
bear upon the conscience, so that even now, as then, 
there may be the firmest conviction conveyed to an 
xmbeliever who might come in, that God was there. 
I do not doubt that this is perfectly possible, and may 
be now at any time ; and I would to God it were 
always! But this is a wholly distinct thing from 
a revelation. God may use Christian instruction 
of a powerful character from the written word as a 
testimony to His own presence among His children 
on earth. But revelation cannot, ought not, to be now 
looked for. The apostle was instructing ^K^s;^^ ^'^ffifesi^ 
H 2 



100 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

before the canon of Scripture was closed. All the 
truth of God was not then written ; and therefore it 
seems to me to be the fact, that, according to the 
order of God, there might have been a positive reve- 
lation then given, while much of the word of God 
remained to be written. Whereas, to pretend to 
revelation now would be clearly an impeachment of 
the perfectness of Scripture, and I have no doubt 
woidd soon prove to be nothing but the fraud or 
foUy of man, and a snare of the devil. Whatever 
might be the power of the Spirit of God at work 
now, it must be by means of truth abeady revealed 
— ^truth already in Scripture. It is not something 
added to that which God has given, but the mighty 
use, in the hand of the Spirit of God, of what is 
already furnished and permanently given for the 
Church's help in passing through this world. There 
may be a recovery of what has been hid by unbelief 
from the saints ; but it is there. A new truth, revealed 
now for the first time, is incompatible with the Scrip- 
ture as the complete book of God. 

If we have certain things, even in this chapter, 
that clearly refer to what was then in existence and 
not now, the very fair question might be asked by a 
simple-minded person desirous of imderstanding the 
word of God — " Why do you maintain that such a 
chapter as this is meant to regulate the assembly 
now ? It is clear that you have not these tongues, 
and that there cannot be any revelation of a new 
truth. If there are such modifications, why do you 
contend for this chapter as God's permanent rule for 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MIXISTET. 101 

His assembly?" The answer Is quite simple. The 
Spirit of God necessarily regulated what was there 
before Him ; but then the great aim of all the instruc- 
tion, is not miraculous powers nor any other transient 
actings, which were evidently for the special object 
of testimony in the early days of Christianity. None 
of these things form the centre of these chapters. 
What does P The presence of the Holy Ghost. 
To this one point all grave consideration and sober 
arguing of the subject must come. 

Have we that one and the same Spirit still P Can 
we count upon His presence ? Do we believe that 
He deigns even now to act in the assembly ? How 
many, day after day, say, "I believe in the Holy 
Ghost;" but do they prove their faith by their 
works? I woidd ask you, and desire to ask every 
saint of God, Do you believe in the real presence of 
the Holy Ghost as a divine Person, who is with the 
Church, who is in the saints, who is there expressly 
for carrying on the assembly according to the word 
of the Lord, and for maintaining the Lordship of 
Christ there ? If we have the Holy Ghost ; if He 
be in and with the saints still ; if this be a certain 
truth, and not dependent for proof upon a particular 
part of Scripture where miracles and signs are spoken 
of, but quite as clearly laid down where these have 
no place whatever; if He be positively promised 
to abide with us for ever, then I demand. How does 
He act ? Does imbelief dare to make the Spirit no 
better than a dimib idol ? Allow me to put a ques- 
tion OT two : Has the Holy Spiril sSosisx<5lot:l<^^ *Qaa 



102 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY, 

word of the Lord as His only standard for our 
practice as well as faith ? Or is it that men bring 
cunningly devised reasons for avoiding subjection 
to that word? But is it possible that children of 
God can content themselves with any reasons for 
disobedience? Alas! it is no want of charity to 
speak thus. They can quote continually, " Let all 
things be done unto edifying ; " and, " Let all things 
be done decently and in order." But do they ever 
reflect that not even the Corinthians had so violated 
the order of God's assembly by their unbecoming 
displays, as they themselves do every day, by a 
routine of their own (fixed or extempore), which does 
not resemble the form, any more than it embodies 
the spirit, of the divine order? There is the very 
chapter they quote, on the one side; there are, on the 
other, the plain, positive facts of their religious prac- 
tice habitually. 

You have the Church of God no longer on the 
ground of one assembly — ^no longer holding to 
such a foundation-principle as liberty for the Spirit 
therein to edify by whom He pleases. You have 
difierent religious associations set up, often peculiar 
to different countries, and in no respect answering to 
either the assembly or the assemblies in the word of 
God. If a man belonged to the Church of God at 
Jerusalem, he belonged to the Church of God at 
Eome. It was merely a question of locality. He 
was a member of the Church of God, and therefore, 
wherever it might be, he, if there, belonged to the 
Cbixroh in, that place. Scripture doea uot x^cso^jiize 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 103 

membersliip of a Church, but of the Church. If the 
Church of God was in a given place, the Christian, 
unless put away, finds his place within it. You 
never find, I repeat, in Scripture, anything about 
membership of a Church ; it is always of the Church. 
This is a most significant difference, as indicating the 
departure of Christendom from God's word. For in 
our days, if you belong to this Church, you do not, 
for that very reason, belong to that Church. Instead 
of your membership in the Church of God being the 
ground why you are a member of it everywhere, on 
the contrary, so great is the change, that now the 
fiwt of belonging to one Church is the best possible 
proof that you do not belong to another. If you 
belong to the Church of Scotland, you have no such 
connection with the Church of England ; if you are 
a Baptist, you do not at the same time belong to the 
Wesleyan Society, or to any other of the Dissenting 
bodies. Scripture knows nothing of the kind. 

Thus the revolution of Christendom is complete. 
A state of things entirely outside the word of God, and 
contrary to the word of God, has come in. Religious 
societies, independent of one another, have sprung 
up. I am not now speaking particularly of what is 
commonly called the Independent or Congregational 
system, though there the principle is carried out more 
antagonistically than in any other to the unity of the 
assembly of God as Scripture presents it. But take 
any or every one of them ; they are all more or less 
independent. It is so, even, to a large extent, with 
the national Establishment. On ^<b eoTi\x^i3:^ ^ m 



104 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTBT. 

the times of those who laid the foundation of Qtxl's 
assembly, he who belonged to the Churoh at all, of 
course belonged to it where he lived ; but if he moved 
or journeyed to another place, he was received accord- 
ing to his place in the Church everywhere. There 
might be in some cases a doubt as to his reality ; for 
subtlety as well as violence assailed the early Chris- 
tians. Hence they carried letters of commendation, 
or they were visited : that is, just the principle of what 
is now available can be shown in Scripture. Thus, in 
the case of Saul of Tarsus, when Barnabas heard tiie 
news of his remarkable conversion, he did not, like 
other disciples, think such a work too hard for the 
Lord ; but, being a good man, and full of the Holy 
Ghost, he is quite ready to believe what grace could 
do, and goes and finds Saul, who is thus recognized of 
the Church in Jerusalem. So now, if a stranger comes 
forward, professing to be a member of God's Churoh, 
persons in whom all can confide visit him ; and thus 
the Church, upon their representation, conscientiously 
and heartily accepts the confessor of Christ. 

But we are not confined to any one rigid canon 
whatever. There is divine light in the word of God 
f6r every possible exigency, and if we have not that 
light, we had better wait on the Lord, and see 
whether the precious fulness of Scripture will not be 
rendered without doubt applicable to the difficulty, 
by the power of the Spirit, without our presuming to 
add anything like a rule to meet the case. It is not 
meant that there may never be perplexity, and that 
we may not feel our weakneaa and lack X)f wisdom. 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 105 

Humility, patience, and faith will ere long prove 
better solvents than all the appliances of htmian art. 
God has undertaken to provide for us in His word ; 
and spiritual power consists in the bringing that 
word, by the Spirit, to beax practically upon every 
case that comes before us. 

The main point on which I insist, however, is 
this — ^that, according to Scripture, he who becomes & 
member of the Church of Gbd at all is a m^oiber of 
it everywhOTe. He might carry letters of commend- 
ation to the assembly where he went. But whyP 
Because, all tiirough the world, it was the Church of 
God. Now, I ask you. Ought we to accept, as Gbd'a 
assembly, anything i^^matically diiGferent fixnn the 
Scriptural acooimt of it? Ought we ta allow 
another and contrary principle to rule its public 
services ? If we do, are we really, in this, subgect to 
the word of Q-od ? You may tell me of the obstaclea 
which exist now, and that you have so many diffi- 
culties to contend with. All this is granted : only 
let us hold fadst that here, as elsewhwe, the will of 
God is paramount to all other considaraticHis. If we 
find ourselves accrediting tibat which opposes Scaip- 
ture, our business is to cease fix)nl doing evil, and to 
leam to do well. 

It is no^ our duty — ^far from it — to form a new 
Church, but to cleave to that which is the oldest of 
all, and the only Church that is true — ^the assembly 
of Ghxi as it is exhibited in Scripture. "Why do you 
hesitate ? Are you not satisfied with the Church of 
Ood ? Whom Church, what Chuxda. d.o ^qvl y^^^^t*^ 



106 THE ASSEMBLlf, AND MINISTRY. 

But you allege that times and circumstances en- 
tirely diflfer now; and you ask, with a sort of tri- 
umphant air, whether two or three Christians meeting 
here and there can be God's assembly P Undoubt- 
edly, I reply, there is a sorrowful change ; but the 
true question is. Does God's will about His assembly 
change ? Which is right — ^to accept man's change, 
or to go back to God's will, even though there be 
but two or three who meet together in submission 
to His word P If I am with them gathered to the 
Lord's name, owning the members of His body, 
waiting upon God to work by His word and Spirit, 
is not Jesus in our midst P And what so great 
comfort for our souls P I hope to prove, another 
evening, that this is the express provision of the 
Lord for these last days ; but however this be, all I 
stand to now is, that the free action of the Spirit, 
among the gathered members of Christ, is the one 
principle of the assembly of God laid down in His 
word. There can be no other which He sanctions. 
Either I am acting upon it, or I am not. If I am 
seeking to be faithful thus to the Lord, blessed am I, 
whatever my sorrow for the state of the Church. If 
I am not, at any rate, let me confess my fedthless- 
ness. The word of God leaves no doubt what His 
unchanging mind about His assembly is. The Holy 
Ghost is come for ever to guide His assembly. All 
that is wanted is a spirit of repentance and of fedtL 
There are hindrances ; there are ties ; there must be 
a high price paid in this evil world for obedience to 
the Lord JeauB. But am I Hia? Do I yahie His 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 107 

love P Is He more precious to me than all else in 
this world? Is His yoke a burden, is His will 
sweet to my soul P Then, I say, there is but one 
pathway. It is vain to be loud in our profession of 
readiness to go with the Lord to prison or to death. 
This He may not ask of us ; but He does, as it were, 
demand of every Christian whether he is true to His 
own glory in the assembly of God. It is not a 
question of rival institutions pertaining to different 
.countries, or to different leaders ; neither is it a ques- 
tion of a special school of doctrine, or of a peculiar 
plan of discipline and government. Is old habit, is 
tradition, is interest in this life, to keep me back from 
faithfiilness to that which Q-od shows to be His will 
for His assembly P 

If you see the will of the Lord, do not hesitate 
another day. Do not wait till everything is clear. 
It is not faith, when Q-od calls one out, to say. First 
show me the land. Put away what you know to be 
wrong ; never go on in what is without doubt con- 
trary to the word of Q-od. " To him that hath shall be 
given." Have you renounced what you know does not 
agree with, but opposes, the word of Qod P Cleave 
to nothing but the word. Let me ask, for example, 
what you did last Lord's-day. Were you found, as 
a Christian, where you could honestly say, " I was 
in my place in the assembly of GodP" Did the 
various members of the body come together trusting 
to the Holy Ghost to guide them, with an open door 
for this or that believer, as each had received the gift, 
to minister the same one to anotixei, aa goo^ ^\/s^«s.^ 



108 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

of God's manifold grace P or were you joining with 
others where the Scriptural plan would have been 
regarded as disorderly? If the latter, the Lord 
grant you to see clearly that you are not within the 
scene of His will, and of His glory in the assembly ! 
I say not that you are strangers to the grace of Christ, 
or outside the work of the Holy Spirit — ^far from it. 
I believe He blesses not only in Protestant associa- 
tions, but beyond them too. Is this to be unchari- 
table P I believe that the Spirit of God acts, wherever 
He sees fit graciously to use the name of Christ, for 
the good of believer and unbeliever. I, for one, 
doubt not for a moment Gtod has used His word for 
the conversion and comfort of souls among Boman 
Catholics — ay, and Romish priests, monks, and nuns. 
It may have been in a scanty measure, as assuredly 
the opposition to the truth is enormous, and the 
opening seems small indeed ; but yet has it been 
really so down to our own days, and still more largely 
and clearly in the past. 

But enough of this. The question is, not whether 
the Spirit of God may not cause truth to take effect 
in this denomination or that. The chief thing before 
our souls now is, Are we honouring Christ according 
to the word of God P Are we subject to the Lord in 
the assembly P Are we carrying out His will as far 
as we know it ? "We may fail in doing so ; surely 
we all do. "When you are thus come together, you 
may find some restless, some that do not altogether 
what they should; you may hear individuals that 
Iiad better be silent, and you may «^ ftf)ixLQtim.es 



AND MINIST&T. 109 

tiiose silent whom it would be blessed to hear. It 
may be that they are yielding to a morbid sense of 
responsibility, and fear of criticism, and many other 
things that hinder their utterance of what is in their 
hearts. All this may readily be. Nobody denies 
the possibility or the fact of fedlure. But how does 
this in the least degree weaken the truth of God, or 
the bounden duty of His children P 

Let me put a case that any believer may under- 
stand. The Holy Ghost dwells in you, if you are a 
CJhristian ; but are you always acting in the Spirit P 
No. Does not the Spirit always abide P To be sure 
He does. Tou are always the temple of God ; you 
never can be anything else, if you are members of 
Christ ; but you may, for all that, sometimes grieve 
the Holy Spirit. Tour obligation, however, never 
ceases. It is just so with the Spirit in the Church. 

Let the assembly come together. We will suppose 
they are converted, and have received the Spirit of 
God, and reaUy do, as an assembly, look to Him to 
guide. I use that expression "as an assembly," 
because it is not assumed that every member imder- 
stands the truth about the Spirit of God. Some of 
them may be very ignorant. It is more or less a 
shame for them, but there may be such cases, and, in 
point of fact, such there are. Some saints have been 
attracted by spiritual instinct, who may have been 
trained up in dissent or nationalism, and who settle 
down with little progress in intelligence. These are 
apt to bring in the effects of the routine in which 
they have been brought up BpiritviaXiy^ ^o \^ ^^^'^^^ 



110 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

and I need not say that their experience will not 
help them to be always submissive to the guidance 
of the Spirit. Nor is this at all confined to these 
only; for we know what weakness may be found 
among those that have been inured to the truth from 
their infancy. Their being where they are costs them 
but little ; they have not known any deep sense of 
the ruin of Christendom. Their souls have been 
exercised feebly. I am supposing them to be con- 
verted, but coining into the truth of the Church's 
position rather through parental training than at the 
loss of aU ; and so there is apt to be a taking for 
granted, without any divine conviction, that things 
are all right. Need I say how desirable it is that 
there should be real, exercised, spiritual intelligence as 
to the working of the Holy Ghost in God's assembly P 
But then, allowing these drawbacks, and all the 
rest that might be added, the great fact holds good, 
that as certainly as the Holy Ghost dwells in 
every Christian man, so sure it is that He dwells in 
the whole assembly — ^in the Church of God. What 
we have to consider is, whether individually, or as 
an assembly, we submit to be guided by Him to the 
glory of Christ. Indeed I cannot but judge it to be 
reaUy Antinomian in principle, where men delibe- 
rately rest in this, that to be Christians is the one 
great matter — ^that if the Lord has shown us His 
grace, we need not make much ado about His will or 
anything else. Is it, then, come to this, that the 
great body of God's people not only do not know, 
but do not care to know, His will about His 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. Ill 

assembly P Do you resent this charge P Then search 
and see what is your desire as to this. Is it to be 
subject to the Lord and His word P Can there be a 
more direct test for me as a Christian, or a more 
evident way of proving my loyalty to my Lord, than 
in this very thing P If I belong to the assembly of 
Gk)d, ought I not to renounce everything inconsistent 
with the Scriptural account and regulations of that 
assembly P 

Further, let me warn you that have taken this 
position, that wrong principles, false doctrines, evil 
ways, may slip in. We know the devices of Satan ; 
but what some of us may have said before they were 
thus proved, this we may repeat with increasing 
emphasis now, that as God's Spirit is the Spirit of 
truth, so is He the Spirit of holiness also. "When, 
therefore, the assembly refuses to bow to God's 
word, preferring to accept evil publicly, rather 
than judge it for Christ's sake, what is to be done in 
this case P First, of course, fiill testimony is to be 
given, and warning, private and public, perhaps, 
and patient waiting on honest slowness and fear, in 
order to bring all right. But suppose all has been 
rejected, and the assembly in any place, deliberately 
prefers its own ease or will to the word of God, 
what thenP The duty of separation is even more 
peremptory than from the ordinary ecclesiastical 
institutions of Christendom ; for it is a greater sin in 
the sight of God for those that have known the truth 
of God, and seemed to be acting upon it in faith, to 
abandon it £ot any reason wTiate^et. Ow^sA* "^^\» 



112 THB ASSEMBLY, ANP MINISTRY* 

these, then, to be parted from with yet more gravity 
and horror in the sight of God, than one would turn 
from the meetings of those who have never known 
the value of the Lord's name for the assembly of His 
saints P 

At the same time, when you find an assembly 
— ^let it be small, or let it be great — come together, 
owning their faith in the Holy Ghost's presence, we 
should not be quick in laying a sin to their charge. 
Surely there is to be slowness in judging an assembly 
yet more than an individual. Are we to assume that 
cur thoughts, our feelings, are necessarily according 
to God ? Hence we find the all-importance of waiting 
upon the Lord. But still the fact remains, that if 
the public sin be certain and clear, and all warnings 
be. rejected, the more the oasembly takes the position 
of being God's assembly, the more is its departure 
from Him to be lamented, and one's back is to be 
turned upon it, because it is, now at least, a false 
profession. God looks for truth in His saints, but 
He looks for it also in His assembly. It is the place 
where He expects the manifestation of His character 
before men, and not only wh^re He makes good the 
edification of His saints. Everywhere He holds to 
the glory of His Son. I admit all the difficidties 
from the rising up of national systems after the great 
Eomish apostacy, from the spread of nonconformist 
bodies subsequently, and from more recent attempts 
of all kinds. But let me press upon all who hear 
me that we do not contend for anything of ours, 
whether inherited from our fathers, or an invention 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 113 

of ourselves ; we do not contend for anything because 
it is new, nor even because it is old — ^had it the green 
age of three centuries, or the hoary hairs of fifteen 
hundred years. We return to the ground which it was 
our sin — Christendom's sin — ^to have left ; we return 
to a way which we know to be absolutely good and 
true, because it is God's way. We take our stand 
upon the only divine foundation for the Church. 
We have no confidence in ourselves, but are sure we 
are right and safe in commending ourselves to God 
and the word of His grace ; and therefore we may be 
of good courage. If the character of our difficulties, 
dangers, and trials proves how we need the Scripture, 
we learn also how Scripture applies ever fresh and 
mighty; and thus our hearts are encouraged to 
deave to God more and more. 

I have dwelt so long upon the assembly, that I 
shall not be able to say much as to ministry to- 
night But I may be brief, more particularly as 
we shall have the subject of Gifts and Offices before 
us another time. Let me just make a few plain 
observations as to ministry before closing. 

We have seen that the Church fiows from Christ 
risen and glorified, by the Holy Ghost sent down 
fix)m Heaven to bind together and form the assembly 
upon earth. This is the only assembly that God 
sanctions, and therefore which every member of it 
ought to sanction, until the Lord takes it out of this 
world. We have the words and workings of the 
Spirit of God in the assembly eixo^wn xj^a m^^T^^Nisa'^ 

I 



114 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

already referred to. I come now to some general 
principles. And first of all, just as the Church is a 
divine thing, so is ministry. It flows neither from 
the believer nor from the Church, but from Christ, 
by the power of the Spirit. 

Now this at once clears the way. The Lord calls, 
not the Church ; the Lord sends, not the saints ; the 
Lord controls, not the assembly. I speak now of the 
ministry of the word. There are certain functionaries 
whom the Church does or may choose : for instance, 
the assembly may nominate the persons it thinks fit 
to take care of the funds, and to distribute of its 
bounty. The Church may employ its servants, 
selecting them according to its best wisdom ; and 
the Lord owns this choice. So it was done of old, 
as we read in Acts vi., where the multitude chose, 
and the Apostles laid their hands upon those chosen 
to look after the tables. So it was where "the 
churches" (in 2 Cor. viii.) chose brethren as their 
messengers; and so, again, where the Philippian 
Church made Epaphroditus their messenger in minis- 
tering to the wants of Paul. (Phil, ii.) 

But we never find this kind of selection where the 
ministry of the word is concerned. Never ! On the 
contrary, the Lord Himself once looked upon His 
poor disheartened, scattered people, pitied them, and 
told the disciples to pray that the Lord of the harvest 
would send forth labourers. (Matt, ix.) The very 
next chapter shows that He was the Lord of the 
harvest, who accordingly sends them Himself. 
AfterwardSf He prepares His disciples for the full 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 115 

character of the Christian ministry when He should 
leave them. Thus, in Matt, xxv., where there occurs 
the parable of the lord departing to a far country, 
we have the same truth — ^the Lord giving gifts to 
His servants. Now this really decides the matter. 
For the difference between that which the word of 
God acknowledges, and that which is seen now-a- 
days, lies in this, that, according to Scripture, the 
ministry of the word, in its call and in its exercise, 
is more truly divine than that which is now sub- 
stituted for it in Christendom. Hence, also, its 
proper dignity is impaired, specially the holy inde- 
pendence of man, which is essential to its due exer- 
cise, and, above all, to the glory of the Lord Himself. 
If preachers be sent bij men, it is an usurpation of 
the Lord's prerogative, and the gravest detriment to 
His servants who submit to it. 

What is the effect of ministry exercised according 
to Scripture ? The most perfect freedom for all that 
is given of God for the blessing of soids. Accord- 
ingly you find the imiversal doctrine of the Epistles 
fiilly confirms that which the history shows in the 
Acts of the Apostles. But I must refer to both 
as briefly as may be. 

Li 1 Cor. xii. — ^xiv., we have already seen that it is 
of the essence of the Church, as God's assembly, 
and the aim of the Spirit's presence therein, that He 
should have ftdl liberty to use whom He pleases for 
the glory of the Lord and the blessing of all. The 
exhortation in 1 Peter iv. 10, 11, and the caution 
in James iii. 1, suppose the sam.^ o^^TmajSJSk «sA 
I 2 



116 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINlUTRT. 

its liability to abuse. This may suffice for " those 
within." 

As to "those without," the will of the Lord is 
equally clear. Thus, in Acts viii. we hear of perse- 
cution falling upon the Church, and they were all 
scattered (but the twelve), and went everywhere 
preaching the word. Now, I do not call this neces- 
sarily ministerial. Of course, some of them were 
ministers of the word, others not; but all went 
everywhere evangelizing. But it proves that the 
Lord recognizes any and every Christian man in 
going forth and announcing the glad tidings. (Com- 
pare Acts xi. 19 — 21.) 

But when we come to detail, we find Philip, in 
the same chap, viii., preaching freely. " But," some 
will say, " he was chosen of the Church." He was 
not chosen to minister the word. He was chosen, 
on the contrary, to leave the apostles, imembarrassed 
by serving the tables, to the ministry of the word. 
It was expressly for the purpose of relieving the 
apostles from the secular work, that the seven men 
were looked out by the multitude, and didy appointed 
over this lower task ; the call of the Church was for 
this only. It was the Lord that called Philip to preach 
the Gospel ; and the Lord blessed the word, which 
extended to and beyond Samaria. (Compare Acts 
xxi. 8 for both.) 

In Acts ix., we see a man on the highway to 

Damascus with a commission from the high priest to 

persecute the Jewish Christians. That was the only 

commiBsion Paul received from man — on authority, 



THS* ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 117 

not to preach the Gtospel, but to extinguish it, if it 
were possible. But the Lord, in sovereign grace, 
not only converted Saul of Tarsus, but sent him 
out, direct from Himself, a preacher, and an apostle, 
and a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity. 
Paul thus becomes the standing type of Christian 
ministry. Apart from miraculous facts, he exempli- 
fied livingly the words, " we believe, and therefore 
speaL" (2 Cor. iv.) 

We find the Lord, after this, introducing others 
into the work, more particularly Apollos, who was 
" ail eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures," 
but so very ignorant at first, that he knew nothing 
beyond the baptism of John (that is, the testimony 
whidi was rendered to Christ when He was living 
upon the earth). But if he was thus in the dark as 
to the Church and the ftdl truth of Christianity, he 
was a converted man. Of course, there were souls 
converted before the coming of Christ. It is mere 
ignorance that sees any difficulty in such a statement. 
Apollos had received by the Spirit the early testimony 
to the Lord, but he did not know the work of Christ. 
This he is taught by a good man and his wife, who 
helped him in the fiiller understanding of the Scrip- 
tures, and he comes out mightier than ever in the 
truth, but there is no hint about a human inauguration 
before he preaches. Yet the apostle Paul writes with 
all respect of Apollos, putting this unordained man 
between himseK and Peter (1 Cor. iii.) Again, he 
tells them, in the last chapter of this epistle, that he 
had asked Apollos to come, but " Ina ^riSl ^^^ i\a\» ^ 



118 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINI8TRT. 

all to come at this time." Does not this indicate a 
very different state of things fix)m what men dream 
of apostolic rule, as well as from what exists now P 
What it does truly illustrate is the way the Lord 
maintained His place. An inspired apostle gives 
his counsel to ApoUos, who does not conform. This 
Paul himself records without censure; and, in fact, 
Scripture does not say which was right : it may very 
probably have been the great apostle, but on this 
point we are left entirely in the dark. In any case, 
the record brings out the weighty truth that the 
Lord abides the absolute Master and Director of His 
servants. Man likes to regulate ; but the Lord, to 
whom we are surely boimd above all, exercises the 
hearts of His servants, and gives them in this word 
a guiding principle for all time. Is it true for your 
soul and for mine ? Are we practically servants of 
the Lord — of the Lord only P or are we serving a 
denomination as its ministers P If we are only 
nationalist or dissenting ministers, I have nothing 
to say ; but if we are really ministers of Christ, let 
us beware. "No man can serve two masters:" if 
we have been striving to serve Christ and the sect 
whose officials we are, which is to be held to P which 
to be given up P 

Thus, along with the assembly of God, there is 
the ministry of the word, committed sovereignly to 
some of its members, not to all, yet assuredly for the 
good of all. Let the assembly respect the servants 
in their place, and let the servants respect the assem- 
iJy IB its place. None ever coii£o\md the two things 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 119 

without the most disastrous consequences: neither 
must be sacrificed. It is the place of a servant, no 
doubt, to preach or teach in subjection to Christ ; it is 
the place of a servant, likewise, to coimsel, guide, 
govern, according to his gift from the Lord. But 
whatever may be the servant's mind, judgment, or 
counsel, nothing dissolves the direct responsibility 
of the assembly to Christ, The same Jesus is Lord 
of the servant, but He is also owned as the Lord 
by the assembly of Q-od. 

Take the instance, again, which is shown in Acts 
xiii. Barnabas and Saul go forth on a missionary 
circuit, directed by the Holy Ghost, and taking 
Mark with them. But Mark turns out an indifferent 
servant, and speedily returns to his home. They 
are going out again (Acts xv.), but Paul insists upon 
going without Mark. Barnabas, who was related to 
Mark, did not like him set aside, and contends with 
Paul about it — good man as he was — and this so 
sharply, that it leads to a severance of these two 
devoted and tenderly attached servants of Christ. 
Then Paul chooses Silas, and they were commended 
by the brethren to the grace of God. The Church, 
or the labourers, were, no doubt, convinced that Paul 
was in the right. Of Barnabas, nothing of the kind 
is said ; the subject, as far as he is concerned, drops. 
Paul enters on a large and enlarging sphere, and 
Silas goes with him, supplying, as it were, the place 
of Barnabas. Now, there we find not only an indi- 
vidual servant at work, but the joint action of two 
or more in the service of the Lord. B«im!G^TKij^c^ 



120 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

be as wrong in taJdng Mark, as Paul was right in 
choosing Silas ; but the principle is clear. Spiritual 
judgment is necessary in selecting a feUow-labourer. 
Forced association with one we do not believe com- 
petent or desirable, is clearly not according to the 
Lord's mind. 

Thus, in His service, there is such a thing as 
association, but no bondage about it. Barnabas was 
free to preach the word as much as ever. There 
was no lack of saints, of course, to welcome Bar- 
nabas, and no want of sinners to be preached to. • 
But Paul would not have Mark forced upon him, 
and chooses another; and this is an important 
example for us. How completely does Scripture 
provide both for co-operation and for refusing it! 
The Lord Jesus keeps His due place, not only in 
relation to the assembly, laying down how it is to 
be ordered, but also in relation to ministry, showing 
how the work is to be carried out on earth. The 
word of God meets every need. 

But there is another thing that is wanted for all 
of us. What is this ? Simple faith in the Lord, in 
His grace, in His word. Where this is not, souls 
axe apt to be oast down by difficulties. Then, when 
they see things looking other than what attracted 
them once, they begin to doubt everything. How 
different if our mind is made up for having to do 
with the Lord ! Let us look well to it, that we are 
subject to Him. Of course, I am not now denying 
moral subjection to " chief men *' in the fear of the 
Lord; thk may be a port of subjection to Him; 



THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 121 

but what we need to have settled is, that, at all times, 
and under all circumstanoes, we must please the 
Lord. He will be with us ; our circumstances may 
look critical and be trying enough; but we shall 
find infinite blessing to our souls — ^indeed, it is in 
times of trouble we prove the solidity of the blessing. 
Be assured that, as the Lord went through the cross 
to His heavenly glory, so we shall find His cross 
stamped upon every service; but then, it is the 
Lord, and it is His cross. Let our hearts, therefore, 
•be of good cheer. 

The two lines of truth here sketched — the assembly 
cS. God, and the ministry of Christ — ^you will find 
laid down in the word of God. Both flow from 
Christ, instead of being mere volimtary associations : 
as to both we lie imder a responsibility which cannot 
be evaded. The Church u bound to receive Christ's 
ministers, instead of having the right to choose.* 
Prom Christ the power comes ; to Christ the servant 
is immediately responsible. If a man is called to 
serve, let him rejoice in, but bow to, the blessed 

* The Congregational Lecture on " the Ecclesiastical Polity of the 
Kew Testanoent," by I>r. S. Dayidson, may be compared with what 
we have seen in Scripture. " Let us now take a Church and trace 
its yarious proceedings. A number of belieTcrs agree to associate 
together. In a united capacity they resolye to confess Christ, to 
obserre His precepts, and to follow His wilL They choose pastors 
whom they judge to possess the qualifications described in the New 
Testament In this way the believer chosen by them becomes an 
official person as soon as he accepts their inyitation" (p. 269). << The 
compact entered into between the ruler and the ruled may be dis- 
solyed by one or both of the parties. The union formed between 
pastor and peopJe may be severed " (p. V[\\ '* k xxiYDLYaXjet \& ^\!^'5t 



122 THE ASSEMBLY, AND MINISTRY. 

truth, that he is to serve the Lord Jesus Christ. 
The consequence of carrying it out will be, that 
the world will drop oflf; it may be even that 
many of his Christian friends will look cold. The 
ministry of Christ was never intended to work in 
the system of the world, any more than the as- 
sembly of God; both were meant to exalt the 
Lord Jesus, and to be an exercise of ftdth for His 
saints and servants. It must be so still. More than 
that, it was intended that in the Church and the 
world we should feel the difficulties and sorrows, as 
well as joys, of faith. I do not doubt the triumph 
in Christ ; but we can count upon trial and tribula- 
tion surely in this world. We may find differences 
as to the world. Sometimes, too, in the Church of 
God there may be fluctuations. Every one who 
has served Christ knows something of this. But as 
to TTiTn to whom the Church belongs, and whom we 
serve. He remains "the same yesterday, to-day, 
and for ever.'' The question is. Are we prepared to 
follow Him ? 

the minister of one Church, viz., that hy which he has been chosen, or 
else he is not a minister at all. When he ceases to be pastor of a 
Church, he ceases to be a minister of the Gospel, till he be elected by 

another He is not made a minister by the act of ordination, but by 

the people's call, and his acceptance of it, by virtue of which a soleam 
engagement is entered into ; and when the engagement terminates, 
he ceases to be a minister (!) " (pp. 252, 253). No principle seems to 
me more flatly opposed to God's Word than religious radicalism. 



WOESHIP, THE BEEAKTOG OF 
BEEAD, AND PEAYEE. 

John iv. 10—24, 
LECTURE lY. 



The first and weightiest part of the subject now 
before us is worship. It most of all concerns us, 
because it most nearly touches God himself; and 
this, I am convinced, is the truest criterion, as well 
as the safest and most salutary for our souls. No 
doubt the breaking of bread may be included in 
worship, but it calls for a separate notice, as being 
of a complex nature, and having a distinct aspect 
toward the saints themselves; whereas worship, as 
such, is essentially God-ward. Again, it seemed due 
to its importance to give it a place of its own, as 
furnishing most impressively, and in an act which 
engages all hearts, that which brings before our 
souls the deepest and most aolemn T^^^\ia.^<:s^ ^1 



124 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

divine holiness and grace in the Lord's death, in 
presence of which all find their level, all recognize 
what they were without His precious blood, what 
they are now in virtue of it, and, above all, what He 
is who so died in atonement for them, that they 
might remember Him — ^yea, for ever — ^in thankful 
and adoring peace. 

The Scripture read to-night shows not only that 
worship forms a blessed, lofty, and most fiiiitfdl 
part of Christian life, but that the Lord HimseK 
puts it in contrast with that which God enjoined in 
times that are past. As, on previous occasions, a 
consideration of God's ways of old helped us to see 
more distinctly the fresh revelations of God in the 
New Testament, so we shall find in the matter of 
worship. 

First of all, let me premise that there is a certain 
state of soul that is needed for worship. God looks 
for the worship of His children, and it is a duty in 
which all of them have a direct and immediate 
interest; yet there is a basis necessary, both on 
God's part and on theirs, in order that there should 
be real, proper Christian worship. So it was with 
regard to the one body, the assembly of God, and 
the gift of the Holy Ghost. If there be one domain 
more than another where the allowance of man's will 
is both a sin and a shame, it is in intruding into the 
worship of God. Yet, is there anything more fre- 
quently done, and with less conscience ? Is there an 
act where man more exalts himself, and does greater 
despite to the Spirit of graxse? Let none suppose 



OF BEEAD, AND PRATER. 125 

fhat iihis is speaking with undue severity. Can one 
speak too strongly of an interference whioh deludes 
the world, defiles the Church, and destroys the moral 
glory of Christ ? On a false foundation, or rather 
without foundation, man all the while is but actively 
dishonouring God, and this in the face of the brightest 
manifestation He has made, or can make, of HimseK; 
for it is in His Son. If, in truth, God has so spoken 
and acted, then we have God ftdly revealed ; and we 
must have one superior to the Son of God in order to 
find a brighter and fuller revelation than what we 
have in Christ. 

This, then, is both the source of all our hopes and 
blessedness, and the basis on which Christian worship 
proceeds ; nevertheless, though it is absolutely essen- 
tial to Christian worship that there should be a perfect 
revelation of Qt)d in Christ, this, infinite as it is, does 
not suffice. There is a need on man's part which 
must be met according to divine glory. God has 
not failed to reveal Himself fully; He has left 
nothing undone; He has done nothing that is not 
absolutely perfect ; and all this so that there need be 
no doubt or question about it. * 

There was, doubtless, a gradual unfolding of God's 
mind, and will, and glory : indeed, I think we might 
say that He could not have brought out all His mind 
until He gave His Son. But now that the Son of 
God is come, we can, as believers, say without pre- 
sumption — "He has given us an understanding, that 
we may know H im that is true." In fact, we 
should be deliberately slighting, oi gvioSiSL^ ftc^^^^^ 



126 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

lieving what God has given in order that He should 
be known, if we did not say boldly " We know." 
Is it not a great thing, in a dark world like this, to 
have God preparing, even for His babes, such language 
as " we know? " Yes, and He would have us prove 
the truth of these words, " we know," not only as to 
ourselves but Himself. It is much to have a divine 
book in which we can, as led of the Spirit, look back 
on the past, forward unto the future, down upon the 
maze of the present, and say as to all, " we know." 
It is infinitely more and better that we can humbly 
and truly say, " we know Him that is true, and we 
are in Him that is true, even in His Son Jesus 
Christ." (1 John v.) 

It is not a question of how far there may be 
intelligence developed in the child of God. There is 
such a thing as growth in knowledge ; but along 
with it we must also stand up for the great blessing 
and fundamental truth, that every soul God has 
brought to Himself has an imction from the Holy 
One, and knows all things. Now, the possession of 
this divine capacity is far beyond any measure of 
difference' there may be in practical development. 
Of course, there are such differences, and there is 
thus room for the exercise of a spiritual mind, and 
the Spirit of God, no doubt, acts through the truth 
upon us, that we may make progress. But then we 
may rest confident, as we think of the children of 
God, that, wherever they are, under the most imto- 
ward circumstances, God has given them a new 
nature, and this a nature ca5a\Aft, \i7 ^laa S^mt^ of 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYEK, 127 

understanding, and appredating, and enjoying Him- 
Belf. All the time here below is, or ought to be, just 
the season for growth. It is the school where we are 
to learn truth in practice ; but then it is the applica- 
tion and deepening in our souls of that which we have 
abeadj in the grace of God. " I have not written 
unto you," says the apostle, " because ye know not 
the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is 
of the truth.". (1 John ii.) This is the portion of 
every child of God. 

But this very privilege indicates the great essen- 
tial on man's side in order to be a worshipper. 
Man, as such, unless bom of God, is incapable 
of worshipping God — ^no more able to do so than 
a horse is capable of understanding science or phi- 
losophy. I deny, entirely and in principle, that 
there is any capacity in man, as he is naturally, 
to worship God. He needs to be a new creature in 
Christ ; he needs to possess a new nature that is of 
Gbd, in order to be able to understand or to worship 
, God. Not that the simple fact of eternal life, which 
every soul receives in believing on the Son of God, 
alone qualifies for worship ; but then God does not 
give it alone. He has provided other means of the 
greatest possible moment, and He has vouchsafed 
them not merely to some, but to all His children. 
In many cases, however, lamentable to say, the 
appearance and the enjoyment of this great grace 
may be hindered. It may be hardly possible to 
discern either the divine capacity or the power of 
worahip. But we are entitled always \» t^^qt^ q^ 



128 WOKSHIP, THE BREAKING 

the Lord, the unfailing truth of His word, and the 
fidness of His grace. 

If God has given a new life to His children, and 
reconciled them to Himself by Him who has borne 
their sins in His own body on the tree, wherefore 
has this great work been done ? No doubt for His 
own glory, and out of His own love ; but it is a 
part of that glory, and an answer to His love, that 
He calls upon His children to praise asi well as serve 
Him now. And we have before us the consideration 
of this very subject — Christian worship, which de- 
mands the gift of the Pentecostal Spirit quite as 
much as either the assembly or ministry can do — a 
part of the homage of the children of God, and a 
return of heart which God claims £rom all that are 
His. 

The first great requisite, then, for man, in order 
to worship as a Christian, is that he be bom of God, 
as the object of His grace in Christ, and receive the 
Holy Ghost to d.well in him. The Lord teaches the 
principle of it in the answer He gives to the Samaritan . 
woman — " If thou knewest the gift of God, and who 
it is that saith to thee. Give me to drink, thou 
wouldst have asked of Him, and He would have 
given thee living water." There we have the kernel, 
as it were, of worship — " If thou knewest the gift of 
God." It is not the law, were it of God Himself, 
though even that she knew not as one that was under 
it ; for the Samaritans were a mongrel people. Gentiles 
really, though partially Jewish in profession and form. 
But even if the law of God TaaA \>ftevi iKnorwri m oil 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYER. 129 

its fillness, HDimpaired, and imcorrupted by man, it 
certainly would not have fitted for Christian worship. 
But it is, "if thou knewest the gift of God^^ — His 
free-giving ; if she knew Grod as a giver — ^that He is 
acting out of His free bounty and love. This is the 
first truth. But in the next place, " If thou knewest 
.... who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink, 
ihou wouldest have asked of Him, and He would 
given thee living water." 

All the time God sanctioned the law as a system. 
He dwelt in thick darkness; that is. He did not 
reveal, but hide HimseK, as it were. But when the 
only-begotten Son declared the Father, God no 
longer occupied the position of a claimant on man, 
which was necessarily the form in which the law 
presented His character. Of course, this character 
was right, and just, and good, like the commandment 
itself; and man ought to have bowed to Him, and 
answered His demand. But man was a sinner, and 
the effect of pressing the claim was to bring out 
more plainly the sins of man. Had the law been 
the image of God, as ignorant and perverse theolo- 
gians falsely teach, man must have been hopelessly 
left and lost. But this was far from the truth. The 
law, though of God, is neither God nor a reflection 
of God, but only the moral measure of what sinftd 
man owes to God. God is light ; God is love ; and 
if man is in the depth of need, He gives freely, fully, 
like Himself. Indeed, it is what becomes Him, and 
what He delights in. " It is more blessed to give 
than to receive." It were strasig^ \t Q;q^ ^<sl^ 

K 



130 WORSHIP, THE BBEAKINO 

defrauded of that which is the more blessed of the 
two. According to the law, He should have been a 
receiver, had not man broken down ; in the Gospel 
He is unequivocally a giver, and what is more, a giver 
of His very best to those whose only desert is ever- 
lasting destruction. 

But this is only possible through the glory and 
the humiliation of the Son of God, stooping down 
and suffering to the uttermost for sinners. How 
truly and beautifully, then, the Lord says, " If thou 
knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saifh 
unto thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have 
asked of Him, and He would have given thee living 
water :'* in other words, had she known God^s grace 
and the glory of Him who freely talked with her, she 
would have sought and found all she wanted. Little 
did she suspect who the lowly One was whom she 
supposed to be but a Jew, though she did wonder 
that a Jew could be so tender, and so bend down to 
a Samaritan woman. Little did she think that it 
was the Lord God of heaven and earth, the Only- 
begotten in the bosom of the Father; had she 
known but a little of this, she would have asked 
and He would have given her living water. It is 
the Holy Ghost that is meant by the " living water." 
Thus, in a single verse, we have the whole Trinity, 
as it were, concerned. God^s own grace is the first 
thing, the source; then we have the glory of the 
Person of the Son, and BKs presence in humiliation 
among men on the earth ; finally, the Son, according 
to His proper glory, gives to needy, thirsty souls the 



OF BBEAD, AND PRAYER. 131 

living water — ^the Holy Ghost. Is it necessary to 
say that none but a person supremely divine could 
impart such a blessing ? 

Here, then, you have testified by our Lord Jesus 
the necessary basis of Christian worship. First of 
all, God revealed as He is in the Gospel as contrasted 
with the law — God in His grace ; secondly, the Son 
coming down in perfect goodness, and willing to be 
man's debtor in the least things that He might bless 
him in the greatest, by a love which can win the 
most careless and obdurate ; and thirdly, the gift of 
the Holy Ghost. What must Christian worship be, 
according to its true character and object in the mind 
of God, if all these things are necessary in order that 
it should exist ! It does, in very deed, suppose, on 
God's part, a ftdl revelation of what He is in His 
own nature, and in His grace, to man. It does 
assume that the Son has come amongst men in love 
to make good that revelation, in the thorough putting 
away of sin by the sacrifice of Himself. It also 
supposes that the heart, awakened to its real wants, 
has asked and received of the Lord living water, the 
Holy Ghost, not only as the agent of life and renewal, 
but as a well within of unfailing refreshment, spring- 
ing up iQto everlasting life. 

Accordingly, a little lower down in the chapter 
we have more developed instruction on the subject, 
although we have had the foundation of it in verse 
10. The woman, when her conscience was touched, 
and ebe learned that she stood in. \ha y^^^^t^^^^H.^ 
K 2 



132 WOXSHIPy THE BKEJLKLSG 

prophet, though not yet reoognizmg in Him fhe 
Messiflh, put her leUgions difficulties before Him 
for solution, quite sore that He brought the troih 
of God — "I pezteive that thou art a prophet" 
Bemaik, in passing, that the essential idea of a 
prophet, both in the Old and the New Testament 
sense, is one that brings the oonsdenoe direct! j into 
the presence of God, so as to hare His light shed 
upon the souL There were many prophets who 
predicted scarcely anything, but they were not the 
less prophets. Finding herself, then, in the presenoe 
of one who was aUe to announce the truth of Qod^ 
she wants to have the questions of her soul answered. 
She turned to Him about that which, at all timeSi 
and eTerywhere, has and must hare unrivalled in- 
terest The world itself, blind and dead, will fi^t 
for nothing faster than its religion. There were 
differences then, as there are now. ** Our fathers," 
she said, '' worshipped in this mountain ; and ye say 
that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to 
worship." The Lord solemnly tells her : " Woman, 
beUere me, the hour cometh when ye shall neither 
in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem worship the 
Father." He gires a rebuke, too : "Ye worship ye 
know not what. We know what we worship, for 
salvation is of the Jews." It is dear that what- 
ever hopes of salvation were held out to the Jew, 
they were founded on their belief in Christ. But 
while He vindicates the position (not the condition) 
of the Jews, He proclaims the dawn of a brighter 
day : " The hour cometh, and now is, when the true 



OF BREAD, AND PBATER. 133 

worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth, for the Father seeketh such to worship 
Him." He could speak thus plainly and strongly, 
because He was Himself the Son in the bosom of 
the Father, and was entitled, in virtue of the glory 
of TTiH Person, to bring in worship suited to His 
own intimate knowledge and perfect revelation of 
the Father. 

Thereon at once follows the fiill and distinctive 
character of Christian worship. God is made known 
as a Father calling and adopting children; nay, 
more than this. He is seeking children. In this is 
the fulness of divine love going out from heaven 
and for heaven. In Israel men had to seek Jehovah, 
and this with carefully prescribed rites and rigid 
ceremonies : thus only could even the chosen people 
in their worship come and appear before God. Not- 
withstanding the nicest care, not one could approach 
into His presence — ^nay, not even the high priest 
himself; and if it had been possible for him to 
draw and stay near, it was not to God revealed as 
a Father. God was no more Father to Aaron, or 
Phinehas, or Zadok, than He was to the least 
member of the most obscure tribe in Israel. There 
was at that time no such manifestation of God. 
But now the hour was coming, and in principle 
come, when the Father was seeking worshippers. 
The Jewish system had been tried and found want- 
ing, and was how doomed. Before God the worldly 
sanctuary was already fallen, and Christ was the 
true temple. The Son of God was come, and this 



134 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

could not but change all things — ^not only teach, but 
change all. No wonder, then, that there was, in 
and through His presence, a new and full display of 
God, a declaration of the Father's name. Here 
Christ makes known the new thing in this point of 
view; how earthly worship must vanish, not merely 
at the mountain of Gerizim, but even in Jerusalem ; 
that it was a question henceforth of worshipping the 
Father, and this in spirit and in truth ; for, wondrous 
to say, the Father was seeking such to worship Him I 
What a truth ! God the Father going out in His 
own imcaused, creative love in quest of worshippers ! 
Of course. He was accomplishing this task by His 
Son, and in the energy of the Holy Spirit. Still, 
this was the principle, in direct contrast with nature 
and Judaism — ^the Father seeking worshippers. Not 
only was it an entirely new character of worship, 
suited to and demanding the new revelation of God 
Himself, but it necessarily and completely extin- 
guished the old lamps of the sanctuary hitherto 
acknowledged in Jewry. Not only was the spurious 
worship of Samaria more than ever condemned, but 
the brightness of heaven, now shining freely, eclipsed 
the feeble rays which in Israel were meant at least 
to make the darkness visible, and to keep up a testi- 
mony to better light that was coming. What had 
been temporarily owned and used of God was now 
becoming a nullity and a nuisance ; and God, as we 
might expect, brought in the vast change most 
righteously. Up to this time, man was on his trial. 
The Jew, as the sample of chosen, favoured man, 



135 

was being proved, and what was the issue of it? 
The cross and shame of the Lord Jesus. They 
rejected and slew their own Messiah, little knowing, 
too, that He was Jehovah, God over all, blessed for 
ever. Justly, therefore, and after long patience, the 
Jews were put aside. Such was the moral develop- 
ment of the ways of God. There was nothing 
arbitrary, as every one who believes what God de- 
clares in His word as to Israel's rejection of the 
Messiah must at once see and feel. In the life and 
ministry of Christ was a manifestation of such grace 
and long-suflfering as had never been witnessed or 
even conceived on the earth. But now the end was 
come before God. The Jews, by their conduct, were 
cutting the last ties which a people in the flesh could 
have with God. In rejecting their Messiah they 
rejected themselves. But when the cross was a fact, 
and redemption accomplished, when Jesus was risen 
from the dead, the grace and truth which had come 
by Him shone out in His work on the cross, and the 
plenteous redemption, not promised now, but accom- 
plished, was made known by the Holy Ghost. 
Accordingly, those who believed were in a capacity 
to worship the Father. It is not merely that they had 
faith in the Messiah, for this they had when He was 
here. But now that they had in Him redemption 
through His blood, the forgiveness of sins ; now that 
Christ made God Himself known as His Father and 
their Father, His God and their God (and this in the 
power and presence of the Holy Ghost sent down 
from heaven), they could draw near into the holiest, 



136 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

and truly worship the true God; they oonld say, 
not only by, but with the Lord Jesus, "Abba, 
Father." 

Not merely were spiritual life and redemption need- 
ful, but the Holy Ghost also ; and accordingly here 
the Lord adds that " God is a Spirit : and they 
that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and 
in truth." Mark the difference of the language. 
When He speaks of His Father seeking worshippers, 
it is pure grace flowing freely out ; it is He who is 
seeking. It is not merely that He accepts the 
worship of His people, but He seeks wordiippers. 
Yet let us remember that our Father is God. It is 
a thing easily forgotten, strange to say; but this 
is mere fleshliness, and not from our privilege in 
infinite mercy of nearness to Him, which ought not 
in the least degree to dull, but to increase and 
strengthen our sense of His majesty. " Qt)d is a 
Spirit," He says ; " and they that worship Him 
must worship Him in spirit and in truth." There is 
a certain moral necessity here, which cannot be dis- 
pensed with. The truth is, Christ creates, the law 
never does. The law kiUs ; what else can it do, or 
ought it to do, for sinful creatures P It would be a 
bad law if it did let us off. If I deserve to die as a 
guilty man responsible to God, then, I say, the law is 
just, holy, and good in condenming me. It is the 
province of the Saviour alone to give me life, and 
not this merely, but to give me life by His death 
and resurrection, without sin, fruit or root, that I 
majr stand in Him possessed ot a ue^ Tksfeicce, wholly 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYER. 137 

delivered by grace from the misery, gmlt, power, and 
judgment of the old man. 

This is the place of every Christian. These are 
the simple but most blessed elements of his life and 
standing before Gk)d ; but then, as they are insepa- 
rable from the gijPb of the Holy Ghost, so is He 
. absolutely needed that we may worship our God and 
Father ; and for this purpose and others He is given. 
Thus we see what the living water means. " The 
water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of 
water springing up into everlasting life." It is the 
Holy Ghost given by Christ to be in the believer ; 
without Him there can be no such thing as the 
power of worship. But He is given, and the hour of 
true Christian worship is come in the strictest sense. 
And you that are here assembled to-night, are 
you prepared to acknowledge, for any consideration 
whatever, worship which is not of this character P 
Tou, especially, who are young in years, and per- 
haps, also, little established in the truth of God^ 
hearken. Tou may be tempted, not only through 
natural hankering after the world and its worship, 
but you have relatives, connexions, friends, who 
think it hard you do not join them. In what ? In 
Christian worship P Join them in it by all means. 
Whenever, wherever you find worship in spirit and 
in truth, fear not to join ; seek it, yes, earnestly seek 
it. Eather would I ask. Are you disposed to slight 
such worship for that which does aU it can to return 
to the moimtain of Samaria, if it cannot reach Jeru- 
salem; for a religious service \]baJu \a X^q^Jcl xxsfecv^ 



138 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

and formal; and an order that mingles some genuine 
worshippers in a crowd of false ? How many there 
are now-a-days who in word boast of their heavenly 
liturgy, in reality hurry through it with such evident 
heedlessness as to show that the sermon is all they 
care to hear I One might fancy they were men who 
knew nothing, desired nothing, but to hear the way 
to be saved, instead of being God's children, called 
and capacitated to worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth. But this is the misery of being in a 
position which is bound up with what they value in 
the flesh and in the world ; where worshipping the 
Father according to His word never was nor can be 
known. 

I admit that even this is better than belonging to 
another class of religionists, nominally in the same 
sect, who, being ignorant of Christ's redemption, 
bear with an evangelical discourse for the sake of 
services, the darkness of which is to them delightful, 
because it answers to their own condition. Fleshly 
worship suits a fleshly stata 

My charge is not about the slipping in of a hypo- 
crite amongst the true — ^these, no doubt, may creep 
in anywhere. The main point insisted on is, the 
error and sin of embracing the world in divine 
worship through a false principle, than which there 
is notMng in the present day more common, and in 
some eyes more desirable. Clearly this is not Chris- 
tian worship ; but still it is so styled ; it is accepted 
and justified as such ; and the refusal of it is branded 
popularly aa the fruit of a harsh, "vmloving, censorious 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYER. 139 

spirit, instead of being seen to be, as it is, simple- 
hearted desire to carry out the will of the Lord. 
Worship there cannot be, unless the ground of grace 
is taken: there must be life in the Spirit, nothing 
less than divine life and the power of the Holy 
Ghost working in the worshipper. 

Again, it ought not to be very difficult to discern 
where there is Christian worship. One can easily 
say where it is not. How can it be where there is 
no recognition of the assembly of the faithful in 
separation from the world ? where human formularies 
largely displace the divine word ? where the Holy 
GFhost is not welcomed to work in the order laid 
down in Scripture? where anybody may be in mem- 
bership, and the evidently imconverted can join in, 
or lead, the most serious services ? The invariable 
effect is, that as you cannot raise the world to the 
height of faith, the believers who mingle all together 
indiscriminately must descend to the world's level. 
Hence, fine buildings, imposing ceremonies, exciting 
music, poetic sentiment, are apt to come in by de- 
grees, where Christian worship is imknown or for- 
gotten. Hence, too, the need of legal order, for it 
seems bold to trust the grace of God. 

Tou may have Christian worshippers in such a 
state of things; for I have no desire to exaggerate; 
but Christian worship there cannot be. Do you 
doubt this ? Perhaps the doubt is because you have 
never known what worship really is. So much is 
this the case at present — ^the thoughts of Christians 
are so vague, unformed, and dark— \Xi^^ \.c> tsi^sj^ *&l^ 



140 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

very meaning of worship is lost. How many call a 
building where they meet to hear preaching a place 
of worship ; and when they go to hear, they think 
and say they are going to worship ! Does not all 
this show that the very idea of worship is unknown P 
Nor is it to be wondered at. The truth is, there 
is a great deal of preaching of Christ in these days, 
much calculated to arouse and also to win souls; 
but where is there a full setting forth of the Q-ospel 
of God's grace ? That Christ is preached at all, is a 
matter for which we have to thank God. Souls are 
converted, and learn, as far as the usual orthodox 
testimony goes, what is most true of their sins 
and their danger ; but we want the Gospel of God 
fully proclaimed — the Gospel as we see it set forth 
in the epistles — ^the glad news not only that the 
work of Christ has put sin away, but that the 
believer stands in a new life and relationship with 
God, of which the Holy Ghost is given as the seal. 
"Where this is known, worship is the simple, necessary 
fruit ; the heart, thus set free by grace, goes out to 
God in thanksgiving and praise. 

So, in the chapter we began with, the believer 
enjoys not only a new life communicated, but a well 
of water within him, which springs up into everlast- 
ing life. Thus, by the energy of the Holy Spirit given 
to us, we possess, as a conscious thing, perfect, un- 
broken peace, and we cannot but breathe the joy of 
our ransomed souls to the praise of our Saviour God. 
As a fact, this may not be found among the children 
of God, save few comparatively, becaxvae in general, 



OF BREAD, AND PBAYEK. 141 

where there is a perception of Christ, they put the 
law ia the place of the Holy Ghost, and thus fell 
into the uncertainty which invariably, where there 
is conscience, flows from the law thus misused, 
instead of enjoying the light, and power, and peace 
in Christ and His redemption, which is the proper 
fruit of the Holy Ghost's testimony to Christ and of 
His indwelling in the believer. Here only can you 
have Christian worship. It is founded upon the ftdl 
revelation of grace in Christ dead, risen, and ascended ; 
and it is in the power of the Spirit of God that this 
is enjoyed by the believer. But not this only : for 
God is a Spirit, and the conseijuence is, that Christian 
worship repudiates formality. " God is a Spirit: and 
they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit 
and in truth.^^ There we have the nature of God 
revealed, and thence is deduced the moral need of 
worshipping Him in spirit and truth, not according 
to earthly form or human will. 

This, then, is the source, groundwork, and cha- 
racter of Christian worship. But we have one element 
more when we pursue the further instructions of the 
New Testament. In 1 Cor. xiv. we find it connected 
with the assembly. We learn there on what prin- 
ciple, and by whom, worship is now paid to God. 
This is an important addition to our knowledge of 
God's will. No one contends for a moment that the 
Gospel should not be preached, or that believers 
should not be instructed in the truth. These are 
duties confessedly according to Scripture. There we 
have everything provided for, that can be ns^dftdfet 



142 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

the good of the Church, and for the well-being of souls ; 
we have both the principle and the fact of all Chris- 
tian service most clearly laid down in the word of 
God. Among the rest, there is no lack of testimony 
to the manner according to which Christian worship 
should be conducted. We have seen that none can 
render acceptable worship to God but Christians: 
from it the worid is plainly shut out, according to 
the teaching of Scripture. It is not a question of 
closing the door, or of excluding persons from the 
place where the faithful assemble. It is clear from 
Scripture that unbelievers might be present where 
the assembly of God may be gathered ; but they are 
incapacitated from rendering proper and acceptable 
worship imto God, because they have neither the 
new nature, nor the Holy Spirit, who is the only 
power of worship ; they neither know redemption, 
which is the basis of worship, nor do they know the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus, who, with the 
Son, is the object of worship. Thus, in every point 
of view, the world is necessarily without the pale of 
Christian worship, and the bringing the world in, is 
a large part of the sin and ruin of Christendom, 

Again, we gather from 1 Cor. xiv. the place which 
the giving of thanks has in the worship of God ; and 
this connected, not with any one individual only, or 
a separate class, but with the order and operation 
of God in the assembly. Hence we read (ver. 15), 
" What is it then P I will pray with the spirit, and 
I will pray with the understanding also : I will sing 
with the Bpirit, and I will sing with the understand- 



OF BREAD, AND PRATER. 143 

ing also." Important as singing is, its end is not, 
of course, the sweet sound : the essential thing, as we 
are told, is " singing with the spirit and understand- 
ing also." What a proof that the Lord is looking 
for the intelligent service of His people! So, in 
ver. 16, we read — " Else when thou shalt bless with 
the spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room of 
the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, 
seeing he understandeth not what thou sayestP" 
If in Christian worship there were the utterance of an 
unknown tongue in the giving of thanks, or in bless- 
ing God, it would traverse the rules of edifying the 
assembly, because it would leave out those that could 
not intelligently join their "Amen." The passage 
is cited also to show that thanksgiving and blessing, 
like singing, and other constituents of Christian 
worship known to us familiarly, were found firom the 
first in the Christian assembly. 

But there is just the difficulty. Look right or 
left — ^look where you will, where can you find the 
Christian assembly? Where is there the gathering 
together of the children of Gfod, in the name of 
the Lord Jesus, engaged in thanksgiving and bless- 
ing, praising and singing, as we read of here P Tet 
the assembly of God, meeting as such, is essential to 
Christian worship. There might be the best of men 
chosen to conduct the service, and the order of praise 
and prayer might be as faultless as existing liturgies 
are open to severe criticism ; but what then P Would 
it be the worship of the family of God P If not, how 
could it be of really Christian character ? God laoka. 



144 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

for the worsliip of His children in the Spirit. Do 
you say that, after all, it is only the slight difference 
of several taking part, instead of one ? But grave 
as that might be, such a difference is not the essen- 
tial thing, but this — ^that there be perfect open- 
ness for the Spirit's action by whom He is pleased 
to speak. It is not, then, a question of one man, 
or half-a-dozen. On some occasions the Holy Ghost 
might use one or two, on others more than sis in 
various ways. What Scripture demands is, that 
there be Mih in the Spirit's presence, proved by 
leaving Him His due right to employ as may please 
Him. It is not, therefore, a mere question of one, or 
few, or many mouthpieces to give thanks, or bless, or 
take part in acts of Christian worship. The real and 
essential feature is, that the Holy Ghost, being 
present, should be counted on, and His employment 
of this Christian or that as He will. In an assembly 
where there were many spiritual men, it would have 
a strange appearance if but one or two took an active 
part in the worship of the Lord. StiU, whether few or 
many speak at any given time, the only Scriptural 
mode by which acceptable worship is rendered is 
where the whole assembly imites in the liberty of the 
Spirit, with heart and mind, in the offering of their 
praises and thanksgivings to God through the Lord 
Jesus Christ. The Holy Ghost, acting in the assem- 
bly by its members, may think fit to employ one or 
twelve to speak the praises suitable to His mind, 
and according to the condition of the assembly. 
And what can be sweeter to all, whether or not they 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYER. . 145 

be thus employed as the audible channels of wor- 
ship, than to have the consciousness that the Holy 
Ghost in very deed so deigns to guide in one and 
all ? The one point of value is, that Se should be 
firee to direct all for the glory of Christ. 

There is another remark of a practical kind to 
be made as to worship. We must guard against 
bringing into the assembly our own thoughts of the 
worship to be offered unto God. An individual may 
give out a hymn to be sung in which he delights, and 
which may be not only beautiful but true and spiritual 
in itself; but it may be a mistake in him to give it out 
— a wholly unsuitable hymn for the occasion on which 
he desires it to be sung. Again, there may be some 
outside the assembly, known or unknown, who, out 
of curiosity, are come to see what the worship is like: 
now are you, fearing that they might wonder at the 
silence from time to time, to read a chapter, or give 
out some sweet hymn? Need I say that such a 
step is indefensible, and beneath men who believe in 
the presence of the Holy Ghost ? Some may think 
there is liberty to do this or the like ; but who put 
such thoughts into the mind? Do you think the 
Holy Spirit is occupied with what those without 
may say or think of those within, or anything of the 
kind ? Is He not, on the contrary, filled with His 
own thoughts of Christ, and communicating them to 
us? The becoming thing, therefore, for us to do 
under such circumstances is to look from ourselves, 
and those within and without, to God, that He, work- 
i^g by the Spirit, may give us communion with the 



146 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

present thoughts of the Spirit of God about the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

When such is the case, how simple is the flow of 
thanksgiving for His special mercies to us and all 
saints ! how fragrant the sense God gives us of His 
delight in Christ ! what praise of His grace ! what 
anticipations of glory, and of Christ Him self there ! 
All these, and more, are but ingredients ; and they 
will variously predominate, as the Lord sees fit. 
Even a lower character of worship, if it be but suited 
to a given state, is, in my judgment, a far more 
pleasing thing to God than any strain ever so high, 
which has not the real present energy of the Spirit of 
God connected with it. • 

Further, as to criticism: I cannot think the 
assembly of God is the right place for any man to 
stand up and show his superior wisdom in ; on the 
contrary, therein, above all occasions, is the place for 
the greatest to show his littleness before God. There 
may be seasons and circumstances where a judgment 
of what is given out may not be amiss, but a duty ; 
but the assembly of God is not the place for such a 
course. May I not take the liberty of applying to 
this what the apostle lays down as to another inno- 
vation : " If any man seem to be contentious, we 
have no such custom, neither the assemblies of God?" 
How, where, could any one gather such a practice 
from the word of GodP Nor do I confine myself 
here, or in these remarks generally, to a bare text, 
but I am speaking of the whole tenor, and texture, 
and ohjeot of all that is given us in the Scripture. 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYER. 147 

Accordingly, as it is unauthorised, so the result can- 
not but be pernicious. What can the effect of criti- 
cisni in the assembly of God be, but the sowing of 
discord and distraction where unity and concord 
should prevail? And yet it may be a thing too 
often done; against it I would warn my hearers 
earnestly. All are liable to make mistakes, and aU 
deserve to be corrected occasionally; but, as a general 
rale, comment upon another is altogether out of 
place in the Christian assembly. There is a meet 
time and place for every real duty; and it never 
can be right to rectify one wrong by another, how- 
ever godly the intention. 

Next, as to the breaking of bread, a few Scriptures 
will suflfice. The Lord's Supper, not baptism, was 
revealed of the Lord, we all know, to the apostle 
Paul, as it is brought out in the same epistle (1 Cor. 
xi.) from which much has been already quoted. It 
is a holy institution, intimately linked with, and the 
distinct outward expression of, the unity of Christ's 
body, which it was St. Paul's work especially to 
develop. We have the Lord, accordingly, there 
revealing it afresh to the apostle Paul. He had not 
sent Paul to baptize, as he says, but to preach the 
Gospel. There is not the least doubt that he did bap- 
tize, nor that it was perfectly right in him to baptize. 
But baptism, so expressly charged on the eleven, 
after the Lord's resurrection, is not only a single 
initiatory observance — " one baptism," — ^but it is for 
each individual the confession of the foundation- 

L 2 



148 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

truth of Christ's death and resurrection. The subject 
of it stands forth as a believer in Him who died and 
rose ; he is no longer, therefore, a Jew, or a heathen, 
but a confessor of Christ. The Lord's Supper, on 
the other hand, belongs to the assembly, and forms 
an affecting and important object in the worship of 
the saints of God. It is, primarily and strictly, the 
standing sign of our only foundation; it is the witness 
of His love imto death, and His work, by virtue of 
which such as we can worship. No wonder, there- 
fore, we have the apostle Paul showing the very 
solemn and blessed place which the Lord's Supper 
claims in the revelations of the Lord to him. " I 
have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered 
unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in 
which He was betrayed, took bread : and when He 
had given thanks. He brake it, and said. Take, eat : 
this is my body, which is broken for you : this do in 
remembrance of me. After the same manner, also, 
He took the cup, when He had supped, saying, 
This cup is the new testament in my blood : this 
do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. 
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this 
cup, ye do show the Lord's death till He come." 
It is evident, on the face of the statement, what a 
large and deep place the Lord's death has in His 
Supper. No joy, no brightness of the favour of God 
in heaven, no consequent communion, nor hopes of 
everlasting blessedness with Him, can be allowed for 
% moment to distract from, or overshadow, the death 
of the Lord. But the reverse is the truth ; for the 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYER. 149 

more the Lord's death has its own central value 
before the Christian, all these things shine out not 
only more brightly but also more sweetly and aflfect- 
ingly to the heart. And so the same man who was 
Gfod's blessed instrument for developing the ftdl 
extent of the Christian's privileges, is the very one 
who gathers us round our Lord's death as that 
which pre-eminently attracts and fills every heart that 
loves His name. 

!EVom Acts xx. 7, it is plain that the saints should 
break bread on the first day of the week, not of the 
month or quarter. But it is the resurrection-day, not 
the day of His death, as if we were summoned to be 
there in mourning as for the dead. But He is risen, 
and therefore, with grateftd, solemn joy, we take the 
Supper on the day that speaks of His rising power. 
I cannot but believe that the Holy Ghost records 
the day for our instruction, as well as the object that 
called together the believers primarily. No doubt 
the apostle, passing through after a short stay, dis- 
coursed to those assembled; but they came together 
on that day to break bread. Have we consented to 
other thoughts and arrangements ? Or do we act as 
if we believed the Holy Spirit knows and shows us 
the best and truest, the holiest and happiest way of 
pleasing God and honouring Christ ? The death of 
the Lord keeps constantly before the soul our utter 
need as once guilty sinners, proved by the cross ; the 
complete blotting out of all our sins by His blood ; 
the glorifying of God up to, and* above all in, death 
itseK; the manifestation of absolute grace, and withal 



150 WORSHIP, 

the righteousness of God in justifying us ; the per- 
fect glory of the Saviour — all these things, and 
infinitely more, are brought and kept before us in 
those simple but wondrous words — " the Lord's 
death!'' 

To take the Supper in remembrance of the Lord, 
and thus show forth His death, is what gathers us 
together as our prime desire. There can be no doubt 
about the meaning of the word of God which records 
this for our comfort and edifying; yet how could 
one infer that such was His will if one looked at the 
practice of Christians? Compare what they are 
doing Lord's-day after Lord's-day, with the obvious 
lessons of Scripture, and intention of the Lord in so 
revealing His mind to us ; and say whether, for the 
most part, this simple, touching memorial has not 
been slighted by real saints, and whether its character 
has not been changed imiversally in Christendom. 
I speak not of points of form, but of its principle — of 
such an interference with its mode of celebration as 
leaves hardly a single shred according to the Lord's 
institution. 

Beware of thinking anything can be of equal 
moment with duly showing forth the Lord's death. 
The Supper of the Lord claims an unequivocal pro- 
minence in the worship of the saints. Not that one 
thinks of the mere fact of celebrating it, as to time, 
in the middle of the meeting. Indeed, it is remark- 
able how the Spirit of God avoids laying down laws 
about the Supper (and the same is true of Christianity 
in general) — o, circumstancQ 'w\n.(3a.\5ii<& \]j\S.^\M\A.Ti;^^ 



OF BREAD, AND PBAYEE. 151 

abuse, but which gives infinitely greater scope to the 
spirit of Christian afiection and obedience. This, 
however, we may safely say, that it is not a question 
of the point of time when the act of breaking the bread 
occurs. The all-important thing is, that the Lord's 
Supper should be the governing thought when the 
saints are gathered for this purpose on the Lord's 
day; that neither the prayers of many, nor the 
teaching of any, should put that great object in 
the shade. Li ministry, however spiritual, man has 
his place ; in the Supper, if rightly celebrated, the 
abased Lord alone is exalted. There might be 
occasions where the evident guidance of the Spirit 
brings it early before us, or postpones it late in the 
meeting, and thus any technical rule binding it to 
the beginning, or middle, or end, would be human 
encroachment on Him who alone is competent on 
each occasion and always to decide. 

This openness may seem strange to such as are 
habituated to rigid forms, even where there are no 
written formularies; but that apparent strangeness 
is chiefly due to their habitual lack of acquaintance 
with the real presence and guidance of the Holy 
Ghost in the assembly. Where, however, the door 
is open to the action of the Spirit according to Scrip- 
ture, and where a just sense of what is in hand per- 
vades the assembly, the Spirit of God, somehow or 
another, according to the truth of things in His 
sight, knows how to adjust the right moment as 
well as all else, and to give us the comfort of His 



152 WORSHIP, THE BBEAKIKG 

guidanoe, if the Lord be but the oonfidenoe of our 
souIb. 

Again, it may be that you flometimeB go to the 
Lord's table and return disappointed, because there 
has been no exposition of the word, or no exhortation. 
Is it possible that you have gone to remember and 
show forth the death of Christ, and yet have come 
back with feelings of dissatisfaction ? How can this 
be ? Is it not the morbid influence of the present 
state of Christendom ? No doubt there is that in 
the natural heart which suits and likes what is now 
the vogue; and the excitement of Egypt's food is 
readily craved, where the heavenly manna is loathed 
as light food. Unquestionably we have that within 
which helps what is found outside ; still it is humbling 
and afflicting to my own mind that a discourse shoiild 
seem indispensable to garnish the breaking of bread, 
and that there should be a thought of want in the 
meeting where the Lord's death has been before the 
heart; when one has met around the Lord in His 
own name with those that love Him? Do you 
suppose that there is any service more acceptable to 
God Himself than the simple remembrance of Christ 
in His own Supper P 

But, however that may be estimated, all this has 
been often and plainly forgotten, and the Supper of 
the Lord has not only been made, in many instances, 
a much rarer thing than Scripture warrants, but its 
proper character has been tampered with, and the 
great landmarks that the Lord laid down have been 



OF BREAD, AND PRATER. 153 

utterly disregarded, so that the celebration is become 
anything men please to call it, except the Lord's 
Supper. Say that it is a sacrament, if you will; 
but one may perhaps doubt that, if so, it is the Lord's 
Supper. The Corinthians used to take a common 
meftl together on the Lord's-day ; for in those days 
Christians strongly felt the social character of Chris- 
tianity, and one may regret that it has been ever 
since so much lost sight of. After the meal, they 
celebrated the Lord's Supper. The devil, however, 
contrived to bring shame and confusion among them 
at Corinth by licence at this feast : some of them got 
intoxicated. No doubt it was a dreadful dishonour 
on the Lord's name ; but it ill becomes those to speak 
harshly who are apt to utter the loudest reproaches. , 
We must remember that, in those days, they had just 
been brought out of heathenism; and it used to be a 
part of the worship of false gods to get drunk in their 
honour. The Gentiles did not feel the immorality 
of it in the way that everybody knows now. It was 
thought no improper thing then to be thus excited, 
and worse, in their religious rites, and, indeed, at other 
times. It is probable, therefore, that in this infant 
assembly at Corinth it was not counted such an 
enormity, as we know it to be, that Christians should 
so far forget the Lord at the agape. What aggravated 
the sin was the mixing up the Lord's Supper then 
and there, it seems, with the love-feast. Such conduct 
was destructive of the character of His Supper. To 
eat and drink thus was to eat judgment (1 Cor. xi. 29). 
What had heen begun in the Spirit eixiia^ixi^'^^^'S^^ 



154 WOBSHIP, THE BREAKING 

I refer to this merely for the purpose of showing that, 
by bringing carnal feasting into such a holy assem- 
blage, we lose or destroy its true nature and aim. 

Thus, without confining oneself to the notice of 
any particular body, the practice of appointing par- 
ticular officials, whose sole right and title* it is to 

* Let me give a few extracts from the famous work of an able and 
moderate man, John Calvin : — " It is here, also, pertinent to observe, 
that it is improper for private individuals to take upon themselves 
the administration of baptism ; for it, as well as the dispensation of 
the Supper, is part of the ministerial office. For Christ did not give 
command to any men or women whatever to baptize, but to those 
whom He had appointed apostles. And when, in the administration 
of the Supper, He ordered His disciples to do what they had seen 
Him do (He having done the part of a legitimate dispenser). He 
doubtless meant that in this they should imitate His example. The 

, practice which has been in use for many ages, and almost from the 
very commencement of the Church, for laics to baptize, in danger of 
death, when a minister could not be present in time, cannot, it appears 
to me, be defended on sufficient grounds " (Inst IV., xv. 20). " For 
the words of Christ are plain : * Go ye, therefore, and teach all 
nations, baptizing them.' (Matt, xxviii. 19.) Since He appointed 
the same persons to be preachers of the Gospel and dispensers of 
baptism in the Church, * No man takcth this honour unto himself 
(Heb. V. 4) according to the apostle, but he that is called of God, as 
was Aaron,' any one who baptizes without a lawful call usurps 
another's office " (Ibid. 22). Then, in chap. xvii. 43 of the same 
book IV., after alluding to some ancient ceremonies in order to dis- 
miss them, he proceeds to say the Supper ** might be administered 
most becomingly, if dispensed to the Church very frequently, at least 
once a week. The commencement should be with public prayer ; 
next, a sermon should be delivered ; then the minister, having placed 
bread and wine on the table, should read the institution of the Sup- 
per, then explain the promise therein left us, and at the same time 
keep back from conmiunion [excommunicaret] all those who are 
debarred by the Lord's prohibition. He should, after that, pray that 

Hie Lord, according to the kindneu in vi^c^ '&.«'\)Q«\A'«^\!b^ «Afis«d 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYER. 155 

administer the bread and wine to each oonmiunicant, 
is clean contrary to the teaching of Scripture, and 
flies in the face of the evident intention of God, 
quite as much as the distressing conduct of the 
Corinthians themselves. For what is the Lord's 
Supper P Is it not the family feast ? When you 
derange the Father's order among the members of 
His family, or when you bring in those that are not 
of His family, its character is gone, it is the family 
feast no more. Let us, then, assume the least un- 
favourable supposition of a Christian company, and 
of none but Christians. Yet supposing that the 
administration, as men call it, of the Supper of the 
Lord is committed to a real minister of Christ, or to 

food on us, would also instruct and form us to receiye it with faith • 
and gratitude of mind, and would make us worthy of the feast by 
His mercy, since we are not so of ourselves. Here either psalms 
should he sung, or something read, while the faithful, in due order, 
communicate at the sacred hanquet, the ministers breaking the bread 
and conveying it to the people. The Supper being ended, an exhorta- 
tion should he given to sincere faith and confession of Mth, to 
charity and manners worthy of Christians. Lastly, thanks should be 
offered, and praise of God sung. This done, the Church should be 
dismissed in peace." How man loves to meddle and legislate I Now, 
it is instructive to observe that the fullest regulation of the Lord's 
Supper in Scripture occurs in 1 Corinthians, that is, in an epistle 
written to an assembly where as yet elders were not. Such I believe 
to have been the case ; but even if elders did exist there, the &ct 
remains that absolute silence is kept respecting them, where modem 
thought would have called them in at once to meet the disorder by a 
proper administration of the Sacrament. This never occurs to the 
apostle. The whole assembly are admonished on moral grounds. 
Such is the divine remedy, not an appeal to the elders if they existed, 
nor a direction to have them appointed in order to correct the abuse 
ii there were none* 



156 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

all who are His ministers, as the exclusive prerogative 
of such as minister only — ^I put the most favourable 
form which can be conceived for the popular notion — 
imder any and all circumstances, it is a himian in- 
vention, not only without the authority of Christ, 
but decidedly contrary to the doctrine and facts 
recorded in Scripture. I admit ministry most fuUy; 
but the Lord's Supper has no connexion with it. 
Make it a necessary function of those that rule to 
administer the bread and wine, and it bears not even 
an outward resemblance to the* Lord's Supper. It 
becomes a sacrament, not His Supper ; a manifest in- 
novation, a decided and complete departure from what 
the Lord has laid down in His word. The very 
idea of a person standing apart, and claiming to 
administer it as a right, alters and ruins the Supper 
of the Lord. That Supper, according to Scripture, 
leaves no room for the display of human importance 
in the pretensions of a clergy ; least of all when the 
apostles were on earth. Blessed and honoured of 
God as these were at the celebration of the Lord's 
Supper, they were there in His presence as souls 
that were saved from sin and its judgment by the 
Lord's death. In the regulation of the Churches, in 
the choice of elders, in the appointment of deacons, 
they had their own proper place of apostolic dignity. 
The word of God clear^jy and ftdly proves that the 
administration of the Supper by an official is a 
figment and tradition of men, wholly wanting the 
support of Scripture. 
But there is another point tToiat oftie\i \icsviX^fi»^'V3is», 



OF BREAD, AND PRATER. 167 

and might possibly harass, even where the bread is 
broken in a holy, simple. Scriptural manner — ^the 
danger of eating unworthily, and so of incurring 
"damnation." Let me meet this at once by the 
assurance that, though one has to watch against a 
eareless or otherwise unworthy participation, there 
is no thought of damnation, which would indeed 
upset for the believer all the comfort of the Gospel 
and the general drift of God's word. But some 
may say, "Do not the Scriptures assert as much P" 
I admit the English version does, but not the word 
of God; and we must not confound them. We 
have every reason to thank God for the English 
Bible, which, as far as I am acquainted with the 
subject, I believe to be as good a version, if not better 
than any other current in the world ; but for all this, 
it is only a version, and therefore a work in which 
the weakness of man appears, and in which are found 
here and there defects which human infirmity has 
not been able to avoid. One of these errors is on 
this very subject (in 1 Cor. xi. 29). The apostle is 
showing how essential it is that we go to the Lord's 
table, which invites us freely as every week opens, 
our hearts filled with grateftd remembrance of 
Christ's self-sacrificing love, who died in atonement 
that we through Him might be saved. What is the 
result of a light, heedless state at the Lord's Supper P 
If we take the bread and wiAe at that holy feast, as 
we eat the common food God provides in our own 
houses, not discerning the Lord's body — ^in other 
words, if we eat and drink unwoxtJoiL^, \1 \a \i<::i^ *^^ 



168 WORSHIP, THE BREAKING 

Lord's Supper we are eating, but rather judgment to 
ourselves. The Lord's hand will be on such, as the 
apostle shows bj the case of the disorderly Corinth- 
ians ; but even in that aggravated instance, it was 
expressly temporal judgment, that they should not be 
damned, or "condemned with the world." On the 
other hand, there is no excuse for absenting yourself 
firom the Lord's table. There is no escape firom the 
hand of the Lord, save by humbling ourselves and 
vindicating Him by self-judgment, and then coming. 
The Lord's Supper is no more a sweet privilege than 
a solemn duty for all His own, save those under dis- 
cipline ; and when we think of the love He has shown 
us in the boundless sacrifice He has made for us — 
the deliverance wholly undeserved He has wrought 
for us in His own deep abasement and suffering under 
Grod's wrath on the cross, together with all the 
gracious encouragement He has therein brought be- 
fore us for our comfort, admonition, and support 
in our conflict through the world, we cannot but 
regard the thankfdl commemoration of the Lord's 
death as a paramount obligation which, under no 
circumstances, ought to be neglected. 

Another person's £ault should not keep me away : 
if it rightly acts so on one, it ought to hinder alL Is 
the Lord, then, to be as it were forgotten because 
somebody deserves censure? Let the faulty individual 
be reproved or other^^Kse dealt with according to 
Scripture ; but my place is to " c^ this in remem- 
hrance of Christ" Again, sense of my own faulti- 
ness ebould not keep me back. ^' Let a man examine 



OF BREAD, AND PRAYER. 159 

himself, and so let him eat " — ^not stay away. He 
who abstains irom the Lord's Supper virtually says 
he is none of His. 

This will suffice as to the breaking of bread, barely 
as the subject has been touched. A few words 
remain to be added in regard to prayer. There 
is very often a great mistake made as to this. 
We hear sometimes about the "gift of prayer;" 
but where do you find it ? Show me a passage of 
Scripture which speaks of a "gift of prayer" in 
the sense in which people commonly use the term ? 
What is the eiflfect ? It largely hinders conscien- 
tious, modest, simple souls, who otherwise would 
join heartily in public prayer. But they cannot give 
themselves credit for possessing the " gift of prayer." 
They are frightened by what is a mere bugbear — ^by 
what is really, if they but knew it, a blunder. The 
consequence of this for them is, that they hang 
back, and are silent, when the meeting would be 
greatly benefitted by their help. Are there not some 
now present who know well that they have had many 
a time a desire to pray, and thus express the wants 
of God's assembly to Himself, but who have been 
deterred because they feared their lack of a " gift of 
prayer," and that they might not be able to pray 
long enough, or in a way acceptable to some whom 
they have heard insisting on the " gift of prayer?" 
Is it not a fact ? I entreat you, beloved friends, to 
listen to them no more, nor heed your own thoughts 
and feelings. 



160 WORSHIP, ETC. 

Examine the word of God for yourselves, and 
you will find that the apostle lays down (1 Tim. ii), 
and even peremptorily, his desire that the men 
pray everywhere. Let them, then, commit them- 
selves to the Lord without doubt, and at the same 
time remember, that Scripture, at any rate, never 
even hints about a ** gift of prayer." This brings 
us to another point connected with the one I have 
just endeavoured to explain. It is in my opinion a 
mischievous notion that those who possess a minis* 
terial gift should be regarded as the only proper 
persons to let their voices be heard in the assembly 
of God. 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHAEGES. 

Eph. ly. 7—11. 
LECTURE Y. 



I SHOULD feel to-night that my subject was dry 
indeed, and promising little profit to souls, if we had 
only to look at gifts and offices in themselves. It is 
thus that the subject is often regarded, and is apt to 
become, therefore, not only a barren, speculative 
question for some souls, but also a snare to others — 
barren to such as, looking upon it from outside, 
think that they at least have nothing to do with gifts 
and offices ; and a snare, perhaps, as often, to those 
who conclude that they themselves are especially, if 
not exclusively, concerned in them. The truth is, 
these spiritual functions closely and materially aflfect 
both Christ and the Church of God. Attached to 
Christ as their source, they (at any rate gifts) flow 
down from the same reservoii oi x\s3a. gt^j^ ^\i\i\!^^ 

Id 



162 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

whence all the main charaoteristio blessings of the 
Church proceed. They proceed from Him in heavenly 
places, and therein is the true answer to much the 
greater part of the aversion some feel to the subject, 
as if ministerial gifts were only a means of giving 
importance to their possessors. It would be hard to 
think that such a turn can be anything but a gross 
perversion of what comes from Christ or heaven. In 
truth, they are of the deepest moment in God's eyes, 
as He deigns to use them for the glory of His Son ; 
and, surely, the consideration of the light that Scrip- 
ture aflfords should be precious to those whose joy as 
well as responsibility it is to proiBit by them; and not 
least to those who have personally and most jealously 
to watch how the gift of Christ's grace is used, lest it 
should be diverted from the object for which the 
Lord gave it, to some selfish or worldly account. It 
is evident, I think, that simply to state the source is, 
in the principle of it, to cut off all excuse for the 
earthly aggrandisement, in various forms, which the 
Lord's gifts are too commonly made to serve. 

But then there is another remark to be made. 
Not only do these gifts of Christ spring from Him in 
heaven, and therefore must, if anything can, refuse 
to mingle with the vanity of the world and the pride 
of man (I speak, of course, of the gift itself, and not 
of the flesh's perversion of it) ; but, besides, there is 
another feature of these gifts, which is of immense 
interest to us as believers in the Lord Jesus. They 
are essentially bound up with Christianity, not on the 
contemplative side, but in wlaat ia ec^vijally needfiil, 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 163 

its active, aggressive character. Again, whether you 
look at the source or the character, all is founded on 
an eternal redemption that is abeady accomplished 
The more these considerations are weighed, the more 
their importance will appear; the more, also, it seems 
to me, the subject of the gifts of Christ will be seen 
to be entirely above that earthly and barren domain 
to which theology at least would consign it. 

Further, is tiiere not a wrong done to God and 
His saints, wherever that which the Lord deigned to 
make known to us in His word — ^that which con- 
stitutes, rightly applied, so essential a part of the 
blessing of the Church — is viewed as a mere 
secondary matter that can be taken up or laid aside 
at will ? In point of fact, such indifference to His 
truth is deep dishonour done to Him, and a corre- 
sponding loss invariably to the souls of the saints 
who thus slight His will. It must be evident, if it 
were only from the scripture just read, that the 
Holy Ghost does not in any way banish the subject 
of gifts into some dark comer — ^if such there can be 
in the Scriptures — ^whence we may, if we please, 
draw it forth from time to time, and regard it as a 
matter of small consequence. In the Epistle to the 
Ephesians, where the Holy Ghost has shown both 
heights and depths of blessing in Christ and in the 
Church — ^in the very centre where He shows us, too, 
the Lord Himself, in His own glory, at the right 
hand of God — ^it is there, beyond almost any other 
part of the New Testament, that we find the Spirit 
M 2 



164 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

launching out into an account of the gifts of the 
Lord to the Church. 

But, observe, I say the "gifts of the Lordj^ 
because so it is that they are regarded here, rather 
than gifts of the Spirit, Indeed, it would be difficult 
to find such an expression in Scripture. There is a 
passage which seems to say as much in Heb. ii. ; but 
it is properly " the distributions of the Holy Ghost." 
Tou will find, also, in 1 Cor. xii., that wisdom, 
knowledge, and the rest are said to be given by 
^^the same Spirit.^^ But still, in these things, the 
Holy Ghost, properly speaking, is not regarded as 
the giver, save mediately. The Lord is the real and 
proper giver ; the Spirit of God is rather the inter- 
mediate means of conveying the gift, distributing or 
making it good, — the energy by which the Lord 
acts. And I conceive it to be of moment, practically, 
that we should see that the gifts which are used to 
call out and build up the Church, and which are the 
only true basis of ministry, take their rise &om 
Christ Himself. 

Ministry, then, may be defined to be the exercise 
of gift, and therefore it is evident that these gifts of 
grace are bound up with it in the most intimate 
manner. There can be no ministry of the word, 
properly speaking, without gift, by the Spirit, from 
Christ. 

But let us look for a moment at the development 
which the Holy Ghost gives to the truth that these 
^riftfl flow from Christ. " Unto every one of us is 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 166 

given grace according to the measure of the gift of 
Christ." It is not a bare question of qualities pos- 
sessed ; still less is it merely a matter of attainment, 
let it be ever so well meant to give honour to the 
Holy Ghost. It is a new thing given, the positive 
consequence of grace ; it is the fiiiit of the free 
favour of the Lord, who in these things acts accord- 
ing to His own sovereign will and for the glory of 
God. 

" And unto every one" (or each) " of us is given 
grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. 
Wherefore He saith [taking up Psalm Ixviii.] 
*When He ascended up on high. He led captivity 
captive, and gave gifts unto men.' " Although the 
Lord Jesus was in His person, one need hardly say, 
competent at all times, still He was pleased, in the 
order of the ways of God, to wait for the great work 
to be done — ^and done, too, not merely as regarded 
man in divine mercy towards him ; but there was the 
enemy to be dealt with ; there was the power to be 
broken that had led captive the children of God. 
Hence the spiritual enemies were first disposed of, 
and the Lord is accordingly represented here as 
ascending up to heaven on the defeat, the total 
defeat before God, of all the once mighty unseen 
power of evil. Upon this foundation ministry is 
built. The Lord Jesus goes up into heaven. He 
has Himself confronted and defeated the powers of 
darkness. He has led captivity captive ; and thereon 
" He gave gifts to men." How completely the door 
for man^s energy and ambition la o\o»^^\ li.o^ ^«3tfe- 



166 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

fully God — alone able to teach us on this subject, 
and in His revealed word having, in fact, given us 
the perfect truth — shows us the Lord Jesus, from first 
to last, the one means of good to us, and glory to 
God the Father by the Holy Ghost ! Do you view 
Him only as Saviour and Lord ? The truth is, there 
is not a single seed of the Church's blessing, jthere is 
not a means of acting upon the souls of ourselves or 
of others, that is not, every whit of it, connected 
with Christ. Where we have not apprehended this 
vital, aU-embracing connexion with Him, and where 
that which assumes to be ministry, for instance, does 
not flow from Him only, it is clear there is a some- 
thing not to be held fast, but, on the contrary, to be 
got rid of ; an object not to be fought for as if it 
were a prize, but to be suspected as contraband, 
brought into the light of God, and judged in Hir 
presence. For whose ministry is it, if it be not of 
the Lord Christ ? and for what are we contending, 
if it be not for the gifts of Christ ? 

The Lord, then, is ascended on high, and from that 
height of bliss and glory He has given gifts to men, 
and the Spirit of God carefully turns aside for a little, 
and puts us in the very presence of the mighty work 
on the ground of which Christ took His seat there. 
" Now that He ascended, what is it but that He also 
descended first into the lower parts of the earth ?" 
What grace in Him ! What infinite love to us, that 
He might bless us — eternally bless us! He had, 
with the Father and the Spirit, a divine, co-equal 
light to that place of supreme majft«»\.^. TV^a^ ^one 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 167 

were competent to fill it. But He descended first 
into the lower parts of the earth. He had the 
highest place above, if I may say so, naturally, in- 
trinsically. It belonged to Him as the Son of God, 
who counted it not robbery to be equal with God ; but 
He deigned to be made flesh ; and, as a part of the 
counsels of God, it was needful that He should be 
man. Without the incarnation, there could have 
been no retrieving of the universal ruin of man, and 
of the dishonour of Gt)d through sin ; there could have 
been neither defeat of Satan, nor an adequate and 
righteous deliverance for man. But now He descends 
first into the lower parts of the earth. He takes 
upon Him the sorrow, the shame, the sin. To have 
condescended to become man, and to live as He 
lived rejected and abased on earth, would have been 
much; but what is this to the cross? He went 
down to the very uttermost, and in consequence of 
this humiliation. He is now, as man, exalted to the 
highest. In His death He retrieved aU that was 
ruined — ^indeed, I may say, infinitely more. He 
"restored that which He took not away;" He 
brought a new and better glory to God than had 
ever been thought or even prophesied of in any 
respect ; for I fear not to say that, as aU types and 
shadows are but the feeble heralds of His glory, so, 
too, there is, there could be, no prediction rising up 
to the height of blessing that was found in Christ, 
nor fathoming the depth of His moral glory in the 
sight of God. Himself was needed to come forth — 
TUmself needed that the full wox^ oi^\^ ^NSsesra^'^ 



168 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

and cross might be known. Before that, there oonld 
be no sufficient expression of His glory. It was out 
of this descent into the lower parts of the earth that 
He went up — out of this thorough coming down by 
Him who was as truly God as man, in the very 
nature which before had borne such firuits of shame 
and disgrace to God. 

But what a change I Humanity is a nature in which 
the blessed God could delight, as He looked upon it 
in the Lord Jesus. Now, too. He ascends ; and 
this, not as He came down ; for, descending simply 
as the Son of God to become the Son of Man, He 
goes up, not the Son of God only, but also the Son of 
Man. Indeed, it is especially in this very character 
of man that we find Him seated in heaven now. 
"He ascended up," as it is said, "far above all 
heavens, that He might fill all things.'* On this 
magnificent ground, whether one looks at the humi- 
liation on the one hand, or at the exaltation on the 
other — on this twofold ground of a height of glory, 
consequent on a depth of abasement, beyond all 
thought, is founded that ministry which is according 
to God, being the simple exercise of the gift of Christ. 
And yet, could it be credited, if one did not know it, 
that there are men, and Christians, too, who can look 
upon such a scene unmoved, if not moved only to 
spite, and sneer, and reproach ? But it must be so. 
To work thus, belongs to Him whom the world knew 
not. No wonder, therefore, that it recognizes not 
the gifts of His grace. Whatever can be made to 
merge into the world's greatness, whatever can be 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 169 

altered to suit the age's taste, the world can admire. 
Even Christianity and the name of Christ — ^per- 
verted, no doubt, and regarded only in some partial 
way — ^may be adopted. Why, even the heathen were 
willing to do it. There was an emperor, as probably 
many of you know, who would have been glad to 
put Jesus Christ as a god in the Pantheon. And so 
it is now. Has not Christendom something akin for 
its success ? It has taken up piecemeal this insti- 
tution and that; it has made them the means of 
adorning the scene into which God " drove out the 
man," exiled by Him because of sin. 

But we who believe are assuredly entitled to look 
above this world, and there to see, higher than all 
heavens, our Lord and Master. And what is He 
doing there? What is His present occupation, 
according to that which the Spirit of God tells us 
here ? He is giving gifts unto men. Let us bless 
Him for it I He (Himself a man, for so it is that 
He has taken this place) is giving gifts unto men. 
From on high He looks round about upon this 
world, and His grace makes man to be the vessel of 
these precious gifts, which savour not only of the 
Person who is there, and of the work He has done, 
but also of the glory from which He gives them. 
They are heavenly gifts. They will not, if He be 
consulted, conform to the world's thought or measure; 
nor were they ever intended to serve the world, but 
the Lord Jesus, though surely, for His sake, serving 
any and everybody. 

Let us take care, then, that Ti?e tmij «2t^ vsolks^^^ 



170 OIFT8 AND LOCAL CHABOES. 

to Him in whom we believe. And let ns beware 
of the evil heart of imbelief^ lest we treat a word of 
HiB lightly. Let iw remember, it is easy, pretending 
to honour His word, to let it slip away from ns, 
counting it something of the past — ^no doubt to look 
back on it with reverential awe, but still as a thing 
gone by. Is this the living word of a Grod that lives 
for ever and ever ? Are you going to treat the Head 
of the Church as if He were dead ? Nay, He never 
was dead as the Church's Head. Never ! He only 
took that Headship as One alive again from the 
grave, and so giving life ; He only took it as not 
only raised from the dead, but gone up to heaven : 
and yet men act as if the Head of the Church were a 
dead and not a living Lord ! And if He is thus 
living, what is it for ? Is it merely as High Priest, 
according to the Epistle to the Hebrews, to bring 
His people through the wilderness ? There is some 
tendency in Christian^ to overlook the priesthood of 
Christ ; but there is a far greater danger of their 
forgetting Christ as the Kviiig Head, who stiQ stands 
at the fountain-head of blessing, ever in faithful love 
giving His gifts to man. No doubt, it is all simmied 
up as if it were a given thing here — " He gave ; " 
and there is a very interesting reason for such a way 
of presenting His gifts, for the Lord surely would 
not Himself put the gifts of His grace in such a 
form as to interfere with the Church's constant hope 
of His own return. On the contrary. He would fix 
the Church in the attitude of expecting Himself from 
heaven. Accordingly, not even ftie smy^'J ^^ wiA?r 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 171 

terial gift is so put as to defer the ftdfilment of the 
" blessed hope " from age to age. On high is the 
Head of the Church, and as Head it is part of His 
work to vouchsafe all needed gifts for men. 

Here, then, is the whole scene of His grace summed 
up in one — ^the Lord gave gifts to men ; " and He 
gave some apostles, and some prophets, and some 
evangelists, and some pastors and teachers." We 
have not a catalogue of aU the gifts. It is not at all 
in the manner of Scripture or of the Lord to furnish 
a mere formal list ; for the truth is not written in 
the word of Grod so as to satisfy hiunan curiosity, or 
form a system of divinity. What is done, is infinitely 
better. He has given us exactly what suited His 
wisdom in each particular part of Scripture. Hence, 
if we compare, for instance, what we have here with 
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, we shall find 
striking diiGferences. There are some gifts found 
here, not there; and some found there which are 
not here. Now, this is not a thing of chance, nor a 
matter in which the apostle used merely his own 
judgment, and decided things after his own mind. 
Nobody denies that his heart and mind were deeply 
exercised. Grod forbid! But we may bless God 
that there was an infinitely wise mind directing all 
things, and that there was a judgment which knew 
the end from the beginning. We shaU find, accord- 
ingly, that the apostle mentions these gifts according 
to that divine intelligence. Indeed, the reason of it, 
to some extent, may appear as we proceed. 

Yirat of all, the gifts (SopaTo) laei^ ^Twas^^ssaiy^ 



172 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

are in view of the perfecting of the saints, which is 
the great primary object, branching out into the 
work of the ministry, and the edifying the body of 
Christ, as connected with it. Now, there, at once, 
may be discerned the key, or divine reason for pre- 
senting here certain gifts and not others. Here we 
have nothing, for instance, about speaking in a tongue; 
neither have we any mention of miracles. Why 
so ? What have they to do with the perfecting the 
saints ? The reason seems to me clear and adequate. 
Those gifts for signs were of all consequence in their 
place ; but how could a tongue or a miracle perfect a 
saint? We see, in the first Epistle to the Corin- 
thians, that, instead of perfecting, they on the con- 
trary became a very great snare for the saints. No 
doubt the Corinthians were carnal, and therefore they 
were like children amused with a new toy — with that 
which was, indeed, an engine of power. And we 
know how great a danger this is, just in proportion 
to our imspirituality. We have the very solemn 
lesson that even the greatest powers and most 
astounding manifestations of the Holy Ghost in 
man cannot give spirituality, and do not minister 
to the edification of the saints necessarily in any 
way; but, if there be a carnal mind, they become a 
positive means of the soul exalting itself, turning 
away from the Lord, losing its balance, and bringing 
discredit upon that which bears the name of Christ 
on the earth. In this Epistle, however, God is occu- 
pied with His counsels of grace in Christ for the 
Church, beginning primarily with the saints as such. 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 173 

He always tekes up the question of individuals before 
He deals with the Church. And how blessed and 
wise is this ! He does not begin with the body of 
Christ, and then end with the perfection of the saints. 
This would be, very likely, our thought, but it is 
very far from His. He first puts forward the per- 
fecting of the saints, and then shows us the work of 
the ministry, and the edifying the body of Christ. 
Thus, the true explanation of the passage is, that it 
is the development of Christ's love to the Church. 
His eye is fixed upon the blessing of souls. It is 
Christ not only gathering in, but building up — causing 
them to grow up to Him in all things. Accordingly, 
He gives the gifts which are of grace suited to this 
end. " He gave some apostles and some prophets." 
These are the two gifts which the second chapter 
of this epistle shows to be at the foundation, we may 
say, of this new building, the Church of God. Thus, 
in the 20th verse, we read, " They were built upon 
the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus 
Christ Himself being the chief comer stone." Evan- 
gelists, evidently, are not the foundation; neither 
are pastors and teachers; but prophets, as well as 
apostles, are. And we can easily understand this. 
We can see that, as God was introducing into the 
world a wholly new system when He set His Son 
at His own right hand — a new work of God in the 
Church, so there was a new word which had to 
accompany this work, whereby He would act upon 
the saints so as to give them to grow up to the 
perfecting of His will and the glory of His Son 



174 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHAEGES. 

in this unprecedented thing, the Church of God. 
Accordingly, then, we have the foundation laid, and 
not Christ alone. Of course He is, in the greatest 
and highest sense, the foundation — " Upon this rock 
I will build the Church :" the confession of His own 
name. His own glory as the Son of the living God, 
is this unquestionably. But still, as the means not 
only of revealing the mind of God touching the 
Church, but also particularly of laying down with 
authority the landmarks of His husbandry in the 
earth — the Church of God, the apostles and prophets 
were thus used. The former were more particularly 
distinguished by an authority in action, the prophets 
by giving out, according to God, His mind and will 
about this great mystery. 

It is hardly worth while to disprove the notion that 
the prophets here refer to the Old Testament. The 
phrase " apostles and prophets '' is strictly limited to 
those that followed Christ. Had there been the 
inverse order — prophets and apostles^ there might 
have been some shadow of reason for this idea ; but 
the Spirit of God, in His wisdom, has taken care to 
exclude the thought. The work spoken of is alto- 
gether new. The apostles and prophets seem to be 
expressly introduced in this order. But in the third 
chapter a decisive reason is furnished by the Holy 
Ghost. It is written in the 6th verse that the 
mystery of Christ, "which in other ages was not 
made known unto the sons of men, is now revealed 
unto His holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit;" 
BO that we have there, with, tlie mo«fc ^etteo^ dfe^jniQflft^ 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 175 

not only the same order still preserved, but the posi- 
tive expression " now revealed." The prophets of the 
Old Testament, therefore, are necessarily excluded. 
These prophets are of the New Testament as v^ell as 
the apostles. 

But more than this, let me make the remark, 
before going farther, that this character of ministry 
was altogether new. When our Lord was upon 
earth, no doubt there was more or less preparative 
action for it. He sent out, first, twelve apostles; 
then He sent out seventy, to carry a final message 
to His people. All this was a thing never found in 
any age previously. It was wholly unprecedented 
upon the earth — an activity of love that went out 
with a blessing to others. God Himself had jiot 
done it ; for the solemn word by a prophet, and the 
secret action of His grace before, are too distinct to 
be confoimded with it. Who had ever seen or heard • 
such a thing as a Man on earth gathering men to 
Himself first, and sending out from Himself after- 
wards a message of love, the glad tidings, not yet, of 
course, in the fulness which was afterwards imparted 
when the great work of redemption was done, but at 
any rate the blessed news of the King on God's part 
of the kingdom of heaven on the earth ? This is what 
the Lord did on earth: He sent out disciples or 
apostles with the message of the kingdom. And no 
doubt it was in man's eyes strange, and to faith a 
blessed thing, suitable only to Him who had divine 
grace as well as divine authority, worthy of, and 
reserved for, the Lord Jesus here belo^. E\Lt» \k» ^s. 



176 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

remarkable that, in Eph. iv., all the earthly part of 
our Lord's action is left completely out, and the gifts 
here spoken of are, beyond controversy, dated from, 
and shown to hinge on, the ascension of the Lord. 

Do I mean to deny that the apostles were in- 
cluded — ^the twelve, or, strictly speaking, the eleven 
along with the one supplied to fill up the place of him 
that was cut off? In no wise; but nevertheless 
their earthly call and mission are quite passed by. 
"We can all understand that the Lord as Messiah 
might prepare a mission suited to Israel, as I have 
no doubt that " the twelve " had this distinctly as its 
reference; for the twelve apostles naturally answer 
to the twelve tribes. The sitting on twelve thrones, 
spoken of in connexion with them also in Matt, xx., 
clearly confirms the thought. What hinders these 
same men afterwards from becoming the vessels of a 
heavenly gift ? Thus we can recognize in the earlier 
apostles a sort of double relationship. There was 
a link with Israel, which was conferred by the Lord 
when He was upon earth in the midst of His people, 
dealing with them ; but a new place became theirs 
when the Lord ascended on high. 

But, besides, the Lord took care to break in upon 
this Israelitish form and order, and the apostleship 
of St. Paul becomes an event of cardinal importance 
in the development of the ways of God, because 
therein all thought of Jerusalem, all reference to the 
tribes of Israel, is dropped, and that takes its place, 
which is clearly extraordiuary in all its circum- 
Btanoes, and heavenly in source and character. More 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 177 

particularly this was plain, that the Lord made 
manifest what was really true with regard to the 
others, that they on the day of Pentecost received 
that gift of apostleship which was suited to the 
heavenly work which they were afterwards to have, 
in addition to their previous earthly call and work. 
Apart from and towering over the twelve, stood the 
apostle Paul, bringing out into the utmost promi- 
nence the principle that his apostolic mission was a 
heavenly thing, entirely and exclusively such as far 
as he was concerned. Therefore he was the fitted 
person to say, as it was of course by the Spirit of God 
that he did say, "Though we have known Christ 
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no 
more." The glory of the Messiah on the earth fades 
away and is eclipsed by a deeper and brighter glory, 
the heavenly glory of Him who is now at the 
right hand of God. It is the same Christ, the same 
blessed One, without doubt, but it is not the same 
glory ; and more than this, it is a better and more 
enduring glory. It is the glory that is suited to 
the new work of God in His Church, because it is 
the glory of its Head. " Now is the Son of man 
glorified, and God is glorified in Him. If God be 
glorified in Him, God shall also glorify Him in 
Himself, and shall straightway glorify Him." 

Thus, the Church being a heavenly body, and Christ 
Himself, its Head, being in the actual and fullest 
sense a heavenly Person, ministry takes a heavenly 
shape : and these gifts which flow from Him are its 
first expression. Hence, then, we have the cleai iii.^- 

N 



178 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

mation from the Scripture before ub that these gifts 
from Christ on high are heavenly in their character 
and source. 

Another thing also may be noticed by the way. 
If we take the bestowal of these gifts as dating from 
the ascension of Christ, where is there room left for 
the hand of man ? Where can you insert that pre- 
liminary ceremonial on which tradition lays so much 
stress P Who ordained the apostles for their heavenly 
work? Who laid hands upon them, as authori- 
tatively installing them in that high oiffice? You 
will say that, imquestionably, the Lord called them 
when He was here " in the days of His flesh." He 
did call them for their mission to Israel ; and when 
risen, but still on earth, He charged them to disciple 
the nations (Matt, x., xxviii.). But what hands of 
man did He employ in setting them apart to their 
proper heavenly work ? Will any believer breathe 
the thought that this was an imperfection in their 
case ? Did the new work of God, based on a dead 
and risen and ascended Saviour, and carried on by 
the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, want any- 
thing for its due commencement? If there is no 
appearance, then, of that rite of laying on of hands, 
which some count not merely desirable, but essential 
for all that minister, from the highest to the lowest 
grade, how comes this strange omission ? Who will 
venture to impeach the regimen of Christ ? Will 
any zealots for " holy orders," as men speak, affirm 
or insinuate that the Lord did not know better than 
tbejr what became His own glory in His chief 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES*. 179 

ministers ? Let them beware of their theories and 
their practice, if either lead them to become "judges 
of evil thoughts." 

In truth, the Lord took care, now that it was a 
question of a new and heavenly testimony, not abso- 
lutely to abolish that ancient sign of blessing, but to 
break in upon, and leave no excuse for, the earthly 
order so easily abused by man. Hence, as if for the 
purpose of manifesting yet more distinctly the vast 
change which was come, in the case of him who 
styles himself emphatically " minister of the Church" 
(Col. i.), there is no derivation from the twelve 
apostles that were before him. On the contrary, 
from His own place in heavenly glory, the Lord 
calls one who was not going up to Jerusalem, but 
rather from it ; one who had no connexion with the 
apostles — ^nay, so much their enemy, that most stood 
in doubt of him, after he was arrested by sovereign 
grace in the midst of his determined, systematic 
hatred of Christianity, and persecution of all who 
bore the name of Jesus. What a proof that not 
only the conversion of Saul of Tarsus was of the 
pure and rich mercy of God, but that his apostolate 
sprang from the same source, and bore the same 
stamp, as the salvation which reached him ! Thence- 
forward he becomes the characteristic symbol, as he 
was the most distinct and abundant testimony, of 
the grace that is now not saving only, but choosing 
vessels and fitting them as instruments for the active 
blessing of mankind, and especially of the Church of 
God. It was the Lord Jesus, at the right hasLA ot 
N 2 



180 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

God, calling and sending an apostle to the Church, « 
chosen vessel unto Himself, to bear His name before 
the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel; 
but first taken out from both Jew and Gentile, and 
then sent to them (Acts xxvi. 17). 

The same principle embraced the other apostles, 
no doubt; because they, on the day of Pentecost, 
were made gifts of grace, in the highest degree, to 
the Church, from the now ascended Lord, its Head. 
But there is fresh and brighter light in the case of 
Paul, who was not more truly " as one bom out of 
due time," compared with all those that went before, 
than he furnishes, in the strongest colours, the un- 
mistakeable intimation of the mind and will of the 
Lord as to the future. 

But, then, it will be objected that, after all, there 
was a miracle in Paul's conversion and call, which 
takes the case out of just application to ordinary 
ministry. A miracle most striking and significant 
there was, when the Lord in glory revealed Himself 
as the Jesus he was persecuting in the members of 
His body — ^notwithstanding it rested mainly on the 
apostle's testimony; and there were not wanting, 
even in the Church of God, and among his own 
converts, it would seem, those who questioned the 
apostleship of Paul. His call far from Jerusalem ; 
his isolation from the other apostles ; the very ful- 
ness of grace manifested toward him ; the emphatic 
heavenly stamp imprinted on his conversion and 
testimony, all tended to make the case peculiar, and 
irregulaXf and unaccountable, wherever the old earthly 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 181 

order so prevailed as to cast suspicion on any display 
of the Lord's ways beyond or different from the past. 
Personally a stranger to the Lord during His mani- 
festation here below, there was no question of his 
candidateship, like a Joseph or a Matthias, on the 
ground of his having oompanied with the twelve 
from the baptism of John till the ascension. There 
was no decision by lot in his instance, nor any formal 
numbering with the twelve. He was a witness of 
Christ's resurrection no less than the rest, yet it was* 
from no sight of Him after His passion upon earth. 
He had seen the Lord, but it was in heaven. Hi« 
was the Gospel of the glory of Chrifit, no less than of 
God's grace. Thus carefully was the great apostle 
made the witness of non-sticcessiony and of a ministry 
direct from the Lord, independently of man! No 
doubt the highest expression of that ministry was in 
Paul, who thenceforward becomes the most iQustrious 
exemplar of its source and character. 

Allow me, also, to put another question. Who 
ordained the prophets of the New Testament ? when, 
and how, and by whom were they appointed ? who 
ever heard of hands being laid upon their heads P 
Search the New Testament through, if you wish the 
best proof that the notion is unfounded. Let me 
come to the point at once, and aflSrm farther, that 
neither prophets nor any other of these classes were 
installed of man after that fashion. Here we have 
apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers ; 
can you show me a single instance among these 
classes where the individual vv«ia c«i!L<^^ \s^ \sa2CMKSi. 



182 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES* 

authority P Is it denied, then, that there was such 
a form of blessing as the laying on of hands in the 
New Testament? For my part, I accept the feet, 
not only in its apostolic application to the sick and 
to those who had not yet received the Spirit, but also 
in its connexion with our subject. The question is, 
its scriptural use. Let me ask. When were hands 
ever laid on any save to confer a gift by the power 
of the Spirit, or to conmiend those already gifted to 

•God's grace in a special work, or formally to assign 
men to the charge of secular work ? It is clear, for 
example, that Philip, along with his six companions, 
had hands laid upon him ; but was it for his work as 
preaching the Gospel ? On the contrary, he was one 
of the seven men chosen " to serve the tables,'* in 
order that the apostles might not be distracted from 
prayer and the ministry of the word. " The seven " 
thereon were ordained to be employed in the external 
service of the Church. Apart from this, the Lord was 
pleased to send him forth in the proclamation of the 
word here and there; as an evangelist naturally 
would be a wanderer, not according to the meaning 
of the word so much as the exigencies of the work. 

Hence, when the persecution about Stephen broke 
out and scattered those in Jerusalem, Philip had a new 
task which had nothing to do with his local duties £us 
one of the seven. His diaconal service would station 
him at Jerusalem, to take care of the poor, for this 
was the purpose for which he was ordained; whereas, 
his preaching Christ flowed from a gift of that oha- 

racter, not from ordination. In i^, ^ &s qa the 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 183 

New Testament speaks — and it speaks fully and 
precisely — no one teas ever ordained by man to preach 
the GospeL Hands were laid by the apostles upon 
Philip, like the rest, after he was chosen by the 
multitude, and thus he was appointed to take charge 
of the tables; for the Scripture, perhaps Ibecause of 
a certain peculiar state of things at Jerusalem, does 
not positively give the title of "deacon" in this 
case, though one does not deny its general justice, 
for there was something akin in their duties. 

It is certain, therefore, that whether we look 
at an apostle, or a prophet, or an evangelist, or a 
pastor and te€M)her, or either of these last, there 
was no such ministry instituted for the Church, 
which itself existed not, until after our Lord's ascen- 
sion ; and in none of these cases was there the laying 
on of hands as the initiatory sign or inauguration of 
these ministers. All admit the imposition of hands 
in certain cases, ordinary or exceptional. The exagge- 
ration of clericalism should not hinder the Christian 
from being perfectly fair in dealing with this and 
every other question. There is nothing that will 
dispose of prevalent traditions so readily and con- 
clusively as searching and submitting to Scripture. 
There is ftdl and clear instruction there, the effect of 
which is to confute all that tends to exalt man and 
lower Christ, whatever support men may try to 
extract from the word of God for selfish ends. It is 
outside the light of inspiration that all these errors 
live ; once let that in, and it will soon be seen that 
the Holy Ghost is not providing for th<a ^c«MI^ 



184 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

honour of man on earth, but for glorifying Christ in 
heayen. 

What, then, is the genuine meaning and scope of 
Acts xiii. P It has long been the well-known stock 
passage which theological controversialists are wont 
to cite for ordination in general. Some insist on it as 
warranting their "three orders" of bishops, priests, 
and deacons ; others allege it as decisive for parity 
of ministers, whether Presbyterian or Congregational. 
The Episcopalian points with triumph to Barnabas 
and Paul in the first rank ; to Simeon, Lucius, and 
Manaen in the second; and to Mark in the third 
(as, after the dispute with Barnabas, to Paul, Silas, 
and Timothy respectively).* 

♦ So Archbishop Potter, in the well-known text-book, "A Dig- 
oourse on Church Goyemment (pp. 73, 74),** if one may, without un- 
kindness, specify a single defaulter out of the crowd. Yet the Arch- 
bishop evidently gave up the passage as bearing on ordination. '* It 
cannot be proved that Paul and Barnabas were ordained at this time to 
be ministers. If they were ordained to any office or ministry, it must 
be that of apostles, not only because they are presently after this 
called apostles, before they received any farther ordination, but also 
because they were prophets before that time, as shown in one of the 
preceding chapters [chap. iii.]. But this is very unlikely, because 
this rite of imposing hands, whereby other ministers were ordained 
[an assumption of the archbishop's without and against Scripture], 
was never used in making apostles. It was a distinguishing part of 
their character that they were immediately called and ordained by 
Christ Himself, who gave them [nay, but ' the disciples * and not 
apostles only, John xx.] the Holy Ghost by breathing on them ; but 
neither He nor any other is ever said to lay hands on them. When 
a place became vacant in the apostolic college by the apostacy of Judas, 
the apostles, with the rest of the disciples, chose two candidates, but 
left to God to appoint whether of them He pleased, to take part of the 
znimMtry and Apofltleship, from whicli ludaa ieU. '^^V2ti.«t^^^\>«l^vQl 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 185 

Only examine the passage, and the more closely 
you do so, the better will you be enabled to judge 

inferior to the rest of the apostles in this mark of honour ; for he often 
asserts himself to be an apostle not of men, nor b j man, but imme- 
diately, and without the intervention of men, to have been appointed 
by Jesus Christ, in opposition to those who denied him to be an 
apostle, as was shown in one of the former chapters. But then it will 
be asked for what end Paul and Barnabas received imposition of hands ? 
To which it may be answered, that this rite was commonly used, both 
by the Jews and primitive Christians, in benedictions. Jacob put 
his hands on the heads of Ephraim and Manasseh when he blessed 
them ; and, to mention only one instance more, little children were 
brought to Christ, that He should put His hands on them and bless 
them. Accordingly, it is probable this imposition of hands on Paul 
and Barnabas was a solemn benediction on their ministry of preaching 
the Gospel in a particular circuit to which they were sent by the 
Holy Spirit's direction. Hence it is called, in the next chapter, a 
recommendation to the grace of God for the work of ministering the 
Gospel to certain cities, which they are there said to have fulfilled. 
So that this rite was not their ordination to the apostolic office, because 
the end for which it was given is here said to be fulfilled, whereas 
their apostolic office lasted as long as their lives. And therefore, Paul 
and Barnabas seem only now to have had a particular mission to 
preach the Gospel in a certain limited district, in the same manner as 
Peter and John were sent by the college of apostles to Samaria, to 
confirm the new converts and settle the Church there.'' — OrosthwaiU^s 
(or the Seventh) Edition, pp, 201, 202. 

This is substantially, true and sound, far preferable to Calvin's 
remarks (lust. IV., iii. 14) : " Why this separation and laying on of 
hands, after the Holy Spirit had attested their election, unless that 
ecclesiastical discipline might be preserved in appointing ministers by 
men ? God could not give a more illustrious proof of His approbation 
of this order, than by causing Paul to be set apart by the Church, 
after He had previously declared that He had appointed him to be 
the Apostle of the Gentiles. The same thing we may see in the 
election [?] of Matthias. As the apostolic office was of such impor- 
tance that they did not venture to appoint any one to it of their own 
judgment, they bnng forward two, on one oW\Lom\)si^Vi\.iKV!ig!5^\i^% 



186 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

how little it countenances, how strongly it condemns, 
eyery scheme of ordination which men attempt to 
base upon it. 

In the Church that was at Antioch there were, it 
is said, ^^ certain prophets and teachers, as Barnabas, 
and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of 
Cyrene, and Manaen, who had been brought up with 
Herod the tetrarch and Saul." That is, we have 
these five prophets and teachers, while engaged in 
serving the Lord with fasting, made the object of 
an important communication from the Holy Ghost 
respecting two of their number. " Separate me Bar- 
nabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called 
them.'' Barnabas had been for years actively engaged 
in the work of the Lord ; and so had been Saul of 
Tarsus ever since his conversion. Not only was he 
set apart in the providence of God before his birth, 
as he speaks of it in Chap. I. of Galatians, but he 
was called by the grace of God from the time when 
he was struck down on the way to Damascus. But 
the Spirit of God now separates him to a special 
mission. It is clear that this is not an announce- 
ment of the ministerial call of either Barnabas or 
Saul : Scripture is arrayed against Scripture by all 
who say so. The previous part of the Acts proves 

that thus the election might haye a sure testimony from heaven, and 
at the same time the policy of the Church might not he disregarded.'' 
The tmth is, as to the case of Matthias, it was hefore the mission of 
the Holy Ghost, and there was no question of the Church's policy or 
electioD either ; hut hy the lot the choice hetween the two was cast, 
in the Jewish form (Prov. xyi. 83), into the sole disposal of the 
Lord. 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 187 

that Barnabas was long blessed in the ministry of 
the word within and without, and that Saul especially 
was bold and mighty in the work. The latter, in- 
deed, from the first, brought out the Sonship of 
Christ in a way which we have no reason to believe 
any other had done up to that time, as we learn 
from that very chapter which gives us his conversion. 
The notion, therefore, that ordination was the ques- 
tion in Acts xiii. is most manifestly false. 

But how comes it that the theologians fail to 
notice that their determination to see ordination 
here destroys their respective systems, as weU as 
contradicts other Scriptures ? Who was it ordained 
Paid and Barnabas, and to what ? They are called 
apostles in the very next chapter (xiv. 4) ; and 
hence, evidently, the notion of ordaining Paul and 
Barnabas is quite unfounded, imless those whom 
Gtod has set second and third in the Church can 
ordain the first (1 Cor. xii. 28). Again, the truth 
is, there is not the smallest reason to call Mark a 
deacon at that time. He accompanied them as their 
"minister," probably to get lodgings, to invite 
people to come and hear the word, and in general 
to serve them on their missionary tour ; but, as for 
his being their chaplain, it is mere illusion. John 
Mark preaching to Paul and Barnabas ! The truth 
is, that he then turned out an indifferent help in the 
work, because he soon tired and went home to his 
friends. However, this only by the way. 

But it is transparent, that those who turn the 
account into the ordination of Paul and Barnabas, 



188 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

involye the consequence that it is actually the inferior 
class conferring the highest ministerial rank upon 
them ! K they were not apostles before, they have 
nothing to allege in support of the dignity but the 
sandy foundation that the act of laying on of hands 
upon them at Antioch conferred the apostolate ! In 
this case it was an equal, if not a lower grade, giving 
a higher rank to those above themselves. Thus, it 
is evident that the notion is altogether unfounded* 

Is it insinuated, then, that there was no meaning 
or value in this laying on of hands P That would 
be, indeed, to treat the word of God unwarrantably. 
It was a solenm and precious act of fellowship with 
these honoured servants of Christ. It was an act 
not only valid then, but valid now. But there was 
no pretence of conferring anything whatever. The 
real drift of the transaction is expressed in chap, 
xiv. 26. It is said, that they "sailed to Antioch, 
from whence they had been recommended to the 
grace of God for the work which they fulfilled.*' 
Such was the aim of the laying on of hands by their 
companions in labour at Antioch; for it may not 
have been the brethren generally, but only those 
engaged in the work, and I wish to make every con- 
cession that is fair to those who desire to draw the 
utmost from the passage. But the meaning of the 
act is neither more nor less than a sign of blessing, 
or of fellowship with those going forth on their new 
missionary errand. It was probably repeated : see 
Acts XV. 40. 
The laying on of handa wqa oi ^<^ tclq^ ^sc^s^ssoi 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 189 

date in the Old Testament. Thus, Genesis gives it 
in the case of a father or grandfather laying his 
hands on the children ; and so, in the New Testa- 
ment, we have the frequent use of it where there 
was no pretence of conferring any ministerial cha- 
racter. It was a sign of recommendation to God 
by one who was conscious of being so near to God 
that he could count upon His blessing. The Lord 
takes up little children, lays His hands upon them, 
and blesses them; and so with the sick, too, when 
healing some. It was not at all a question of eccle- 
siastical order in these instances. No doubt there 
were cases where hands were laid on for the pur- 
pose of inaugurating an office. 

It is often thought that the same rite was used 
in instituting elders, as in Acts xiv. 22, 23, where 
the apostles Barnabas and Paul were "confirming 
the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to 
continue in the faith, and that we must, through 
much tribulation, enter into the kingdom of God. 
And when they had ordained them elders in every 
Church, and had prayed with fasting, they com- 
mended them to the Lord, on whom they believed." 
But this is an assumption. It is not exactly said 
here, or anywhere else, that hands were laid upon 
the presbyters. This silence, if the fact were so, is 
remarkable. It may have been probably the case ; 
but Scripture takes care never to say it. We have 
the statement that hands were laid upon deacons. 
We know that an elder was a much more important 
personage in the Church than a da^jcissYi, 'C'^^s^^ 



190 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

may reason and speculate ; but I have no doubt that 
the Spirit of God, seeing the superstition that wag 
attached to the form of laying on of hands, took care 
never to connect the two things together in a positive 
manner. The passage which some conceive does so, 
is in the first Epistle to Timothy (v. 22), where Paul 
tells him to " lay hands suddenly on no man." But 
the object of this is too vague for a sure conclusion, 
the connexion being by no means certain. There is 
no allusion to elders expressly after verses 17 — 19. 
Thus in the 21st verse we read, " I charge thee 
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect 
angels, that thou observe these things, without pre- 
ferring one before another, doing nothing by par- 
tiality." How can one suppose elders in particular 
referred to there P I see a general description of his 
work in verses 20 — 21, after which comes the exhor- 
tation on which so much has been built — "Lay 
hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of 
other men's sins." It is possible that there may be 
included in this an allusion to the danger of haste 
and carelessness in accrediting an elder, but the 
language is so comprehensive as to take in, it seems 
to me, every case which might call for the imposition 
of hands. 

But supposing that it did certainly refer to elders 
and that hands were laid on these functionaries as 
well as on deacons, the important and undeniable 
fact in Scripture is, that elders were never ordained 
except by persons duly authorized, who had a real 
commission from the Lord for the purpose. Now 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 191 

many may imagine that this is a concession fatal to 
the free recognition and exercise of gifts. They may 
think it yet more strange to find that those who 
contend for the largeness of the Jtction of the Holy 
Ghost, lay the utmost stress upon a divine commission 
and a definite authority. But be assured that the two 
things go together, where they are held according to 
God. None will be found to be more tenacious of 
godly order than the yery persons who stand most 
for the rights of the Holy Ghost in the Church. 
My assertion is, that in this very matter of ordination 
Christendom has missed God's mind and will, and 
is ignorantly but not without sin fighting for an 
order of its own, which is mere disorder before God. 
If Scripture is to decide, the common plan of ordina- 
tion for all who minister to those without and within 
is a departure from the order of God prescribed in 
His word. 

Undoubtedly, in the case of " the seven '' (Acts vi.) 
you do find apostolic appointment. The great point 
in this case was, that there the congregation elected 
and the apostles solemnly appointed. But it was no 
more than the congregation choosing fit persons to 
take care of their poor, &c. Nothing could be more 
proper. It shows the condescending goodness of God 
towards those who gave of their substance and those 
who received it. If the Church contribute, it is 
according to His will that the Church should have a 
voice in the selection of those in whom they have 
just confidence that they will distribute, in God's 
sight, not only with good conscience and feeling, but 



192 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

wisely. Thus one sees here a conspicuous instance 
of God's wise and gracious care. The multitude 
chose such men as they deemed most suited to the 
exigency. But even here the mere choice of the 
believers did not give them that place in itself; for 
if all chose, none but the apostles appointed them 
over the business, secular as it was. 

The principle tells in a directly opposite way with 
regard to the elders, and yet more as to the minis- 
terial gifts of Christ. We have no such thought 
expressed as a congregation choosing elders — ^never 
in any part of Scripture. On the contrary, we have 
the fact that the apostles went about; and where 
assemblies were already formed, in which were per- 
sons possessed of certain spiritual and moral quali- 
fications which pointed them out to their spiritual 
and experienced eyes as suitable for eldership, such 
they chose. Among these antecedents, those who 
desired the office must be persons of good report, and 
who, if married, had only one wife. There were 
many individuals brought to the faith of Christ 
in those days, who had several wives. This was a 
scandal, and sure to be felt the more as Christian truth 
spread. Such a direction showed what was in the 
mind of God. One could not rightly refuse the 
confession of a man who had two or three wives, if 
he were converted; but he must not expect to 
become an elder or bishop ; he could not be a suitable 
local representative of the Church of God. 

Again, take the case of a man who had children 
brought up badly. Perhapa tToia li'&glaQt may have 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 193 

been before he was oonyerted ; perhaps after conyer- 
sion, he may have entertained the evil notion of 
leaving the children to themselves, on the faithless 
plea that God, if He saw fit, would convert them 
some time or other. Such mistakes have been made, 
and miserable have been the results. Whatever 
the cause of an imruly house, its head could not be 
a bishop. No matter what might be his spiritual 
gifts, they could not countervail; no such man 
could be charged with the oversight of God's assem- 
bly. For such an office, it was not so much a question 
of gifts as of moral weight. A man might be a 
prophet, a teacher, an evangelist — ^his disorderly 
wife or children would not nullify his gifts ; but he 
ought not to be made an elder, unless he brought 
up his children with godliness and gravity, and 
himself walked with a good report among those 
without. 

Thus the Lord stringently required, in such an 
official, these moral qualifications, as well as spiritual 
capacity for his work. Even if one possessed all 
these things, he was not an elder because he had 
them, unless duly authorized. He needed to be 
ordained; he must have a legitimate appointment 
besides. And in what did this consist ? Manifestly 
the whole value turns upon a valid appointing power. 
In what consisted that competent authority? Are 
we to set up or to imagine one P It must be accord- 
ing to the Lord and His word. Now the Scripture 
allows of no valid appointing power except an apostle, 



194 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHAB0E8. 

or an envoy who had from an apostle a special 
commission for the purpose. 

Where is there such a delegate now that can pro- 
duce an adequate (that is, an apostolic) commission 
for the work of ordaining ? You never saw, neither 
do I ever expect to see, the like. The fact is, the 
word of God nowhere hints at the continuance of 
an ordaining power. It demonstrates in the moi^ 
explicit manner that after the Lord set up churches 
here and there, when He established local fiino- 
tionaries in each church, apostolic appointment or 
choice, and this only, was what He stamped with 
His approval. The requisite qualifications are 
clearly laid down ; but the fact is equally clear that 
none but an apostle or an apostolic delegate was 
warranted to nominate the elders to their ofiSlce, 
and not a word about perpettmting that power of 
appointment after the apostles left the earth. We have 
an apostle writing, not to the Church or churches to 
choose elders, but to one who was specially charged 
to do this task. Yet even to Titus there is not a 
word about another continuing the task ; nay, not 
a hint that Titus himself was to continue it after the 
apostle was dead. Neither was Titus authorized to 
appoint where he pleased, but the apostle assigns him 
the sphere of this commission. Besides being a special 
envoy of the apostle, Titus was doubtless a teacher 
and preacher. But here there was a definite region 
where he had the duty of ordaining elders in every 
city. Titus was responsible to do this in Crete ; but 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHABGES. 196 

there is nothing said of the establishment of elders 
elsewhere or at other times. On the contrary — and 
this would be a strange direction for a diocesan 
— ^he was to be diligent to come to the apostle at 
Nicopolis. He was not to be left at Crete. 

It is evident that such directions as these from the 
apostle to Titus afford no warrant for others to appoint 
elders now. This is pure assumption, whereas all 
depends on a valid authority. Titus was apostoli- 
oally commissioned, and could produce an inspired 
letter of instructions to him personally. Who can 
do anything analogous P " It must be so," is a poor 
and vain reason to him who respects due authority. 
It is easy to settle matters after a sort where this is 
allowed to pass ; but, beloved friends, we want the 
word of Ghod. Let me ask for a plain answer to the 
question. Do you believe that the word is perfect P 
Do you doubt whether the Lord, who cares for His 
own order in the Church, did or did not foresee all 
the need and difficulty P Do you insinuate that He 
forgot anything of real value to us now P Do you 
suppose that He omitted to take into account the 
death of the apostles P He did nothing of the kind. 
The apostle speaks distinctly of his death (and more 
than one apostle too). He speaks of perilous times 
and the importance of Scripture after he was gone ; 
but not a thought about a line of successors to appoint 
afterwards, not a hint about bequeathing his powers 
in this case. To you who are commended to God 
and the word of His grace, to you who tremble at 
His word, is that silence notimig? ^o tk^ ^''^tc^ 
o 2 



196 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES, 

mind it is a fact not more surprising at the iSrst 
blush, than increasingly pregnant with meaning the 
more it is weighed. 

Popery, despising this fact, assumes the contrary 
from human reason, and is built upon this contrariety. 
Not that one cares to denounce any one system in 
particular by name, save only to bring out the truth, 
which shows the will of the Lord and proves the evil 
by the good. In truth, every earthly system, no 
matter how opposed it may become to the word of 
God, begins by adding something of its own to that 
word. The power of ordination attaches not to 
bishops, but to apostles and their delegates. The 
moment you allow men the principle of development 
after the Scripture canon closed, the moment you 
clothe with apostolic authority a body of officials who 
never were authorized divinely for the work under- 
taken, you are off the 'ground of faith in, and defer- 
ence to, the word of God. The present practice has 
not the smallest foimdation in Scripture. 

Indeed, one may safely go farther, and affirm not 
only that the ordination, of which people talk so 
much, 'before preaching and teaching Christ, is not 
a thing to be coveted in the present shape in which 
it is foimd among men, but that it is now a disorderly 
institution, a grievous dishonour to the Lord who 
gives ministerial gifts by the Spirit. In short, it is 
a mere and sorry imitation of what is recorded in 
the word of God. Examine well, and you will soon 
find it does not even resemble what we read of there. 
God's word remains true, sure, and plain: only 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 197 

there once was a positive personal commission, armed 
with a certain apostoKo authority, either direct or 
indirect ; and this you ought to have, if you pretend 
to ordain elders, as Titus did. 

Permit me now to press another question. Which 
is the most scriptural course — to do what was always 
becoming in a Christian, or to copy an apostolic 
delegate? Which commends itself most to your 
conscience, to your heart, to your faith P We will 
suppose now, in this place, an assembly of God's 
children. They see in the word of God that, beside 
the conmion privileges and duties of all saints, there 
were certain gifts for ministry, and that there were 
also certain offices, which needed an apostle or his 
representative to fill them up. They would like to 
have them all, of course ; but what is to be done P 
Are they to neglect what was written to the assembly 
at Corinth, or to the saints at Ephesus, and to ape what 
was not written to the Church but to Timothy or 
Titus P Would it not be humbler to consult the 
word of God, and inquire of Him, that they might 
learn what is His will concerning this matter P 
What do we see there P That as to the gifts of 
Christ, they never required any sanction here below 
before their exercise; nay, they never admitted of 
human intervention. The only exception is, where 
there was a positive power of the Holy Ghost con- 
veyed by the laying on of the apostle's hands. Fully 
do I admit that there was an exception in such cir- 
cumstances. Timothy was designated by prophecies 
beforehand for the work to which the Lord called 



198 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

him (compare Acts xiii. 1, 2). Qtiided by prophecy 
(1 Tim. iv. 14; 2 Tim. i. 6), the apostle lays his 
hands upon Timothy and conveys to him a direct 
power (xap«r/ia) by the Holy Ghost, suited to this 
special service he had to accomplish. Along with 
the apostle, the elders, who were in the place, joined 
in the laying on of their hands. But there is a 
difference in the expression the Spirit of God em- 
ploys, which shows that the communication of the 
gift depended for effective agency not in any way on 
the elders, but only on the apostle. The particle of 
association appears where the presbytery are spoken of, 
that of instrumental means where the apostle speaks 
of himself. It was an apostle that commimicated 
such a gift. Never do we hear of elders thus con- 
ferring a gift : it was not an episcopal fimction, but an 
apostolic prerogative, either to communicate spiritual 
powers or to clothe men authoritatively with a charge. 
Hence it is admitted that, in the peculiar case of 
Timothy, there was, by the laying on of apostolic 
hands, a very special effect produced ; but who can 
do this now? Were this the claim (however one 
might desire to view, not indifferently, but with 
the patience of God, the prevalent and superstitious 
perversion of a sign, admirable in itself when applied 
and understood scripturally), yet if any man now 
presumed to convey a spiritual power, like an apostle, 
should one hesitate to call him an impostorP A mis- 
taken course in assuming the rights of an earthly 
sovereign is, or may be, Ixeason. What is it to pre- 
tend falsely to communicate the Holy Ghost, or a 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 199 

distinct power of the Holy Ghost, in the name of the 
Lord? 

Beloved friends, it is a grave thing to trifle thus 
with the Spirit of God. There are those in our day 
whose ignorant boldness fears not to arrogate the 
right of conveying the Holy Ghost and ministerial 
power in this manner ; but, thanks be to God, they 
are otherwise known to be fundamentally unsoimd, 
so that their influence over the faithful is inconsider- 
able. Then we have, alas ! the Eastern and Western 
bodies of Christendom, who are hardly less guilty. 
But among ordinary Protestants, and especially 
among men of average Christian respectability, such 
pretensions are regarded with pity or horror. Even 
where the formularies, as in the Anglican Com- 
munion, approach fearfully near the precipice, the 
excuse is, titat their godly framers intended no more 
than to impart fitting and scriptural solemnity to 
various offices in the Church. I admit, however, 
that the excuse is lame, and that it is hard to decide 
whether these most suffer in conscience who employ 
the most serious forms ecclesiastically without be- 
lieving them, or those are most injured in faith who 
accept, as divine, pretensions which are doubtless 
more respectably connected and venerable, but not 
better foimded than those of a modem imposture. 

But the important truth on this subject to be 
seen is, that these ministerial gifts were given by the 
Lord without any form further than that He war- 
ranted and sent them. Beware of disputing His 
will and wisdom. How is one to judge of the pos- 



200 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

session of a gift P Undoubtedly by its due exercise, 
which finds an answer in the conscience. Let me 
ask 3'ou again, How do you know a Christian? 
When people talk theoretically, or discuss polemically, 
there are always great and numerous difficulties in 
the way. But if you went, for practical reasons, to 
a godly clergyman or dissenting minister, he could 
give you ample means of judging who are Christians 
in what he calls his flock. Listen to many a man 
on his knees, and, if he be a Christian, he will speak 
as a child to his God and Father; but hear him on his 
legs, and he will perhaps controvert, without knowing 
it, what he has been just saying in prayer, till, on his 
perverse principle, he cannot tell whether God is his 
Father or not. How happy that there are such 
seasons of devotion where people speak with simple- 
hearted truthfulness I Away from their systems, let 
them speak to God, and their true characters and even 
conditioji will soon be manifest, as a general rule. 
Thus, the fact is that, in practice. Christians have 
little difficulty in knowing, for the most part, who 
are converted and who are not. There may be a 
certain number of doubtftd souls, of whom we need 
not speak now. Let a believer be sent for to a sick 
man ; is he wholly at a loss how to speak ? Does he 
not seek as soon as possible to gather whether the 
sick man has peace in Christ, or is anxious about his 
soul, or whether he has ever realized his lost and 
guilty condition ? If the believer finds no sense of 
sin, he will solemnly warn of judgment, and set before 
that soul the oroBS, imploring \nm \iOT^c«i:^^Cl\m&t; 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 201 

or he will exhort hinn to rest in Christ, because he is 
assured of his faith. 

If, then, so little haze really rests on the question, 
who are and who are not children of God, think 
you that the possession of a gift is a question so 
obscure- and doubtful? Some may have more gift 
than others. But the gift of teaching implies the 
power of bringing out the word of God, and apply- 
ing it aright. Again, take the power of ruling — 
for there is such a thing as rule in the Church, 
and I hope none here present imagine it is gone — 
he who has the gift of rule, exercises it, of course, 
according to the word of God. Scripture knows 
nothing of a blind obedience. The conscience is 
awakened, the heart set free and attracted to Christ. 
To these is the appeal of Christian ministry. It is 
not the blind leading the blind, nor is it the seeing 
leading the blind; but rather the seeing lead the 
seeing. Christ gives liberty as well as life, and 
this withal responsible to do the will of God. There- 
fore it is that, according to the intention of God, His 
children do not well to contrive systems to escape 
difficulties ; they need faith to go through them with 
God. Let them prove their gifts, if indeed they 
have gifts from the Lord, by real power. There 
may be severe trials and difficulties now and then. 
Even Paul himself had to do with doubters of his 
apostleship, and this within the Church, and among 
his own children in the faith. What true-hearted 
man should be downcast if A^ is slighted ? But the 
time came when the Lord vinOieatedL "Sii^ W^«s>^> 



202 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

and when the self-will and pride which refused a 
divine gift was utterly put to shame, if the heart was 
not brought back to lowly thankfiilness. The chief 
mistake we are apt to make is in the way of im- 
patience; we do not allow time and space for the 
Lord to work; and that lack of patient waiting 
only defers the wished-for solution, because it makes 
the difficulty so much the greater. 

But as to the discernment of a ministerial gift for 
preaching or teaching, it is in general plain and 
simple. If a brother stand up to speak in the 
Christian assembly without a gift from God, he will 
soon and painfully find it out. If self-judging, he 
will learn much from his own conscience ; but he may 
quite sufficiently soon hear from others that which 
will make him understand that he has not a gift in the 
judgment of his brethren. But where there is really 
a gift, is it not possible that prejudice may act, and 
this be refused P It may be, certainly, for a time. 
Perhaps the speaker thinks too highly of his gift ; 
perhaps he mistakes the character of it, and the right 
scene and time for its exercise; perhaps he is too 
exclusively occupied with his line of things, and too 
urgent or anxious to assert his gift. All this may 
be, often is, and always creates difficulty. But the 
truth remains, that what is of God approves itself in 
the long run. My own experience, as fax as my 
limited range of observation and knowledge goes, in- 
clines me to think that the children of God are 
prone to make too much rather than too little of gift. 
In the present state of the Church there is but a 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 203 

feeble development of gift, and this is felt the more in 
proportion to spiritual intelligence and a true posi- 
tion. Do you wish to know your place fairly and 
fiillyp Look in confidence to God, and search the 
word of His grace. Many things there are to hinder 
and to draw away : partly the effect of education, 
partly the difficulties of finding an honest livelihood, 
especially if a man has been a professional preacher. 
If he abandons, not preaching, but that profession, as 
an unscriptural innovation, he loses everything, for 
the most part, even his bread, unless he have private 
means of his own. Hence it is that the inducements 
for such an one to remain where he is are enormous; 
the difficulties of coming out at the word of the Lord 
are incalculable. The power of God alone can accom- 
plish the change, and sustain the soul in peace and 
praise, " stedfast, immoveable, always aboimding in 
the work of the Lord." 

While we may be sure that the word and Spirit of 
Q-od give us clearly the true position for the indi- 
vidual Christian and for the Christian assembly, we 
ought not, I think, as things are, to expect a great 
varieiy and strength in the gifts of the Lord's grace. 
Of course He can work sovereignly, and assuredly we 
ought to be most thankful for what is given. No 
doubt, also, there are gifts distributed somewhere 
or other. There are gifts of Christ in members and 
ministers of the national establishments, I do not 
question ; there are His gifts likewise in the dissent- 
ing societies ; and are we to suppose there are none 
of His gifts of grace in Romanism itself? For my 



204 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

part, I cannot doubt there are. Who would, who 
could, reject the testimony of facts that there have 
been persons therein — such as Martin Boos, for 
instance, not very long ago — ^used for the conversion 
of sinners, and for the helping on of saints in some 
degree P And are such men not gifts of Christ to the 
Church — as truly gifts, though in that false poedtion, 
as if they were out of it P Their being Romanists- 
ay, Romish priests — does not destroy His grace, 
whatever we may feel as to their faithfulness. The 
fact is, that the Lord gives according to His own 
will by the Holy Ghost, and we ought to acknow- 
ledge these gifts wherever they are. If a man be a 
dissenter, whether a minister or one of the people, in 
either case I am satisfied he is in a false position. It 
is not a question of a feeling of dislike to dissent, if 
one believe its foundations to be unscriptural. I ask 
the forbearance of any dissenters who may be here, in 
aflSrming, calmly and solemnly, my conviction that 
dissent is unsound in its distinctive principles; a 
thorough contradiction of the very character of the 
Church as one body ; and, in the popular call and 
choice, imdermining ministry as a divine and permar 
nent institution flowing from the Saviour's grace. 
Dissent is religious radicalism, which essentially 
opposes God's will as much as, and perhaps more 
than, any other principle. The proofe are too plain. 
Dissent substitutes the election of the people in the 
place of the sovereign choice of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
whether immediate or mediate. 
But how is the truth better secured in the national 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 205 

bodies ? By patronage, clerical, lay, or governmen- 
tal I And the painM apology for this systematic 
self-will is that the men nominated by the govern- 
ment of the day, or a landlord, or a college, or a 
corporation, have gone through the usual forms ! Is 
there the faintest resemblance between this worldly 
machinery and the divine system of spiritual gifts 
from Christ set forth in Ephes. iv. P I see only One 
who has ascended up on high. Are you looking to 
any other person ? to any other kind of ascent ? to 
any other heaven for the favours you crave after ? I 
appeal to you as Christians. Do you value the 
word of Q-od ? Do you cherish that word only for 
the salvation of your souls? or do you confide in 
that same word and Spirit for guidance as to ministry 
and church oflGlce P What subjects more simply be- 
long to the LordP For what do we need Him 
moreP As a believer I surely feel the want of 
God's word for my daily walk, no matter what my 
circumstances, or sphere, or duties. And do you, 
can you believe that the word that lives and abides 
for ever does not concern itself with so grave, deli- 
cate, and spiritually needful a thing as the ministry 
of the word ; or that, if it speak thereon, you are not 
boimd to hear and bow P 

The sum of what has been said is, then, that these 
two great principles are revealed in Scripture, and 
recognized by the early Church : namely, the Lord 
giving gifts of His own grace which did not require 
human intervention ; next also, a system of authority 
which did require that intervention ; as in the appoint- 



206 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

ment of elders by the apostles, or persons commis- 
sioned to do their work in certain cases* ' It is dear 
that we have neither apostles living on the earth, nor 
representatives, like Titus, charged by an apostle to 
do quusi'SL-posiolio work. The consequence is, that 
now, if subject to the word of God, you cannot and 
do not look for elders in their precise official form. 
If any man allege these can be, it might be well to 
hear his grounds from Scripture. What has been 
produced is, in my judgment, amply sufficient to 
disprove it. You cannot have persons formally and 
duly appointed to this office, unless you have a 
power formally and duly authorized of the Lord to 
appoint them. But you have not that indispensably 
needful power to authenticate elders: this is your 
fatally weak point. You have neither apostles nor 
functionaries commissioned by the apostles to act 
in their stead; and therefore the entire system of 
appointment breaks down for want of competent 
authority. Dare you say of pour elders that the 
Holy Ghost has made them bishops? You have 
none really, scripturally entitled to appoint. 

What then P Are there none suitable to be elders 
or bishops, if there were apostles to choose themP 
Thank God ! there are not a few. You can hardly 
look into an assembly of His children without 
hearing of some grave elderly men who go after the 
wanderers, who warn the imruly, who comfort those 
who are cast down, who coimsel, admonish, and 
guide souls. Are not these the men who might be 
elders, if there were a power existing to appoint 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 207 

themP And what is the duty of a Christian 
man, as things now are, in the use of what remains P 
I say not to call them elders, but, surely, to esteem 
them highly for their work's sake, and to love and 
acknowledge them as those who are over the rest of 
their brethren in the Lord. I ask you solemnly, 
beloved friends, do you acknowledge any to be over 
you in the Lord ? — any living servants of the Lord to 
be over you in Him P Do you imagine such a re- 
cognition as this offends against the principles of 
God P Bather let me warn you against picking out 
certain favourite texts from God's word, to which 
only you pay obeisance. If we do so, we are build- 
ing up a sect, as far as in us lies, no less truly than 
our neighbours. On the other hand, beware of 
adopting that human invention — ^apostolic succession 
-^to escape dilemmas. If we dare to call men 
apostles who are not, under the fiction of succession, 
the Lord, in due time, will not fail to challenge our 
word and act, and will ask, who entitled us to 
endorse such an imheard of thing as this P who gave 
us leave, without His word, virtually to acknowledge 
this or that as an apostoKc man by accrediting his 
claim to ordain P It is evident that to ordain elders 
is, however well-meant, an imitation of what apostles 
did, and, if imauthorized, not only without validity, 
but an unwitting usurpation of an authority which 
reverted and now pertains to the Lord Jesus Christ 
alone. Thus, the difference between a true position 
and a false one, in the present state of the Church, 
is not at all that one has got a due ordination and 



208 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

the other wants it. In truth no body on earth pos- 
sesses it now. Do you acknowledge the want P or 
are you trying to cover the humiliating but evident 
fact that you have not the only ordaining power 
which Scripture sanctions? And yet you go on 
ordaining, though you have neither apostle nor 
apostolic deputy! "Which course is most orderly? 
To do as you do ; or to acknowledge our actual lack, 
and carry ourselves accordingly before God and man 
— ^to confess that we want apostles or their delegates, 
and therefore that we cannot have presbyters duly 
chosen and formally appointed? There are, I 
repeat, men endowed with such qualifications as 
would render them eligible, so far as we can pre- 
tend to say, if there were a competent ordaining 
power. And the general principle of Scripture 
(Rom. xii.) manifestly is, that he who had the gift of 
ruling, or of taking the lead among the saints, is boimd 
to use it with diligence (as the teacher, exhorter, and 
others, are responsible to discharge their respective 
fimctions), even if circumstances made legitimate 
appointment to a charge impracticable. 

But subjection to the word of God discovers readily 
that a state of things substantially analogous to our 
own defective condition is provided for in Scripture. 
The Lord in His wisdom let such wants be felt in 
the early Church. Thus the apostle was inspired to 
write epistles to churches where there were no elders; 
as, for instance, the epistles to the Thessalonians and 
the Corinthians. The last was notoriously a dis- 
orderly church, and elders might have been thought 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 209 

useM there. Nevertheless, not the least word or 
hint about elders there is heard from first to last. 
Had elders been then in their midst, would not the 
apostle have called them to account, and blamed their 
want of godly care and diligence in oversight ? Of 
this there is not a trace. Further, we know it was 
not the practice of the apostles to constitute elders in 
on infant Church. Where Paul and Barnabas chose 
elders for the disciples, it was in assemblies that 
had existed probably for years, and thus there had 
been time for spiritual qualifications to be developed. 
But in a new assembly, where the saints were yoimg 
comparatively, a certain time had to be allowed, so 
that those who were competent for such a work 
flhpuld be made evident. Accordingly it is rather a 
rare thing to read of the apostles choosing or appoint- 
ing elders. 

On the other hand, in the first epistle to the Thes- 
salonians, we have in the last chapter very impor- 
tant instruction given to the saints. They, too, 
are a similar instance of a young Church, yet they 
were told to own those that laboured among them. 
Hence all this may be where presbyters are not. 
Thus, in 1 Thess. v. 12, 13, the apostle writes, " We 
beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour 
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and 
admonish you ; and to esteem them very highly in 
love for their work's sake." The presence of elders 
is not requisite in order to have and to own those 
who are over us in the Lord. There is much of 
importance for us now in that Scripture, for we have 

p 



210 GIFTS AKD LOCAL CHARGES. , 

elders no more than they. I think we ought to lay 
its exhortations to heart. There are not a few ill- 
instructed souls, within and without, who hold the 
notion that, unless there be official appointment, they 
cannot have anybody over them in the Lord. This 
is all a mistake. No doubt, when a man was offici- 
ally appointed, there was a definite guarantee in the 
face of the Church given by an apostle or an apos- 
tolic man ; and there was, thereby, no little weight 
given to those who were thus appointed. Such a 
sanction had great and just value in the Church, and 
would be of consequence among the unruly. But 
none the less did Grod know how to provide instruc- 
tion for assemblies where there was not yet official 
oversight. How merciful for times when, for want 
of apostles, there could be no elders ! But it will 
be noticed that the Corinthian assembly abounded 
in gift, though elders are seen nowhere among them. 
The Thessalonians do not appear to have possessed 
the same variety of outward power, while elders or 
bishops again are never hinted at. Yet, at Corinth 
the household of Stephanas devoted themselves 
regularly (erafav) to the service of the saints; and 
the apostle beseeches the brethren to submit them- 
selves to such and to everyone that helped and 
laboured. The Thessalonians he prays to know 
those who laboured among them, and presided in 
the Lord, and admonished them. Evidently this did 
not depend upon their being apostolically appointed, 
which could hardly have been in their circumstances, 
as lately gathered. It is toxmAft^i wgox^ *0a».\. ^Viali^ 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 211 

after all, is intrinsically better, if we must be con- 
tent with one blessing out of two. Surely, if it 
comes to .be a question between real spiritual power 
and outward office, no Christian ought to hesitate 
between them. To have the power and the office 
combined, no doubt, is the best of all, when the 
Lord is pleased to give both ; but in those early 
days we see that individuals were often and rightly 
engaged in the work of the Lord before there could 
be the seal of an apostle, as it were, affixed ; and 
such the apostle encourages and commends earnestly 
to the love and esteem of the saints, before and inde- 
pendently of that seal. How precious that we can 
fall back on this principle now ! 

Even at Corinth and Thessalonica, then, those were 
raised up in the midst of the saints who showed 
spiritual ability in guiding and directing others. 
That was the work of those to whom one epistle 
exhorted subjection, and whom the other epistle 
commended as " over them in the Lord." Such men 
as these did not labour only ; because some might be 
actively engaged in the Lord's work, who might 
not be over others in the Lord. But these manifested 
power to meet difficulties in the Church, and to 
battle with that which was ensnaring souls, and so to 
guide and encourage the weaik, and baffle the eflforts 
of the enemy. They were not afraid to trust the 
Lord in times of trial and danger, and therefore the 
Lord used them, giving them power to discern, and 
courage to act upon what they did discern. This 
was part ot what fitted them to tsikft \Si'^\<i^m'^^ 
p 2 



212 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

Lord. There were such at Thessalonica as well as 
Corinth, and yet there is not the slightest intimation 
that they were regularly installed as elders, but, on 
the contrary, the strongest evidence that elders as 
yet had not been constituted in either place. The 
regular practice was to appoint elders after a certain 
time; indeed, it could only be when the apostles 
came round, or sent an authorized delegate to choose 
fit persons and clothe them with a title before the 
Church, which none but the bad would dispute. 

Need I observe how God has been graciously pro- 
viding for the wants of His children P This subject 
will come definitely before us on the next occasion on 
which it will be my lot to address you. I will not, 
therefore, do more now than draw attention to His 
far-reaching wisdom in meeting the difficulties of the 
day, when a valid authority to ordain as the apostles 
did is not left on the earth. Not that His children 
are left without help ; they have the same Lord and 
the same ever-present Spirit. Hence there is no 
need of some change or new invention to meet the 
difficulties of the day, but the ifetum in faith to what 
was and is the will of the Lord ; and this with in- 



telligence of the actual state of the Church, and the 
feelings which become it. 

We have seen that the Lord alone, as the rule, 
gave these gifts of ministry : it depends upon His 
love to His Church, His faithfulness to the saints. 
Is the Lord Jesus one whit less tender and true now 
than He was on the day of Pentecost ? Who would 
insinuate it ? Neither can. 1 ftym^^^lciift ^^ those 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 213 

who look wistfully back on the earliest times, as if 
they only afforded scope for faithful souls. No 
doubt a bright halo of grace surrounds the scene 
where the Holy Grhost was first poured out on men, 
with a simplicity and power which carried all along ; 
but who w£us the spring and whence the energy which 
produced fruits so much the more wondrous when we 
think of the soil once so hard, and stubborn, and 
cold? Was it not the Lord acting for His own 
name, by the Holy Ghost, after He took the place, in 
risen and ascended glory, of giving gifts to men? 
Is not His grace as equal to these perilous times 
as He proved Himself when ushering in the mystery 
that was hid from ages? Are there saints to be 
perfected and ministerial work to be done? Does 
the body of Christ need to be built up? Then 
assuredly His gifts cannot fail tiU the work is done, 
and all are brought into the unity of the faith ; and 
the many adversaries, and subtle snares, and increas- 
ing perils, will only draw the more upon the faithful 
love of the Lord of all. There is fulness of blessing 
in Christ for the Church now as truly as then. 
Would that we but confided in Him more for every 
exigency ! 

Are we, then, to disparage the truth or to doubt 
His grace, by setting up some work of our hands, 
some calf of gold, as if we knew not what is become 
of Him who is gone on high? Far be it from 
God's children I Let me suppose you come together 
as God's assembly ; you know not who is to speak, 
exhort, give thanks, pray. To uiib^ligt t\aa» ^&\s^ 



214 GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 

confiision. Certainly it looks so, if I forget who is in 
the midst ; certainly it does, if I do not beKeve that 
the Lord is there ; but if assured that He, who has 
all power in heaven and on earth, loves and cherishes 
the Church, and that the Holy Ghost, divine as He 
is, dwells with and in us, what need I fear ? If this 
position is true for one saint, it is true for all. For 
my part, I would not dare for a moment to stand 
upon any foundation which did not contemplate the 
whole length and breadth of the Church of God, which 
did not in its faith and love go out to and embrace 
all the saints of God. 

Of course, allowance must be made for exceptional 
states, as for persons guilty of sin that would require 
their exclusion (immorality, bad doctrine, and such 
like). But still, if I know that this is the ground of 
the Church according to Scripture, and that there 
was no other from the first taken and acted on by 
the holy apostles, the question is. Am I upon it? If 
I am called to labour in the word and doctrine, the 
Lord points me out the way. He opens the door 
which none can shut, and shuts and none can open. 
He finds a path for the feeblest of His pilgrims, and 
gives them courage, and makes it plain if they have 
to serve Him. Let us never doubt Him. 

But may there not be a number of gifts P So 
much the better. If there are five, or twice five, 
gifted men in an assembly, let us thank the Lord. 
There is room for alL God forbid that we should 
sanction the novelty of each minister having his own 
little fiock ! Is- it not a degradation for those who 



GIFTS AND LOCAL CHARGES. 215 

SO speak, and for those so spoken of ? No one behaves 
himself — ^nay, he does not even know how to behave 
himself — ^who does not bear the sense in his soul 
that the saints are "the flock of Grod." But evi- 
dently men do not speak of God's flock, if the divine 
ground of the Church be forgotten : then it is " my 
flock," or "your flock." There is always room for 
the exercise of His gifts, whatever and however 
many they may be. Besides, it is a strange time 
to fear that any could be spared as superfluous. 

The hour warns me that this subject must now be 
closed. My endeavour has been to expound and 
enforce the fundamental distinction between gifts 
and offices — the one, we saw, flowing from Christ 
on high, the other requiring appointment here below 
of men, themselves authorized of the Lord for the 
purpose. As for gifts, they always remain sure, as 
truly as Christ abides the head and source of sup- 
ply. As for the formal authorization, it is no longer 
possible, because you have not a duly authorized 
power to appoint. All you can do in the direction 
of appointing, if you will do something, is to set up 
a paltry and rather arrogant imitation of the apostles 
and their delegates. But if you really love the Lord, 
and value godly order, is it not your bounden duty, 
in the name of the Lord, to acknowledge all His 
gifts in a way you have never done P Acknowledge 
them privately and publicly in the work He has 
assigned them. If the gift be small, acknowledge 
the Lord in it as heartily as if it were a great one; 



216 NOTE ON ACTS XIV. 23. 

and if it be a great one, acknowledge it as humbly 
and unjealously as a small one. On the other hand, 
do" not try to imitate what the apostles did; beware 
of pretending to do what ought not to be thought 
of, unless there were apostolic power. And as to 
appointing deacons or choosing elders, Scripture 
affords no warrant, unless there was direct or in- 
direct apostolic authority, which does not now exist. 



NOTE ON ACTS XIV. 23. 

This opportunity is taken to furnish clear and conclusive 
evidence against the notion that the elders were chosen 
by the votes of the churches. The word •^^tipoTovifa, if 
etymologicaUy viewed, means to stretch out the hand ; 
hence it was appHed to election, as we say by show 
of hands, and, generally, to choice or appointment 
without reference to the manner. Just so }prf<l>l(ofiai 
starts from mere reckoning with pebbles, and was used 
for voting thus, then for voting in general, and lastly 
for the simple resolve or decision of the mind. The 
context, not the word in itself, shows which is to be 
understood. Hesychius explains x^ipm-oviiv by Kadiar^y 
(compare Tit. i. 5), ^//??0/fecv ; as Suidas for xciporov^crairec 
gives eKXe^dfievoi. "With all this accords the usage of 
Aristophanes, as well as of .^schines, Demosthenes, 
&c., both in the narrow and literal sense, and in the 
general meaning of choice or designation. Appian, 
Dio Cassius, Plutarch, Lucian, and Libanius afford many 
examples where the word conveys no more than choos- 
ing. In these, therefore, the idea of popular suffirage. 



NOTE ON ACTS XIV. 23. 217 

with or without the hands stretched out, is quite ex- 
cluded. 

But a few instances must be given from Hellenis- 
tic writers familiar with the Old Testament and con- 
temporaneous with those inspired to write the New 
Testament. Thus Philo (Trepl ^Iwor^) repeatedly uses x« 
of Pharaoh's appointing Joseph his prime minister, and 
of Moses in the place to which he was chosen by God, 
and in his selection, again, of Aaron's sons for the priest- 
hood. So Josephus (Ant. VI. xiii. 9) speaks of Saul as 
"chosen king by Gk)d," vtto tov Qeov Kt^ttporovriijivov 
(iaoriXiay and also (Ant. XIH. ii. 2) represents Alexander 
as writing to Jonathan in these terms, xeiporovovfiev li tre 
(T^ifxepov apj^upia t&v ^Iov^cUwv, " "We constitute thee this 
day high priest of the Jews." This may suffice to prove 
what we are to judge of Dr. J. Owen's statement 
(Works, vol. XY. pp. 495, 496, Goold's edition) that 
*^ Paul and Barnabas are said to ordain elders in the 
churches by their election and sufBrage ; for the word 
there used will admit of no other sense, however it be 
ambiguously expressed in our translation." Indeed, 
Beza, Diodati, Martin, and others had committed them- 
selves to the same thing. Dr. G. Campbell, however, 
Presbyterian as he was, repudiated this version of the 
text, and (in his Prelim. Diss, x.. Part v. § 7) pronounced 
per mffragia, in the Latin of Beza, " a mere interpola- 
tion for the sake of answering a particular purpose." 
If one do not endorse so strong a censure, the only 
alternative is that the gloss sprang &om inadequate 
research and strong prejudice. 

The truth is, that we need not go beyond the New 
Testament to demonstrate the error ; for here, as else- 
where, even when applied to the most rigid election, 



218 NOTE ON ACTS XIV. 23. 

X- never means choosing by the votes of otherSf which it 
must mean to bear the alleged sense. Wherever the 
word occurs technically, the person intended does not 
take the votes of others merely, or preside as moderator 
of the election, but w the voter himself. Now, in this 
case, the subject in question is, beyond doubt, not the 
disciples, but Paul and Barnabas. If any voted by 
stretching out their hands, it was the apostles only. 
Hence the authorized version rightly dropped **by 
election," the sense given in some of the older English 
and foreign translations, which had been too much in- 
fluenced by the Genevese school, and even Erasmus. 

The true meaning is, that the apostles chose elders 
for the disciples in each assembly (not the disciples for 
themselves). And this is entirely confirmed by Acts 
X. 41 and 2 Cor. viii. 19 ; in one of which passages Gkxl 
is said to have chosen beforehand; in the other, the 
churches are the choosers, precisely as here the apostles. 
Neither God nor the assemblies gathered the votes of 
others: no more did Paul and Barnabas. But this 
is the sole testimony which has ever been imagined 
directly to favour the popular election of elders ; and we 
have seen that the inference drawn is assuredly fictitious. 
Eor the matter in hand the usage of the word in the 
political or civil affairs of Greece is no evidence. 

It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to add that x- does 
not mean the imposition of hands, for which Scripture 
supplies another phrase, never confounded with the 
word in question. But this confusion soon began to 
show itself in ecclesiastical authors, who not unfre- 
quently employ \tip(yrovia where we might expect 
\eipode(ria, or ^ emdealc t&v \eip&yi This error occurs 
in the so-called Apostolical Canons, Chrysostom, and 



NOTE ON ACTS XIV. 23. 219 

subsequent writers ; and it may have led the authorized 
translators to give " ordained " rather than ** chose," or 
* * designated. " Bishop Bilson, in his * * Perpetual Govern- 
ment of Christ's Church," is guilty, not of this confusion 
only, but of the strange error that " the elders" included 
"deacons." (See chap. vii. and x.) But really the dis- 
cord of commentators is almost past belief, unless one 
have read extensively and proved the fact by experience. 
Thus Hammond tries to extract from this verse the 
appointment of a single bishop to each church or city ; 
whereas one might have inferred (without appealing to 
such incontestible proof to the contrary as Acts xx. 17, 
28) that the plurality of the presbyters with the singular 
distributive was as strongly against him as language 
could make the case, short of an express contradiction. 
Had Hanmiond's idea been meant, nothing could have 
been easier than to have written Trpta^vrepov icar' iKKKriaiav 
or Trpea^vripovQ Kar* iKKKrjcrlaC' On the other hand, if I 
may trust Mr. Elsley's report, Whitby opposes this 
ultra-Episcopalianism, on the equally untenable groimd 
that these elders were such as had miraculous en- 
dowments, either directly from God (as in Acts ii. iv. ix. 
X. xi.) or through an apostolic medium (as in Acts viii.), 
and who had the care at first of the churches ; not fixed 
ministers, but nearer to the apostles in rank. Can any 
statement be conceived more random and unfounded ? 

The last, and perhaps the worst, specimen of this 
speculation I take from Calvin's Inst. IV. iii. 15, 16, 
where, according to the author, **Luke relates that 
Barnabas and Paul ordained elders throughout the 
churches ; but he, at the same time, marks the plan or 
mode when he says it was done by sufBrage. The 
words are x* ^rp. k. ekkX, (Acts xiv. 23). They therefore 



220 NOTE ON ACTS XIV. 23. 

selected (creabant) two ; but the whole hody^ as was the 
custom of the Greeks in elections, decla/red hy a show of 
hands which of the two they wished to have.^^ It has rarely 
been my lot to meet with a more glaring perversion of 
the facts and language of inspiration than this passage 
exhibits, the refutation of which has been already 
anticipated. The new translation by H. Beveridge is pur- 
posely cited to cut off cavil on that score ; and the original 
is given underneath for verification.* It is consolatory, 
however, to find that so untoward a construction was 
destined to no long existence; for its own author 
smothers it, though with reluctance, in his commentary 
on the passage: — *^ Freshyterium qui hie collectivum 
nomen esse putant, pro collegio presbyterorum positum, 
recte sentiunt meo judicio." ( Comment in he.) 

But the close of the chapter is still more fiill of per- 
plexity and error. " Lastly it is to be observed, that it 
was not the whole people, but only pastors, who laid 
hands on ministers, though it is uncertain whether or 
not several always laid their hands. It is certain that, 
in the case of the deacons, it was done by Paul and 
Barnabas, and some few others. (Acts vi. 6 ; xiii. 3.) 
But in another place Paul mentions that he himself, 
without any others, laid hands on Timothy. * Wherefore 
I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of 
God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands' 
(2 Tim. i. 6). For what is said in the first epistle of 

* ** Befert enim Lucas constitatos esse per ecolesias presbyteros k 
Paulo et Bamaba : sed rationem vel modum simul notat, quum dicit 
fiEictum id esse suffiragiis, xtiporoyiitrcanti^ inquit, trp^ff^vripovs kot* 
iKKkriffiav. Creabant ergo ipsi duo : sed tota multitudo, ut mos 
GrsBcorum in electionibus erat, maoibus sublatis declarabat quern 
habere yellent." (Geney», 1618.) 



NOTE ON ACTS XIV. 23. 221 

the laying on of the hands of the preshytery I do not 
understand, as if Paul were speaking of the college of 
elders. By the expression I understand the ordination 
itself (!); as if he had said, Act so, that the gift which 
you received by the laying on of hands, when I made 
you a presbyter (! !), may not be in vain." That 
apostolic hands appointed the seven men whom the 
multitude elected for the service of tables is clear. But 
Scripture is silent whether imposition of hands was 
practised in the establishing of elders ; and to me that 
silence seems admirably wise, even if in fact hands 
were imposed, as a divine provision against super- 
stitious abuse. But what can be meant by the reference 
to Acts xiii. 3, connected with the allegation that Paul 
and Barnabas, &c., laid their hands on dea.cons? As 
for the notion that row irpta^vTepiov (1 Tim. iv. 14) 
means not the elders as a body, but eldership, and so 
is to be in sense dislocated from its evident and neces- 
sary connection with xeipwv at the end of the verse, and 
put in apposition with xaplafiaroi at the beginning, I 
maintain that the grammar is not more Jb.arsh and 
unexampled than the resulting doctrine is strange. 
Eldership in Scripture is not a gift, but a local charge. 



THE RESOUECE OF THE FAITHFUL 
IN THE RUINS OF CHRISTENDOM. 

2 Tim. iL 11—22. 

LECTURE Yl. 

How many elements of solemnity are crowded into 
the subject now before usl It is solemn to look 
over Christendom and survey its ruins, now too 
palpable to be denied. It is solemn, on the other 
side, to think of the faithftd goodness of God, who 
knew all beforehand, spread it out in the unerring 
word of His grace, and has shown us that, if He felt 
the evil that was about to cover the scene of the 
profession of Christ's name on earth. His loving 
wisdom descried a sure path — ^a path the vulture's 
eye does not see, which, nevertheless. He gives His 
people to discern, and by means of which they can 
have the happy certainty that they are pleasing God. 
To those who, for the sake of the Lord and the 
truth, deplore, and refuse to have fellowship with, 
the current practice of Christendom, there may be a 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 223 

certain necessity to give as strong proofs as may be 
of those evils which now abound, and of which the 
word of Grod forewarned when they were but in the 
germ. Indeed, there may be a kind of temptation 
to prove the evil, where we feel in anywise the need 
of a justification for the path of separation from God. 
But that tendency is corrected promptly, and the 
heart receives its due tone and its right attitude, 
when we think who, after all, is most concerned, and 
whose honour it is we have to justify. The Lord 
preserve us from thinking of ourselves ! It is un- 
worthy of those who belong to Christ. Be it our 
boast to justify Him alone. 

It will be my business now to show, not that He 
needs aught from us, not tliat His words of light 
require the tapers of man to make them more distinct, 
but that divine charity seeks the blessing of every 
one, especially those who are comparatively young 
and iminformed in the truth of God. I hope to 
give enough, at least, of the evidence to show most 
plainly what the will of the Lord is ; how faithfully 
His word deals with us ; how worthy of trust both 
He Himself is and that which He has put into our 
hands. This may encourage the most diffident of 
God's children to look up with confidence, seeing that 
the end was as plain to Him as the beginning, and 
that for us the only path is that of Christ, for there 
cannot be two. He is the way, and as there is but 
one Christ, so there can be, therefore, but one path 
that satisfies the heart and mind of Christ for those 
who love Him. 



224 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

Am I going to produce strong reasons, as if one 
needed to justify this ? It will be enough to explain 
what He has pointed out. To those who know Him, 
there will be the completest justification and the 
strongest reason, in the fact that it is His path for 
us, though His goodness has given, alas I too sure 
and abundant proof how deeply it is needed. 

Further, I shall have the opportunity to-night of 
slightly reviewing the ground over which we have 
passed on previous occasions, and of showing how all 
that is most precious has been secured to the faithM. 
Not that the Lord has not been pleased to take 
away much. Not that we ought to be unfeeling 
about anything that concerns the Lord's power and 
glory in the Church. But if we rightly claim a 
higher place for that which concerns Grod in His 
moral ways; if we ought to feel that what brings and 
keeps before us the grace of Christ must be of deeper 
value than any displays of power before men; yet, on 
the other hand, beloved brethren, it would be a 
wrong to the Lord if we looked with cold indiffer- 
ence on the utter weakness of this our day, and the 
dishonour thus put upon the name of Jesus in 
Christendom itself. Alas ! there is no place among 
the outside strangers to the Lord Jesus where there 
is more daring enormity done than in the very scene 
where men are baptized in His name. When we 
look back at times long past, at the early days of the 
Church's pilgrimage on the earth, and the power of 
the Holy Ghost then displayed, I am persuaded we 
ought to feel for the woimds inflicted in the houae of 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 225 

His Mends ; we ought to be grieved that the bear- 
ing of the Church was such that the Lord could not 
outwardly pour honour upon her, but was obliged to 
strip her, as it were, and shame her before the 
enemies of His name. 

Let us own all this ; as also the far deeper sorrow 
that men so little prize the truth, so tamely feel for 
the honour of the Lord's Person in Christendom, not 
to speak of the well-nigh universal want of feeling 
even what the Church is, in its barest and simplest 
forms, and still more the total forgetfulness of its 
bright portion as one with the Saviour, and of that 
which the Church hopes for in the day to come. Be 
assured that if we do not thus feel with the Lord, in 
our little measure, we are not in a moral condition 
rightly to act upon His word in present things. It 
is a lesson of no small importance to see that the 
Lord has not given us in Scripture that which 
admits of bare imitation. It does not suffice to take 
up the epistles of St. Paul, for instance, and set to 
work as if we were competent to put in order the 
things that are wanting, and ordain elders here or 
there. It is one thing to fall back upon the word 
Grod has given us, and quite another to assume that 
we can reinstate the Church, now that it has been 
broken up and ruined. It is right to feel its low 
estate, but that we should now build up again that 
which is thus fallen, the very thought proves that the 
heart in this has no communion with Christ; that 
there is a lack of due holy distrust of self; that there 
is such insensibility to the true state of things now, 

Q 



226 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

as unfits not merely for authoritatively restoring tha 
ClLureh, but even for the humbleness of faith that 
confides in the actual resources of Christ. For it is 
an unvarying principle of God, that when there has 
been a departure from BKmself, it matters not under 
what circumstances, or time, or place, or people — 
whether before the flood or since — ^whether in Israel 
or in the Church — God insists upon it that the first 
step in that which is morally good should be the sense 
of our real evil in His sight. When this is the case, 
the presumption will be far from us that we can make 
good that wonderful display of divine power, grace, 
and wisdom — the Church of GOD ! It was the 
greatest work, so to speak, that God ever wrought 
upon the earth (next to the Cross, whereby alone 
such a work became possible). 

God forbid that in thinking of what He has done, 
we should compare that which stands alone — alone 
throughout all eternity ! But if we look at all that 
has ever been done upon the earth, or even the very 
making of heaven and earth, I say, that the work of 
God in His Church — ^the Church of God — ^was greater 
still. And now, we poor leaky vessels that could not 
keep the blessing, we that have been, through our 
own weakness and unwatchfulness, a prey to Satan's 
wiles, and let in the thieves and robbers that have 
spoiled the house of God, are we the men to set it 
up again ? Is this the feeling of lowly faith ? If it 
were bad for man to go away, if it were a grievous 
thing for Israel to dishonour the law of God, what 
must it be for the Church to slight God the Holy 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 227 

Ghost? It is the epistle of Christ, the habitation 
of God through the Spirit, the object of His most 
perfect love, accepted in the Beloved, even in Christ — 
made the righteousness of God in Him. What is it, 
then, for that Church practically to forego the glory 
of God here below — ^to prefer the work of their own 
hands to His word and Spirit — once more to bow 
down to idols graven by art and man's device? 
Oh ! it is more loathsome than that which Scripture, 
or even history, records of days and men infinitely 
less privileged. 

Think not that I am exaggerating what Christen- 
dom has done or does. Nor do I wish to dilate, more 
than is absolutely needfiil, upon the painful failure of 
that which bears the name of Christ here below. In 
truth, it is not so. But let us hear what the word of 
God says upon the subject. Who would allow the 
thought that He speaks too strongly of that which 
He saw from the first, and told us was coming, aa 
He looked into the future ? 

Let us begin with the Saviour Himself, and see 
what He intimated to His disciples should be found 
when He returns again to the earth, when He sum- 
mons man to give an account of himself. In Luke 
xvii. He tells us, not that the world should become 
gradually changed from a wilderness to a Paradise, 
nor that the heathen should lay aside their false gods 
and the Jews their enmity to the true Messiah. On 
the contrary. He gives the disciples the needed warn- 
ing, that it was to be as in the days of Noah, and 
Q 2 



228 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

in the days of Lot. These were times of ease and 
worldliness, when all mankind was rising up against 
God; and yet they furnished comparisons for the 
scenes which are to meet the Lord as He appears 
from heaven to judge the world. " As it was in the 
days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the 
Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they mar- 
ried wives, they were given in marriage, imtil the 
day that Noe entered into the ark,'*and the flood came 
and destroyed them all." The self-security and love 
of ease will be substantially the same when the Lord 
is revealed, as just before the flood. Then, as of old, 
men will be engrossed in the ordinary matters <rf 
daily life. Spite of the law, spite of the Gospel, 
again is seen and will be continued that state of 
corruption and violence which brought the Deluge 
upon the earth, no less guilty than utterly uncon- 
c;emed. And Christ looks onward to the day of His 
return : no previous millennium of holy bliss awaiting 
Him ; no happy, rejoicing hearts, characterizing the 
world generally then ; but, on the contrary, the same 
moral condition, the same indiflerence to God's will 
and glory which preceded the flood. 

After the flood, when nations and tongues began, 
there was another scene, more appalling and degrad- 
ing, which the same book of Genesis brings before 
us ; and this also furnishes its sad complement to 
the picture of the days just before the Son of man 
comes again. " Like also as it was in the days of Lot ; 
they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they 
planted, they builded ; but the same day that Lot went 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 229 

out of Sodom " (most ominous words !) " it rained fire 
and brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all. 
Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of 
man is revealed." 

If we take up now the Epistles, we shall find the 
light shed by the Holy Grhost in no way weakens but 
confirms in every respect the testimony of the Lord 
Jesus ; only that now we have, naturally, the Holy 
Ghost looking rather at professing Christendom, 
whereas our Lord made the Jews Has starting point 
and centre. 

Thus, in Rom. xi., without dwelling at length 
upon the chapter, the Spirit of Grod anticipates the 
end of Christendom. " Boast not against the bran- 
ches. But if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but 
the root thee." Such is the warning given to the 
Gentile professor. The Jews are meant by the 
natural branches. They had been the depositories 
of promise of old, and had therefore the responsible 
place of testimony for God upon the earth. Hence 
they were the original branches of the olive tree, the 
line of promise and testimony on the earth which began 
with Abraham. But the Jews broke the law, went 
after idols, refused and slew the Messiah. There was 
a resource in the Gospel ; but they refused the Gospel 
jfrom heaven, as well as the Lord their King on 
earth. The consequence is, that the natural branches 
of the olive tree were broken ofi*, and the wild olive, 
or Gentile, grafted into the old stock of profession. 
And this is the warning that is given : " Thou wilt 



230 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

say then, The branches were broken off, that I might 
be graflfed in." Has not this exactly been the feeling 
of Christendom ? Contempt for the Jews, astonish- 
ment at their wickedness, utter insensibility as to 
their own condition. " Well ; because of unbelief, 
they were broken off, and thou standest by faith. 
Be not high-minded, but fear: for if Grod spared 
not the natural branches, take heed lest He also 
spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness 
and severity of God: on them which fell, severity; 
but towards" thee, goodness, if thou continue in His 
goodness." 

Let me ask any man that has the smallest 
fear of Grod, or even outward acquaintance with 
His word. Has Christianity continued in the good- 
ness of God? Is there any Protestant, any Soman 
Catholic who thinks so? Is there any person, 
no matter where, no matter who— a single soul 
who dares to say that Christendom, the professing 
Gentile, has continued in the goodness of God ? 
The Romanist cannot think the Protestant schism 
continues in the goodness of God. The Pro- 
testant is assured that the Eomish body is the 
fruit of clean departure from God into superstition; 
and so we might run through all existing systems. 
They may each plead for his own association; but 
who will say that even his own has continued 
faithful? They may believe that it means well, 
and would be admirable if carried out; but who 
would not acknowledge that it has not been carried 
out? that consequently no sect, no portion, no 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 231 

fragment even, has continued in the goodness of 
God P All agree that, as for the mass of profession 
outside themselves, it has failed to testify for the 
goodness of God. Consequently there rises up from 
men on every side the acknowledgment that the 
Gentile has not continued in it. Not that the 
failure is felt as it should be ; not that there is 
adequate confession and renunciation of our common 
sin before God. Where sin is really spread out to 
God, it will not be persisted in. But, at least, 
there is an outward acknowledgment to a certain 
extent in the earth now, and quite enough to prove 
that Christianity has not continued in the goodness 
of God. What then says the word of the Lord ? 
"Thou, also, shalt be cut off." The Gentile shall 
be cut off for his faithlessness, as surely as the Jew 
was. 

This, remark, is not in some prophetic portion of 
God's word, which some might think ambiguous, 
though we do not allow the thought for a moment 
that any part of the word of God is so. But here, in an 
epistle which every Christian allows to be one of the 
most fundamental and comprehensive, which takes 
up Christianity from its elements, and through which 
the Lord has established souls in peace, perhaps more 
than through any other portion of His word ; it is in 
this epistle to the Romans that we have the solenm 
announcement of the sure cutting off of the Gentiles. 
Not merely one part or another, but the Gentile 
profession is doomed of God, because it has not con- 
tinued in His goodness; as truly as the Jew is 



232 THE RESOUBCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

now cast out from his heritage, a bye-word and a 
reproach to all the earth, evidently bearing his doom 
stamped upon his brow. 

To examine many of the epistles, would more than 
occupy my time. Suffice it to say, that as we travel 
down the stream, from 2 Thessalonians, which 
was one of the earliest epistles written by St. Paid, 
to the latest, the Epistles of St. John, we have only 
an increasing testimony, growing more distinct and 
urgent and awful. As the evil grew, so the signs of 
judgment became more apparent. The Spirit of 
God sounds the trumpet with no imcertain sounds 
and wakes up the faithful where there is an ear to 
hear. Christendom was gradually being under- 
mined, and would become, in no long time, the 
engine of opposition to God — ^would be made the 
theatre of the grossest evil, taking up the abomi- 
nations, not only of the Jews, but of the heathen 
themselves, and consecrating a systraa of idolatry 
under the name of Christ and His mother, saints 
and angels, even more frighftd and guilty than any- 
thing ever before found here below. For the vety 
fact of praying to Peter, Paul, or the Virgin, proves 
that the light of Christianity must in some measure 
have been known, before it ended in so distressing an 
apostaoy. Does any one think the expression " apos- 
tacy " overnstrong ? Allow me to teU them that the 
very phrase " the apostacy " is the expression of the 
Holy Ghost in that epistle to the Thessalonians. 
There we are told " there is a mystery of iniquiiy 
which now worketh." Only there is now a hindering 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 233 

power. Consequently, it would not burst out into 
its full development all at once; it is kept in check, 
for a certain time, by the good hand of the Lord, for 
the purposes of His own grace. But the moment that 
this restraint was gone, then it would be no mystery 
any longer, but would become manifest. It is called 
" a (or rather " the ") falling away," or apostacy. 
This must become ripe, and " the man of sin " must be 
revealed. Thus we have too plainly an iminter- 
rupted succession of evil. This is the vista described 
in the Scripture ; a succession of evil that goes on 
always swelling in intensity and volume, till at last, 
when the restraint is removed, it bursts out into a 
yet more fearful issue — ^not "the apostacy" only, 
but " the man of sin." What a contrast to the Man 
of righteousness, when man dares to take the place 
of God in the temple of God ! 

This, then, is what Christendom is to the Christian 
watchman. It has not of course been realized in 
all its force, though I do not deny that there have 
been various and also growing manifestations of evil. 
As the apostle John tells us, " Even now there are 
many antichrists, whereby we know that it is the 
last time." This is so much the more remarkable 
because he shows that the Antichrist was coming, 
the great token of which is that there were many 
antidhrists then. They knew thereby it was the 
last time. The Spirit would not close the volume of 
the New Testament until the worst evil was actually 
there, at least in its germ ; and this being so, and 
desmed by inspiration, there was need of nothing 



234 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

further. The Spirit of God could, as it were, fold 
up the sacred roll. It was complete. The mystery 
of lawlessness is shown already at work, " the man 
of sin" is predicted ; the mystery of Christ and the 
Church no longer hid but disclosed. Scripture 
had attained its full compass. There remains, 
not some fresh view of Christ, so to speak, but 
contrariwise, the unfolding of that Christ whom 
they had already, the bringing out more intimately 
and appreciatively the light of the love of God that 
was in the Lord Jesus Christ from the beginning. 
This is the antidote to all Satan can bring — ^to the 
many antichrists, and at last to the Antichrist. I 
refer to it in order to give a kind of connexion 
between the different states — ^the rise, progress, and 
final manifestation of lawlessness. Nay, more, the 
lawless one is to exalt himself against the Lord of 
glory. The last book of the New Testament shows 
the millennial reign over the earth, ushered in by 
the destruction of the beast and the false prophet, 
with all their company, as Babylon had been pre- 
viously destroyed. 

Thus rapidly have we glanced, without entering into 
all the proofs of the doom of Christendom. They are 
patent in the general epistles, and in particular in 
the epistle of Jude, where a most energetic sketch is 
given in the compass of a single verse (11). With that 
power which the Spirit of God only knows how to 
convey, the shadows of Cain are sketched, then of 
Balaam, and finally of the gainsaying Core. Is 
there nothing for Christendom there ? Is there no 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 235 

sound of sure if slumbering judgment there ? " Woe 
unto them ! for they have gone in the way of Cain;" 
that unnatural brother, that pretender to religion, 
who brought his offering to the Lord but slew the 
guiltless. Is there no presage in him who received 
the wages of unrighteousness — ^in the man who, 
spite of himself, prophesied glorious things of a 
people that he loved not, but would have sold to 
destruction ? Is there no solemn lesson in the wages 
received for teaching, it may be, the glorious things 
of God, without heart for His people, stiU less any 
care or jealousy for His word, for His will, for His 
glory ? Finally, in that fearful rebellion of Korah, 
"the gainsaying of Core," in those who had the 
ministry of the sanctuary, in the proud Levites who 
coveted and arrogated to themselves the place of 
Moses and Aaron (the apostle and the high priest of 
the Jewish profession), is there no awful warning 
there ? Have you never heard of men professing to 
be servants of Christ, and yet pretending to be priests 
strictly, officially, and exclusively — ^pretending to be 
authoritative channels of divine pardon, empowered 
on earth to absolve from guilt before Q-od? I do 
not speak only of such as claim in their heathenish 
darkness to offer a sacrifice for the dead as well as 
the living. Assuredly one thinks not with bitterness 
about such things as these, but we may all stand 
aghast as we survey the facts realized in Christen- 
dom. If it be a prophecy, it is a prophecy fulfilled. 
All this may suffice to show how little Christen- 
dom has continued in the goodness of God. Details 



236 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

are needless. The godliest members of the various 
religious societies would be the first to confess the 
fiEulure of their own. God's controversy is not 
with one only, but with all, though doubtless 
the proudest will meet with a peculiar judgment. 
It is evident, also, that the word of God leaves 
it not to human experience or to spiritual judg- 
ment to infer His thoughts of Christendom; He 
has pronounced upon it Himself. Hence it is not pre- 
sumptuous, but on the contrary the part of humble 
£&ith, to believe God in this. How good He is thus 
to cut off the fear of forming a judgment so stem ! 
For now he that does not pronounce after the Lord, 
is ignorant of his Master's mind, or is false to TTir 
will. He that would defend or justify Christendom, 
does not, in effect, fear to give the Lord the lie. 
Prom the Scriptures enough has been given to show 
that the man who can look on Christendom and vin- 
dicate what is around us, ignorantly or wilfiilly 
slights aU the instruction that the Holy Ghost has 
given on the subject. Undoubtedly this is strong ; 
but it is the Lord's goodness which makes the owning 
of it now to be a matter of sympathy with Him, and 
not of a proud claim to superior light. 

God's word is open to all. By it we are all bound 
to see as He sees. The Lord admits of no vain excuses, 
that we cannot judge. The Spirit of God, who judges 
and discerns all things, dwells in every Christian. 
He that says he cannot judge Christendom, virtually 
denies himself to be a spiritual man ; but if we do 
judge that Christendom has fallen into these predicted 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 237 

evils, one after another, and that what was then but 
budding, is now bearing the most bitter and baneful 
fruit, I ask, are we to partake of it ? Are we to be 
insensible to our own share of the common sin ? If 
the Lord graciously imparts the strongest warning, 
are we to satisfy ourselves with that flimsiest and 
most profane of apologies, that when the Lord comes, 
He will set it all right ? Yes, but it will be too late 
to set right my conscious, Christ-dishonouring un- 
faithfulness ; it will be to my shame to live till then 
indifferent to His word, careless of His glory, regard- 
less of the Holy Grhost, who is grieved by that which 
I have been allowing practically. Am I, or am I 
not, to refrain from that which insults Him ? If I 
know these things, am I to content myself without 
doing them? He who does, puts himself in the 
guiltiest place of all. Do I know and feel the despite 
Christendom does, and I have done, to the Spirit of 
grace ? Then let me look up in dependence on the 
Lord, that I may do it no more, nor settle down in 
a pretext so lame and criminal, as that the Lord will 
set all to rights again. Is He not coming to judge 
every evil way ? No doubt. He will bring in good, 
and this from above ; but He will judge all evil, and 
yet more than in times past. In vain, then, do I 
essay to shelter myself under the blessed truth, that 
the Lord is coming to display the kingdom of God 
upon earth. Assuredly, He will. From the heaveni . 
He will come, and fill the earth with the peace and 
blessing He brings with Himself, instead of finding 



238 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

here below. A few poor broken hearts He will find 
in the world — a godly remnant, crying out, like the 
importunate widow in the guilty city where ruled the 
judge that feared neither Q-od nor man. Such and 
worse will be the state of things, and in their midst 
shall He find faith on the earth ? Yes, but crying 
out in alarm. An,d so He will clear the world with 
the avenging sword, before He establishes His throne 
of righteousness upon it. Of course, I speak figura- 
tively now ; but the fact will be imsparing divine 
judgment ; and therefore how blind for any to harden 
themselves, in going on with sin, under the plea that 
the Lord is coming to set the world and Church to 
rights ! 

AUow me to say further, that the Lord has not 
left us to our own thoughts any more of the good than 
of the evil. He has given us His path, and this is 
what the heart desires to come to — ^the resources of 
the faithM in the ruins of Christendom. It were 
strange indeed if the word of God shed no sure light 
where it is so needed ? Can we conceive such a thing 
as the Lord giving His view of the darkening future, 
and no provident care for Has beloved, and feeble, 
and trembling followers ? We began with the Lord's 
testimony about man's evil ; let us see how He en- 
sures good for His people in the midst of it. For 
Matt, xviii. we may bless the Lord. Although He 
is giving instruction as to the animating spring of the 
assembly, which is grace, (as law was the governing 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 239 

principle of the sjoiagogue,) the Lord provides what 
would be deeply needed, if they were reduced to a 
handful. " Where two or three are gathered together 
in my name, there ami I in the midst of them" (ver. 20) . 
Could one conceive more tender thought, or more evi- 
dent wisdom than the Lord thus caring for His own 
in a dark day ? To this the goodly flock might come ; 
that assembly which once stood out so fair, with its 
thousands on whom great grace rested. How wise 
thus to prepare the hearts of His servants ! How 
well He knew and guarded against the anxieties of 
His servants ! We know what numbers are to the 
worldly spirit, and how apt we are to rest upon that 
which looks great -in the earth. Yet nothing is more 
destructive of Christianity. He that has not a heart 
for the two or three, must be only a dead weight if 
he were among ten thousand. It might be, no doubt, 
that he would be carried along the stream of happy 
multitudes ; and that which was thus imfaithfol to the 
mind of Christ, might pass imnoticed in the strong cur- 
rent and new-bom delight in the Saviour, transporting 
all aroxmd, as was no doubt the case on that bright 
day when the Holy Grhost came down from heaven 
to be the herald of the glory of the Lord, and to 
make believing men on earth the dwelling-place of 
God. We can understand that at Pentecost the 
tide of joy rose so high as to cover all such elements, 
sure as they were to appear later on. 

And soon it came, too soon, when sounds of dis- 
content were heard even in that blessed habitation 
of God. Alas ! man was there ; not God only, in 



240 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

His goodness, but man ; and behind was the ad- 
versary, ready to dishonour the one through the 
other. 

The Church, like man and Israel, has to be tried 
on earth. What is the declared issue P Never was 
there such blessing entrusted to man; but man is .as 
feithless under the Gospel as he was rebellious under 
the law. The Holy Ghost is slighted, as the Son 
had been ; and in the day when eternal realities are 
revealed, man turns back to the shadows of Judaism, 
preferring them to the substantial truth of God. 
This is the history of Christendom. And the Lord, 
with it all spread out before His prescient eyes, 
comforts His followers, were they ever so few and 
weak, with the assurance of His presence where His 
name has its central place to their faith. 

In the prospect of coming evil, how gracious of 
the Lord to think, it may be, of some obscure village 
—of some solitary ship that travels across the ocean 
—of some comparatively desert island — ^yea, or of 
the vast and crowded city, where the very solitariness 
of discipleship is more realized sometimes than any- 
where else ! Wherever, however, whenever it might 
be, the Lord gives His own weight of authority to 
the two or three gathered unto His name. It is not 
merely His blessing — ^where could He not bless? 
Blessing He went on high, and never since — ^if I may 
so say — never has He laid down the hands which 
He then lifted up in blessing. It could not be other- 
wise, till He come in judgment. His work was 
infinite. Who could limit the preciousness of Hid 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 241 

blood? Who could say that redemption, like the 
first covenant, was grown old, and ready to vanish 
away? Could any difficulty, danger, or need in 
Christendom turn that grace back, as it were, into 
its spring, or dry up those rivers of living waters 
which they that believe should receive? It could 
not be ; but there is more than all that here. Not 
only is there blessing, but there is also the weight of 
His authority guaranteed to the smallest real repre- 
sentative of His assembly. We know that men 
shrink back from Church discipline ; and he need 
not wonder at this who is aware how it was made 
the most abominable scourge of tyranny, under the 
fairest pretences, the earth ever beheld. One can- 
not, therefore, be surprised that Christians who had 
escaped from the weight of that iron hand should 
somewhat shrink back at the bare sound. But we 
must beware of mistrusting Kim to whom we owe 
our every blessing, because Babylon, the world- 
Church, has perverted His words. But if there 
were only two or three, there ought to be as much 
jealousy as if they were three thousand, to maintain 
publicly and privately, collectively and individually, 
ways consistent with the character of Christ. This 
cannot be unless there be discipline. The obligation 
of an united pure walk is bound up with the very 
integrity and being of God's assembly. It ceases to 
be the Church of God, unless there be the holy, 
earnest, solemn carrying out of that which the Lord 
has laid down. " Purge out, therefore, the old 
leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are un- 



242 THB BEROURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

leavened." No ruin can touch this reBponsibility 
for a moment. On the other hand, the Lord takes 
care, in His grace, that blessing shall flow, spite of 
failure. 

But there is more than the sovereign action of 
divine grace, where responsibility may have been 
little felt and the will of God misunderstood. The 
Lord watches over those gathered together to Hia 
name, and is there present, in their midst, were they 
but two or three. What unfailing and inestimable 
comfort I Conceive for a moment some Christian 
awakened to feel that the place of a believer is not to 
be a member merely of the ecclesiastical system of 
the country, or of particular views, but, on the con- 
trary, that the only thing which suits and is due to 
Christ, is, that we should renounce — ^we cannot be 
too lowly, but neither can we be too thorough in 
renouncing — every tie that is not connected with 
Christ. Where we can obey Christ in the midst of 
those that are His — ^where the Holy Ghost is allowed 
freedom to work according to the word of God — 
there is God's Church, and nowhere else. The 
liberty of the Spirit is to exalt Christ, and this only. 
This is a imiversal principle, true of an individual, 
and true of the assembly. It would be a miserable 
thing if the assembly were not a scene of true and 
blessed liberty; but such it is, that God may be 
glorified by Christ Jesus. There will be also the con- 
sciousness of that which is offensive, just in propor^ 
tion to the spiritual power that is in the assembly. 
A great or a small company makes no essential 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 243 

difference. The Holy Ghost is sent down to care for 
the interests of the name of Christ. The two or three 
weak and ignorant ones gathered to it at least know 
that they are His ; that they ought not, therefore, 
to belong to man ; that they ought not, theref(»re, to 
be under any other tie ; that rules made by cme, or 
many, or all — ^if they were the very best that were 
ever produced — are not entitled to bind Christians, 
seeing that God has already fiimished the only per- 
fect standard not only of faith, but of Church fellow- 
ship, and that to own another is to dishonour the word 
of God and the Holy Ghost, who is here to make it 
good in power. The question is not whether we can 
do better than others. God forbid. That, indeed, 
were presumption. But this I ask, whoever you 
may be (and I trust that, if you are a Christian, you 
will agree with me) , Which is best, your rules or God's 
word? If God, and not you, be the wiser, how 
came you to invent these rules P You thought the 
word of God insufficient, and you must supply th0 
deficiency! What is the result P Take what is 
going on at the present moment, and in any sociefy 
you like. The very newspapers ring with the scandal 
of what is done under the name of Christ What 
do your rules avail P Neither you nor the wisest of 
men can construct a standard for aU time ; and why 
should it be attempted P God has given His own, 
and His children need no other. 

We have already the only sure and divine rule. 
The only want is the faith to value and act upon it. 
True, the consequences are serious. Faithfulness 
R 2 



244 THE RESOURCE QF THE FAITHFUL. 

to Christ costs much now as ever. But is it not 
a solemn thought that now, in this boasted nine- 
teenth century after the Lord has accomplished 
redemption, we are only awakening, as it were, to 
feel that the word of God is better than the word of 
man P What a discovery ! Yet it is great, as it is 
humbling that it should be a new thing ; a discovery 
which many of the children of God have not yet 
made. All admit that God's word is infinitely wise 
for the soul's salvation. Who, when it is a question 
of eternal issues, would trust his soul to the doctrines 
of men P Then is felt the value of that word which 
reveals the Saviour, and of the blessed Spirit who 
makes the word precious in the revelation of Him. 
But is it not daring to draw these distinctions in the 
word of God, and put aside that which speaks of the 
Church, ministry, worship, the breaking of bread, 
and prayer P How comes it that men should behave 
practically as if God's word had less decision and 
authority in these matters than the shifting thoughts 
of man P How comes it that men so seldom think 
of being guided only by the word of GodP How 
comes it that believers resort as a matter of course 
to human ecclesiastical rules P How comes it, for 
example, that Dissenters, the best of them, when they 
want a minister in the word, proceed at once to elect 
him without a syllable of Scripture for that course P 
Who gave them licence to do so P 

" It must be so ; we have our own doctor and our 

own lawyer, and why not our own minister P" It 

is exactly this worldly pimciglb ^i5aa.\, \Ma& done the 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL* 245 

mischief. Why is not God consulted in His word ? 
How comes it that in Scripture a Church never elects 
a minister ? Of course there must have been many 
who wanted ministerial help in those days as now ; 
and God, who knew aU that is good, must have 
known every want also. How comes it that there was 
never a man chosen by a Christian congregation to 
preach the gospel or teach the saints — ^not a solitary 
instance in the word of God ? They cannot get rid 
of the difficulty. What are they to doP The fact 
is, the dissenting principle is broken at the very 
outset. They cannot step over the threshold. They 
cannot do without a minister, and they cannot elect 
administer according to Scripture. Let us look now, 
not at Congregationalism, but at the two or three 
gathered to the name of Christ. They, too, want 
help, these feeble ones ; and what are they to do ? 
This is the word of their Lord, " Where two or three 
are gathered together unto my name, there am I in 
the midst of them." Qt)d forbid that I should dis- 
parage the advantages of ministry ; but to be simply 
subject to the Lord, whether or not He sends, is the 
best of all. The fact is, as we are not authorized, so 
we have no need, to elect any ; for all are ours already, 
" whether Paul, ApoUos, or Cephas." It is for 
God to choose and give. He has bound up and made 
all His ministers part and parcel of the Church. 
They are members of Christ's body. They are His gifts 
to the Church. It is ignorant and evil meddling 
for the Church to elect. Besides, the moment you 
elect one to be peculiarly yova T£iYDi&\Kt^ Vj *&is^ 



246 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAXTHFITL. 

very act you defraud yourselves of all the rest. Toa 
are going out of the path of God, in orderto enrich 
yourselves in this respect; but that very act of 
selfish haste, like every other departure from the 
path of faith, brings, as the necessary result, the 
surest impoverishment. Suppose, then, people get 
their minister ; he may be but young, and they may 
want to be nourished and fed up in truth. Unless 
he have all the gifts centred in his single person, 
they are reduced to his individual measure. Aii- 
other, again, may be a pastor, and love the saints ; 
but the congregation consists, for the most part, of 
persons needing to be converted, while he is not an 
evangelist, but a pastor, and perhaps a teacher. How 
evident that, if tested thus practically, man's ways 
always ruin Qod's work I The parochial system in 
the established bodies works as much or more evil. 
It may seem natural and prudent, but human 
wisdom in divine things is as foolish as it is fatal. 
What else could be expected, by those who know 
God and man, from a departure from the rich pro- 
vision the Lord has made P 

Let us now look on the other side. The Lord is 
there. The " two or three" do not exactly see their 
way. They are in presence of a great difficulty. 
Perhaps they have heard the whisper of some dread- 
ful doctrine, and they do not understand it, not being 
versed in these matters. What then P They wait 
upon the Lord — a wholesome thing for any of us — 
most vrholeBomQ to be obliged to feel that the Lord 
alone can avail. But Se d.OQ%\Q^^ QXLdL^»x^i<^t^^£i& 



THE RESOURCE OE THE FAITHFUL, 247 

saints. He raises up and sends, it may be, a servant 
of His. The latent evil is brought out plainly ; and 
the moment the light of God, by whatever means, is 
oast upon it, the oonscience of the saints answers to 
the call of the Lord, and they repudiate it heartily 
for themselves. 
^^^ Again, there is one fallen into what may seem a 
little evil, yet enough to render him indifferent to the 
Lord, to His word, to His grace. He refuses to 
listen to the warning of one, then of more, and lastly, 
of the assembly of God. " Let him be unto thee as a 
heathen man." He is not a heathen, but supposed 
to be a brother ; yet he is treated as if he were a 
heathen, because he despises Christ in the Church. 
This in fact is the case here supposed (Matt, xviii). 
Such decision is trying to the heart, wh^e will 
works among the saints. But it shows plainly that 
not their wisdom nor their experience guides aright, 
but the Lord in their midst; and He promises His 
presence if it were but to two or three gathered to His 
name. Here then we have a clear and positive pro- 
vision for the faithftd in the worst of times. It is 
hardly possible to conceive of circumstances where 
there might not be " two or three." 

It is well, however, to add that the essential point 
is their gathering to His name. It is not such a 
gathering unto Christ, where narrowness is allowed, 
or sectarianism, any more than in the grosser forms of 
letting in the world or tolerating evil. If any " two 
or three" were so happy together, as to look with 
suspicion on godly men outeidft t\i^TCL^ ^Jokjs^ ^^n^^ 



248 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFLL. 

forfeit their place of privilege, and be in a false 
position. Does the Lord so regard His disciples? 
Does He scrutinize them as if they were doubtftil 
characters, or put them in quarantine as if the 
plague might be in them P I speak of saints where 
there is no suspicion of evil doctrine, direct or in- 
direct, or of unholy walk. The Lord welcomes them, 
and so should we. His name has not its value where 
we are not large for His sake. 

But there may be another case. A person comes, 
of great repute in the world, who has been preaching, 
and is universally respected; but alas! he betrays 
himself by a lack of heart and conscience where 
Christ is concerned. Him they refiise. Thus the 
same name of Christ, which is their warrant for 
welcoming the weakest that loves Him, is here 
exactly the same power for refusing the highest who 
does not love our Lord Jesus Christ in inoorruption. 
What might is in that name to bring and keep 
together hearts otherwise alien, and yet withal what 
a delicate test for detecting and excluding what is 
not of God ! If it be a question of truth, the name of 
the Lord is the only real touchstone ; if it be a 
question of discipline, that name is strength to the 
feeblest heart ; if it be a question between persons 
and principle, there only is found all needed wisdom 
and power, both individually and as regards the 



But let us look now at 2 Tim. ii. We have a 
picture drawn by the Holy Ghost of the professing 
bodjTf the house of God. T\io &w»\. ^y^M^ AxvL^ caiea 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL, 249 

for order and good government in the house of God. 
The second epistle anticipates the influx of evils to 
fiuch an extent, that the house is merely alluded to as 
a comparison. Still " the foundation of God standeth 
sure, having this seal," — on one side, "The Lord 
knoweth them that are His," and on the other, " Let 
every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart 
from iniquity." There are thus the sovereignty of 
the Lord on one side, and just responsibility on the 
other — ^two great principles which meet us every- 
where. Then follows a more detailed application :-^ 
" But in a great house there are not only vessels of 
gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and 
some to honour and some to dishonour." Some 
would take the place of knowing the Lord whom He 
did not own, and who felt not the incongruity of 
His name with iniquity. Timothy must be pre- 
pared for the development of evil among those that 
confess Christ — ^not only " some to honour" but "some 
to dishonour." " If a man therefore purge himself 
from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sancti- 
fied and meet for the Master's use,, and prepared 
imto every good work." Separation from evil is the 
invariable principle of God, modified as to the 
manner, of course, by the special character of the 
dispensation. So Isaiah, Jeremiah and the prophets 
generally. Is Christianity less stringent ? It is now, 
on the contrary, that it becomes more urgent and 
absolute. " If a man purge himself from these [the 
vessels to dishonour], he shall be a vessel to honour." 
Put away the wicked (1 Cor. v.^ \\£Ai!ca^\i^\i<:i\^\sj^55t 



250 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL, 

possible, purge yourself out from them. There is 
nothing man dreads and feels so deeply. You may 
protest, you may denounce, and it will be borne by 
the world as long as you walk with it in the main ; 
but " he that departeth," now, as ever, " maketh him- 
self a prey." Act on your oonvictions, and the most 
honeyed courtesy turns sour ; your desire to please 
God at all cost will be branded as PharisaiGal 
pride and exclusiveness. It matters not how gently 
and lovingly you purge yourself from the vessels io 
dishonour; the pain, the grievance lies there, and 
nothing can sweeten it, above all in the eyes of those 
it condemns. Indeed it is more felt, the more 
graciously it is done, provided it be done thoroughly; 
for then, evidently, your motive is not disappointed 
feeling, but desire to be whoUy subject to Christ, 
with a heart perfectly happy in what they know 
nothing of and could not enjoy. 

All this is an unpardonable affiront in the world's 
eyes. Add to this, that separation is claimed, in 
2 Tim., from the religious or Christian world. "The 
Christian world !" what a phrase ! what a contradic- 
tion! as if there could be the smallest possible 
alliance between Christianity, which is of heaven and 
Christ, and that outside world which crucified HiTn. 
No wonder that in this epistle we read of perilous 
times in the last days. What greater peril than, after 
they have known the truth, going back into the sub- 
stantially same conditions of evil as were found in 
the heathen world before Christianity entered it. 
Compare 2 Tim. iii. with Eiom. \. liorw ^«is&i5L\!aft 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFITL. 251 

resemblance! The difference is, that some of the 
grosser characteristios of heathenism have been re- 
placed by subtler evil. The comparison is most 
instructive. In this state of things, the Christian 
profession is indeed a great house ; and, as in such 
a house, there is that which is destined to the basest 
uses, no less than what is for the best purposes, so in 
that great house which bears the name of Christ— 
if you please, " the Christian world " 

If there, what ought you to do P It is a solemn 
question for the believer. He has no hesitation about 
the profane world ; but the world bearing the name 
of Christ is a difficulty to him. Seeing that the 
Christian profession is there, am I not setting myself 
up and virtually condemning the excellent of the 
earth? But will you name any evil thing that 
has not had a good name attached to it ? I do not 
speak now of such fatal poison as Socinianism or 
the like ; but take Eomanism, or the Gtreek Church, 
or even sects known to be heretical, and yet, by the 
malice of the enemy and the subtlety with which he 
has concealed his work, some children of Grod have 
been entangled. It is too plain, therefore, that, what* 
ever good men may do here or there, the only real 
inquiry is as to the will of the Lord. It is not a ques* 
tion of making others walk in your light, but you 
must not walk in their darkness. This is the great 
point, not occupying ourselves with others, prescrib- 
ing what they must do, but feeling my own sin, as 
well as the common sin, yet by grace resolved at all 
costs to be where I can honova asA ^^«j^ SSafe\jRst^ 



252 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

Is this not a true, plain, imperative duty, an undeni- 
able principle of Scripture, that commends itself to 
your conscience P It may be that you do not act 
accordingly ; but you cannot deny that it is a right 
thing, and what you ought to do. 

But you are tied, and have diiSBlculties. Perhaps 
you have a family and friends you cannot bear to 
grieve ; perhaps you have hopes for your children, if 
not for yourself. Can a heart purified by faith thus 
set aside the Lord's word P Do you think He does 
not know your wants, and does not feel for your 
family P You know the Lord loves yourself; cannot 
you trust Him for a bit of bread ? You, who are 
trusting Him for eternal life and for heaven, cannot 
you trust Him to take care of you in the face of these 
trials and obstacles of every day P Perhaps you are 
too comfortable, too anxious about what is respect- 
able for yourself and your children. Let the Lord 
deal with you ; I am sure He will not harm you, but 
only do what is most loving and tender towards you 
and yours. Impossible for any heart to be beyond 
the Lord's love, and wi$dom, and generous, con- 
siderate care. If you really believe in Him, why not 
cleave to His word without compact or condition, 
and come forth at His bidding P You do not know 
what the next steps may be. It is enough that you 
know you are doing contrary to the word of God 
now. In vain we talk of loving, if we are not pre- 
pared to follow His word. Do you say you do not 
know what next to do P The Lord does not ask you; 
it 28 not TTia way to show aW. at oncfe. ks^ crcL^\^ 



THE RESOURCE OP THE FAITHFUL. 253 

you see from the word, and trust the Lord for what 
will follow. He is worthy of your confidence, and 
will give you more when you have taken the first 
step. But leave for ever that which is condemned in 
God's word. " Eemember Lot's wife," and look not 
back, but go forth at His word wherever it points, 
and you will find that " whosoever hath, to him shall 
be given." And as regards the way, to the Lord, rough 
or smooth, is alike, deep or shallow, great or small ; 
it may make a great diflference to you, but the 
greatest difficulties only become the means of proving 
what the God is that we have foimd. 

But there is more in 2 Tim. ii. Not only are you 
to separate, or purge yourself, from these vessels of 
dishonour, but the word is, " Flee also youthful lusts, 
but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with 
them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart." Thus 
there is no excuse for isolation. Turn your back 
upon what you know is opposed to Scripture. Have 
I to demonstrate to any Christian that what is un- 
scriptural is unholy P Have I to urge that " to him 
that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it 
is sin ?" If, then, you abandon what has no warrant 
from Scripture, but, on the contrary, is condemned 
by it, hear this word of God : " Follow righteousness, 
faith, charity, peace." Follow them, not solitarily, 
but " with them that call on the Lord out of a pure 
heart." What consolation, even if there were but 
two or three ! Are you afraid because there are only 
two or three ? God may act on himdreds or thou- 
sands : this is a matter for Him. You are to follow 



254 THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 

the Lord's path through His word, with chastened 
spirit yet not sadly, but fiill of joy and thankfulness, 
if you find ever so few who call upon the Lord out 
of a pure heart. Li other words, faith has a divine 
warrant to expect companions in its path, though it 
lie now through the ruins of the Christian profession. 
As it is imperative to turn away from all known 
evil, and there can be no valid excuse for refusing 
God's call, so there is enjoined companionship in 
following after righteousness, futh, charity, and 
peace, with such as call upon the Lord out of a pure 
heart. May no hindrances nor dangers alarm, but, 
knowing that it is the Lord who has thus graciously 
thought of us, may you and I, and every one that 
loves that blessed name, have unbroken confidence in 
Him ! He addresses Himself to hearts grieved in 
the midst of dishonour to His grace and' truth, and 
He has taken care to mark most distinctly the path, 
not of separation only, but of association ; the path 
of departure from evil, and of pursuing what is good. 
How clearly the great moral principles of God re- 
maia in spite of disorder I How the operations of His 
grace survive all ruin I Thus, the principle of the as- 
sembly of God abides in, it may be, only two or three, 
gathered to the name of the Lord. Thousands of 
Christians, in a national system or in a dissenting sect, 
oould not redeem their fundamental error ; members 
of Christ may be in them, but the principle of God's 
assembly is abandoned in their very constitution. 
Let "two or three" come out at the word of the 
Lord, mating His name thevc oeok^, and owning 



THE RESOURCE OP THE FAITHFDL. 255 

the Spirit of Orod as in and with them to guide them 
according to Scripture; these, and these only, are 
carrying out His mind in the real intelligence of the 
Holy Ghhost. It is no question of numbers, but of 
being gathered together, few* or many, unto the 
name of the Lord. 

All here know what the House of Commons is. 
A hundred members of that House might belong to 
the United Service Club, or the Athenaeum, or any- 
thing else you please. These hundred members 
might discuss the measures actually before the 
House in their club ; but this could never make 
the club to be the House; whereas, in their true 
position, with the Speaker in the midst, a much less 
number would constitute a House. It is exactly 
the same principle here. What constitutes God's 
assembly ? " Two or three " gathered to the Lord's 
name. He has been pleased to bring it down to the 
point described, with the fullest possible stamp of 
His approval and authority. 

On the other hand, suppose ten thousand Christians 
meeting simply as Christians — ^is that enough P I 
can conceive an assembly of professing, yea, real 
Christians ; and yet there would be no more reason 
to call them God's assembly, than to consider any 
number of members at their dub the House of Com- 
mons. It is not the fact of being Christians that 
constitutes Gt)d's assembly, but their being gathered 
unto the name of the Lord. The true difference is, 
whether we are gathered to the name of Christians 
merely, or to the name of Christ. If the former, 



256 THE RESOURCE OP THE FAITHFUL. 

you must accept of any evil thing into which thd 
enemy succeeds in dragging Christians. For if the 
man be a Christian, I must receive him, spite of evil 
he is doing or sanctioning. But no ! the question is, 
Does he call upon the Lord out of a pure heart ? 
The exclusion of this word of God has widely over- 
run Christendom, to the incalculable injury of souls, 
and never more than now, when men practically put 
Christians in lieu of Christ, the consequence of which 
is confusion and every evil work. 

Whereas, if the Lord have His place, and be the 
centre to which I come, I have then, in His name, a 
groimd and rallying point to which I can claim, 
with the most entire himiility, every saint on the 
world — ^yea, I could not and ought not to rest in my 
spirit as long as there is outside one that belongs to 
Him. What! even those imder discipline, or avoided 
for grave causes P Yes, every one ; not, of course, to 
receive them with known evil upon them, but yet to 
desire themselves, what is contrary to Christ being 
judged and removed. 

The Lord make us steadfast, and give us to feel 
that the lowliest spirit becomes us ! How can we 
boast of ceasing to do evil we ourselves have done ? 
May we look to Him increasingly ! He who has 
brought us out has compelled us to prove by our own 
difficulties the true state of the Church; but He 
has turned to profit our very mistakes, thottgh in a 
humbling way. He has used the storm, as it were, 
to purge the hazy air, and AiB5\a.^^d. more clearly 



THE RESOURCE OF THE FAITHFUL. 257 

than ever the central place of His own name for our 
gathering together, no less than our salvation. 

Thus, we may leave all fears and anxieties. K 
the Lord be our helper, why fear ? What will man 
do ? — ^Then, as for charges of sectarianism, presump- 
tion, or disorder, it were easy indeed to show that 
those are really guilty who are quick to raise and 
scatter them. We know that Scripture condemns 
every church association that is not based on and 
governed by the name of Christ. It is not a mere 
question of wrongs here or there; but are they 
Christians gathered to the name of Christ P Neither 
is it a question of the amoimt of evil ; for what did 
not slip in at Corinth through ignorance and un- 
watchfiilness ? The refusal to judge known evil is 
no doubt fatal. But supposing the absence of every- 
thing gross, the true question is, Are we where the 
Lord would have us beP Then happy are we, if 
but "two or three thus:" were we ten millions 
anywhere else, all must be wrong, because Christ is 
not the acknowledged and exclusive centre ecclesi- 
astically. He who is the only adequate and rightful 
object for all the saints on earth, deigns to be the 
centre of but " two or three," as He says, that are 
" gathered together unto ^j^ name." 



W, H. Collingridge, 117 to 119, A\d«TC%«X«^\.T««\.«\iCixA<()\v^^^. 



