V  •:•   /•■ 


/ 


tttC.  join  V 

thb'ol"ogig*V 


BV  601  .K455  1865 
Kelly,  William,  1821-1906. 
Six  lectures  on  fundamental 
truths  connected  with  the 


L 


A, 


SIX  LECTURES 


FUNDAMENTAL  TKUTHS 


CONNECTED  WITH 


THE    CHURCH   OF   GOD. 


W.    KELLY. 


LONDON : 
W.   H.    BROOM,    34,    PATERNOSTER    ROW; 

G.  MORRISH,  24,  WARWICK  LANE,  PATERNOSTER  ROW; 
E.  CROCKER,  28,  PENTON  STREET,  N. 

18G5. 


■ 
PHIITC3T0IT 


7H2QL0GIC1L 

SYNOPSIS, 


LECTURE  I. 

ONE    BODY. 

Difference  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people  in  the  past  and  present  dis- 
pensations ;  Adam ;  Abraham;  Israel  as  a  nation;  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ  introduce  a  new  thing ;  the  body  composed  of  Jew  and  Gentile ;  the 
cross,  showing  the  complete  ruin  of  man,  removes  the  barrier  to  God's  free 
action;  God's  thoughts  set  upon  the  glory  of  His  Son;  first  shadow  of  the 
Church's  union  with  Christ  precedes  the  entrance  of  sin;  Ephes.  i.  is  then 
adduced  to  show  that  God  develops  His  counsels  of  grace  before  mentioning 
man's  sin ;  the  cross  not  merely  meets  the  desperate  need  of  man,  but  unites 
in  one  body  Jew  and  Gentile  ;  a  new  man  thus  created ;  a  habitation  in  which 
God  could  dwell;  Christ,  God's  true  temple  while  on  earth ;  the  truth  of  the  one 
body  claims  the  attention  of  all  Christians ;  human  and  divine  relationships  ; 
Satan's  grand  object  to  hinder  the  present  operation  of  God  in  the  saints ; 
and  succeeds  at  man's  weak  point  in  that  man  likes  to  be  something ;  and 
so  easily  falls  a  prey  to  the  working  of  the  enemy ;  the  glory  of  Christ's  Per- 
son as  maintained  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  mainspring  of  the  life  and  con- 
versation of  a  Christian  man ;  difficulties  met  with  in  reasoning  about  the 
Church  on  Old  Testament  analogy ;  Christ  Head  of  His  body  in  resurrection ; 
consequently  the  body  is  heavenly  as  in  the  Head ;  "  Christian  "  means  more 
than  "  Saint ;"  bearing  of  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  on  the  one  body ;  servants 
and  children ;  a  Jew  could  never  have  put  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  to- 
gether ;  the  cross  the  foundation  of  a  new  revelation ;  what  is  the  unity  of 
the  Spirit  ?  Christians  act  on  this  unity  only  when  gathered  to  the  name  of 


IV  SYNOPSIS. 

Christ;  God's  grace  in  reviving  this  truth  in  view  of  the  Lord's  speedy 
coming;  exhortation  to  younger  brethren  and  sisters;  the  word  of  God  the 
only  standard ;  "the  world,"  and  "  within  and  without;"  my  place  as  a 
Christian;  separation;  conclusion. 


LECTURE  II. 


ONE    SPIRIT. 


Personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  former  dispen- 
sations ;  Jewish  and  Gentile  view  of  Christ ;  disappointment  of  Jewish  hopes; 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven  is,  next  to  Christ,  the  central  truth  of 
the  New  Testament ;  disciples  prepared  for  the  doctrine  of  the  Spirit ;  Holy 
Ghost  not  merely  a  power,  a  Person ;  why  He  cannot  be  known  by  the 
world;  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  by  the  Father  in  Christ's  name,  and  sent  by 
Christ  from  the  Father ;  God  glorified  in  exalting  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  ; 
the  righteousness  of  God ;  Peter's  boldness  by  reason  of  a  purged  conscience ; 
in  the  Trinity,  subordination  of  Persons  unscriptural ;  the  double  relation  of 
the  Holy  Ghost— to  the  world  and  to  the  saints ;  communication  of  risen  life 
by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  Holy  Ghost  on  earth  in  the  absence  of  Christ ;  miracu- 
lous tokens  of  the  Spirit's  presence  at  the  outset ;  grieving  the  Spirit ;  the 
testimony  of  the  Acts  to  the  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  the  teaching  of  the 
Epistles  as  to  His  presence  both  in  the  individual  and  in  the  Church ;  the 
opening  of  1st  Corinthians  shows  the  perpetuity  of  the  Holy  Ghost's 
action  in  the  Church  so  long  as  it  is  here  below ;  reason  for  the  discontinu- 
ance of  miracles ;  God's  wisdom  in  withholding  them  now ;  the  Spirit  the 
pledge  of  God's  delight  in  the  work  of  His  Son:  Christ's  twofold  reception 
of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  practical  importance  of  these  truths ;  how  the  Holy 
Ghost  works  in  the  assembly ;  duty  of  a  Christian  to  be  where  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  owned ;  why  the  Church  is  so  weak ;  owning  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not 
hinder  individual  ministry ;  true  reason  of  meeting  is  to  please  the  Lord 
Jesus  ;  charge  of  bigotry  weighed ;  why  ask  people  to  come  with  me,  while 
I  do  not  go  with  them  ?  search  the  word  of  God  for  "yourself ;  conclusion. 


ipsis.  v 

LECTURE  III. 

THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

Assembly  and  ministry  alike  flow  from  the  accomplished  work  of 
Christ;  "Assembly,"  rather  than  "  Church ;"  the  Rock  upon  which  it  is 
built ;  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God ;  building  of  the  assembly  future  in 
Matt,  xvi;  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit;  consideration  of  the  term  " invisible 
Church;"  no  church  till  the  death  of  Christ;  the  congregation  of  Jehovah; 
position  of  "  such  as  should  be  saved;"  critical  remarks  upon  Acts  ix,  31 ; 
authority  for  the  same ;  the  case  of  the  trespassing  brother ;  grace  in  action 
instead  of  law ;  a  mistake  often  made  about  what  love  is ;  the  ordering  of 
the  assembly  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  tests— not  as  to  who  are  Christians,  but 
what  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  two  things  maintained  by  the  Holy  Ghost— the 
glory  of  Christ  as  to  His  Person,  and  the  Lordship  of  Christ  as  to  His  place ; 
assembly  not  dependent  upon  age  or  country ;  the  infant  Church  at  Corinth ; 
their  new-born  exuberance ;  how  to  use  a  gift ;  the  meaning  of  the  term 
"prophesying;"  all  to  be  done  to  edifying ;  a  revelation  not  possible  now; 
the  canon  of  Scripture  closed ;  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  assembly  ; 
a  member  of  the  Church  of  God  a  member  everywhere ;  difference  between 
a  Church  and  the  Church  ;  letters  of  commendation ;  our  duty  not  to  form  a 
new  Church,  but  to  cleave  to  the  old ;  Jesus  in  the  midst ;  where  were  you 
last  Lord's  Day  ?  how  God  can  bless  even  Roman  Catholics ;  what  the  faith- 
ful are  to  do  who  meet  on  God's  principles ;  unintelligence  of  those  who 
have  never  felt  the  cost  of  separation  from  the  ruin  around ;  duty  of  a  Chris- 
tian in  the  event  of  an  assembly  departing  from  the  word  of  God ;  action  to 
be  taken  slowly,  and  with  much  waiting  on  the  Lord ;  Ministry ;  the  Lord 
calls,  sends,  and  controls,  not  the  assembly;  preachers  sent  by  men  an 
usurpation  of  the  Lord's  prerogative ;  the  case  of  Philip ;  Paul  and  Apollos  ; 
difference  of  judgment  recorded  without  censure ;  case  of  Barnabas  and  Saul ; 
co-operation  in  ministry  allowed  so  long  as  there  is  no  bondage ;  subjection 
to  chief  men ;  review  of  the  two  lines  of  truth  sketched ;  fluctuation  in  the 
Church,  none  in  Christ ;  conclusion. 


VI  SYNOPSIS. 

LECTURE  IV. 

WORSHIP,    BREAKING    OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER. 

What  is  worship?  state  of  soul  needed  for  worship;  sin  and  shame  of  man's 
interference  with  the  worship  of  God;  our  privilege  to  say  "  We  know;"  man, 
unless  horn  of  God,  incapable  of  worshipping  Him;  the  great  principle  of  wor- 
ship shown  in  the  word  to  the  Samaritan  woman  ;  under  the  law  God  hid  Him- 
self; under  grace  He  revealed  Himself ;  three  things  necessary  to  worship;  where 
ought  men  to  worship?  God's  title  of  Father  not  made  known  to  Israel ;  God  the 
Father  in  quest  of  worshippers;  the  Jewish  lamp  replaced  by  the  brightness  of 
the  Father's  glory  ;  do  not  forget  that  our  Father  is  also  our  God ;  what  am  I  to 
do  if  asked  to  join  in  worship  ?  fleshly  worship  suits  a  fleshly  state  ;  what  happens 
when  Christian  worship  is  unknown  or  forgotten;  preaching  the  Gospel  not  to  be 
confounded  with  worship;  worship  founded  on  Christ  (dead,  risen,  and  ascended), 
and  carried  on  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  position  of  the  unbelievers  pre- 
sent where  the  assembly  is  gathered;  who  can  sing,  and  say  Amen;  how  many 
may  take  active  part  in  the  assembly;  on  giving  out  hymns  ;  criticism  ;  breaking 
bread;  the  Lord's  Supper ;  characteristics  of  the  first  day  of  the  week;  prime 
object  of  the  Sapper  is  to  remember  the  Lord's  death  ;  when  should  the  bread  be 
broken?  strangeness  of  pi-ocedure  to  those  habituated  to  rigid  forms;  thoughts 
sometimes  expressed  by  those  who  have  broken  bread  ;  what  happened  among  the 
Corinthians  through  not  duly  apprehending  the  character  of  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per;  the  practice  of  appointing  particular  officials  considered;  the  character  of 
the  Supper  impugned  if  any  official  be  appointed  by  man  to  administer  it ;  the 
Supper  leaves  no  room  for  human  display  ;  what  is  the  meaning  of  1  Cor.  xi,  29  ? 
the  Lord's  Supper  a  sweet  privilege  as  well  as  a  solemn  duty  for  all  His  own  ; 
Prayer— Scripture  does  not  speak  of  a  " gift  of  prayer;"  the  apostle  lays  down  as 
a  rule,  that  men  pray  everywhere  ;  conclusion. 


LEGTUEE  V. 

GIFTS  AND  LOCAL  CHARGES. 

Dryness  of  subject  unless  connection  seen  with  Christ;  gifts  are  for  the  glory  of 
Christ,  not  the  aggrandisement  of  men  ;  indifference  to  this  a  deep  dishonour  done 
to  Him  ;  "gifts  of  the  Lord,"  not  "gifts  of  the  Spirit;"  gifts  consequent  upon 
the  ascension  of  Christ ;  contraband  ministry ;  "  He  descended  first ;"  "  He  ascended 


SYNOPSIS.  VI I 

that  He  might  fill  all  things ;"  the  world  can  admire  Christ  and  Christianity 
if  altered  to  suit  the  age's  taste ;  Christ,  only  as  risen,  the  Church's  Head ;  gifts  in 
Ephesians  and  Corinthians  compared ;  gifts  in  Corinthians  became  a  snare,  those 
in  Ephesians  are  for  perfecting ;  "  apostles  and  prophets ;"  not  prophets  and  apos- 
tles; character  of  ministry  in  the  Church  quite  distinct  from  that  which  obtained 
while  the  Lord  was  on  earth  ;  the  mission  of  the  twelve  to  Israel ;  earthly  glory 
of  Messiah  fades  and  is  eclipsed  by  heavenly  glory ;  who  laid  hands  on  the  apos- 
tles? Saul's  call  when  going,  not  to,  but  from  Jerusalem  ;  Paul  a  sample  of  one 
whom  the  Lord  calls  to  be  a  minister ;  how  God  has  made  the  great  apostle  the 
witness  of  non-succession;  the  service  of  tables;  as  far  as  the  New  Testament 
speaks,  no  one  was  ever  ordained  by  man  to  preach  the  gospel ;  Acts  xiii ;  Arch- 
bishop Potter  on  Church  Government ;  the  separation  of  Barnabas  and  Saul  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  for  special  work ;  if  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  ordained  in  the  current 
sense,  then  the  lesser  ordained  the  greater ;  what  this  laying  on  of  hands  signified  ; 
the  silence  of  Scripture  respecting  the  laying  of  hands  on  presbyters  ;  the  abso- 
lute necessity  of  having  a  real  commission  from  the  Lord,  in  order  to  appoint  to 
office ;  Christendom  while  fighting  for  its  own  order  has  missed  God's ;  qualifica- 
tion for  eldership ;  an  unruly  house  a  disqualification  for  eldership ;  the  word  of 
God  nowhere  hints  at  the  continuance  of  an  ordaining  power ;  the  case  of  Titus ; 
man's  ordination  puts  one  off  the  ground  of  faith  in,  and  deference  to,  the  word 
of  God ;  foolishness  of  making  a  bad  imitation  of  what  was  written  exclusively  to 
Timothy  or  Titus ;  elders  never  mentioned  as  giving  gifts ;  deprecation  of  the 
thought  that  the  Holy  Ghost  can  be  conveyed  by  ordination  ;  how  to  judge  of  the 
possession  of  a  gift ;  gifts  to  be  proved  by  their  power,  according  to  the  word  of 
God ;  gifts  sooner  or  later,  sure  to  be  recognised ;  difficulties  of  one  who  has  used 
a  gift  for  a  livelihood ;  dissent  is  religious  radicalism  ;  the  value  of  the  word  of  God 
for  guidance  as  to  ministry  and  Church  office ;  persons  having  qualification  for 
eldership  may  still  be  found ;  but  no  power  to  ordain  them  as  such  ;  Scripture  has 
provided  for  this  defective  condition  of  the  Church ;  exhortation  to  esteem  those 
who  labour ;  elders  not  mentioned  in  the  Corinthian  and  Thessalonian  assemblies  ; 
but  those  who  possessed  spiritual  power  in  guiding  and  directing,  found  in  both  ; 
no  new  invention  needed  to  meet  the  difficulties  of  the  day ;  fulness  of  blessing  in 
Christ  for  the  Church  now  as  in  Pentecostal  times ;  plenty  of  room  in  an  assembly 
for  numerous  gifts ;  gifts  always  sure,  because  Christ  is  the  Head  and  source  of 
supply ;  conclusion.    Note  on  Acts  xiv,  23. 


Vlll  SYNOPSIS. 


LECTURE  VI. 

THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL    IN    THE    RUINS    OF 
CHRISTENDOM. 

Solemnity  of  the  subject ;  Christ's  words  of  light  require  no  tapers  of  man  to 
make  them  more  distinct ;  dishonour  to  the  name  of  Jesus  in  Christendom ;  differ- 
ence between  owning  the  ruin  and  endeavouring  to  reinstate  the  Church  ;  the 
Church  of  God  the  greatest  work,  next  to  the  cross,  that  God  has  ever  wrought  on 
the  earth ;  to  slight  it  is  worse  than  any  evil  of  former  days;  the  days  of  Noah 
followed  by  the  flood,  and  the  days  of  Lot  followed  by  the  destruction  of  Sodom , 
types  of  the  day  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  revealed;  Christendom's  danger 
seen  in  Rom.  xi ;  its  non-continuance  in  God's  goodness;  its  excision;  its  apos- 
tacy  apparent  from  the  first ;  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  man  of  righteousness  ; 
Antichrist;  Cain,  Balaam,  Core;  he  who  defends  Christendom,  gives  the  Lord  the 
lie  ;  deprecation  of  the  apology,  that  the  Lord  will  set  all  right ;  unsparing  judg- 
ment His  action  when  He  comes  ;  the  Lord's  provision  for  the  faithful  in  the  dark 
day  ;  the  Lord's  own  weight  of  authority  attached  to  "two  or  three  "  gathered  to 
His  name ;  no  wonder  men  shrink  from  Church  discipline,  seeing  how  it  has  been 
abused ;  the  duty  of  a  believer,  to  renounce  every  tie  not  connected  with  Christ ; 
which  is  best,  your  rules  or  God's  word?  how  is  it  that  the  doctrines  of  men  have 
taken  the  place  of  the  word  of  God  ?  electing  a  minister,  wholly  at  variance  with 
Scripture ;  evils  resulting  from  the  dissenting  and  parochial  systems ;  advice  to 
saints  taking  their  place  with  the  "two  or  three,"  how  to  detect  and  exclude  what 
is  not  of  God;  the  great  house,  and  who  to  separate  from;  "He  that  departeth 
from  evil  maketh  himself  a  prey  ;"  "The  Christian  World,"  or  evil  with  the  name 
of  Christ  attached  to  it;  trusting  the  Lord  for  eternal  life,  and  denying  Him  for  a 
bit  of  bread ;  what  to  flee  and  what  to  follow  (2  Tim.  ii.)  ;  Christ  addresses  Him- 
self to  hearts,  grieved  at  the  dishonour  done  to  His  grace  and  truth ;  illustration 
of  a  rightly  and  wrongly  constituted  assembly ;  Christ  the  centre  and  rallying 
point ;  no  ground  for  fear,  if  the  Lord  be  the  helper ;  conclusion. 


"ONE   BODY." 

Eph.  iv. 

LECTURE  I. 


The  subject  on  which  I  propose,  with  the  Lord's 
help,  to  enter  to-night,  is  the  one  body,  the  body 
of  Christ ;  and  this,  too,  not  only  as  a  great  doc- 
trine which  the  Holy  Grhost  has  laid  down  with 
the  utmost  clearness,  and  throughout  a  considerable 
part  of  the  New  Testament,  but  also,  as  far  as  I  am 
able  in  a  short  space,  deducing  some  of  its  practical 
consequences,  and  showing  its  bearing  upon  the 
communion  and  the  conduct  of  every  member  of 
it,  that  is,  of  every  Christian. 

Now,  in  order  to  develop  the  special  characteristics 
of  Christ's  body,  it  will  be  necessary  to  explain  how 
it  differed  from  that  which  God  revealed,  or  set  up, 
in  past  dispensations  ;  for  there  are  distinctions,  and 
even  contrasts,  between  the  past  dealings  of  Grod 
and  that  which  He  is  now  accomplishing  to  the 
honour  of  His  beloved  Son.     While  there  was,  of 

B 


Z  ONE    BODY. 

course,  always  the  only  true  Grod;  while  He  had 
in  times  past  those  He  loved  upon  earth  ;  while  He 
ever  wrought  by  His  Spirit ;  while  there  was  neces- 
sarily faith  at  work  in  order  to  the  blessing  of  souls ; 
yet  for  all  that,  there  are  essential  and  deeply  impor- 
tant differences,  which  none  can  overlook  without 
loss  to  himself,  without  sure  weakening  of  his  testi- 
mony to  others,  and,  above  all,  without  coming 
short  of  the  just  perception  of  what  God  Himself 
has  nearest  to  His  own  heart — His  own  glory  in 
Christ. 

Now,  it  is  perfectly  plain,  if  we  take  up  the  Old 
Testament,  that  when  man  fell  into  sin,  Grod  gave 
certain  revelations  of  blessing,  all  of  which  find  their 
centre  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  see  this  from  the  very 
beginning  of  Genesis.  When  sin  entered,  not  only 
righteous  government,  but  grace  instantly  followed. 
Grod  was  there ;  and  in  the  presence  of  the  guilty 
pair,  and  in  defiance  of  the  serpent,  the  mercy  of 
Grod  spoke  of  that  same  blessed  One,  of  whom  we 
are  about  to  hear  further  and  deeper  glories.  In  due 
time  Grod  brought  out,  in  a  distinct  and  personal 
manner,  blessings  in  connexion  with  Abraham  and 
his  seed.  There  we  have  the  domain  of  promise — 
not  only  revelation  and  mercy,  but  distinct  promise 
to  a  given  person,  and  to  his  seed.  This  had  not  been 
the  case  in  the  garden  of  Eden.  Man  fell  there ;  and 
it  is  evident  that  fallen  man  could  not  possibly  be 
the  object  of  the  promise  of  God.  There  are  pro- 
mises for  such  :  there  could  not  be  a  promise  to  such. 
When  Abraham  received  the  promise,  he  was  not  a 


ONE    BODY.  6 

fallen  man  merely,  bnt  a  believing  man.  It  was  as 
one  elect,  called,  and  faithful,  that  God  made  him 
the  depository  of  promise.  But  it  was  when  Adam 
fell,  before  there  was  anything  of  the  operation  of 
divine  grace  in  him ;  it  was  when  he  and  Eve  had  com- 
pletely separated  themselves  from  Grod,  that  mercy, 
entirely  irrespective  of  their  condition  or  desert,  held 
out  a  revelation  of  grace  in  the  person  of  Christ. 
The  woman's  seed  was  presented  more  particularly 
as  the  destroyer  of  him  that  had  wrought  this  deep 
and,  as  far  as  it  went,  irreparable  mischief — irrepar- 
able to  the  creature,  but  only  furnishing  the  oppor- 
tunity for  God  to  bring  out  His  own  grace  to  the 
glory  of  Him  who,  bruised  Himself,  was  to  bruise 
the  serpent's  head. 

The  effect  of  the  promise  to  Abraham  was  that  a 
family  was  set  apart  unto  Grod,  and,  in  due  time,  a 
nation.  Next,  we  find  that,  as  this  nation  was  full 
of  confidence  in  its  own  powers,  Grod  was  pleased,  in 
the  wisdom  of  His  ways,  to  try  them  by  the  law, 
as  we  all  know,  given  at  Sinai.  I  need  not  enter  into 
the  details,  but  just  state  the  general  outline  of  the 
divine  dealings,  for  the  purpose  of  clearing  my  sub- 
ject. But  the  issue  of  that  trial,  however  long  Grod 
might  delay,  was  not  doubtful  for  a  moment ;  for  at 
the  very  mountain  where  Grod  spoke,  the  children  of 
Israel  set  at  nought  the  authority  and  the  glory  of 
Grod,  and  bowed  down  to  the  work  of  their  own  hands  : 
that  is,  the  law,  as  a  moral  question  between  God 
and  man,  was  overthrown  from  its  very  foundations  at 
the  outset.  God  lingered — long  lingered — in  patience, 
b  2 


4  ONE    BODY. 

and  meanwhile  brought  out  His  ways  in  every  pos- 
sible variety.  The  crowning  experiment  of  all  was 
the  presence  of  Christ,  the  seed  of  the  woman,  and 
the  seed  of  promise,  too ;  for  now  came  the  Person 
who  answered  to  all  the  revelations  and  promises,  the 
ways,  and  types,  and  prophecies  of  God.  He  came, 
in  whose  Person  was  found  all  that  was  worthy  of 
God,  and  that  was  suited  to  man.  But  the  coming 
of  Christ  brought  out  the  awful  truth,  not  only  that 
man  is  himself  corrupt,  depraved,  and  loves  his  own 
will,  but  that  he  hates  goodness — yea,  divine  goodness 
— in  a  man.  He  is  the  enemy  of  God  when  manifest- 
ing Himself  in  the  most  blessed  manner — in  His  own 
Son  ;  when  manifesting  Himself,  not  only  in  power — 
for  we  can  understand  a  guilty  creature  alarmed  at  holy 
power — but  in  perfect  love,  coming  down  in  humilia- 
tion, putting  Himself  at  the  foot  of  man,  beseeching 
man ;  for  this  is  in  truth  not  a  figure  or  exaggeration 
of  man's  mind,  but  God's  own  word.  Hear  His 
description  of  it :  "  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the 
world  unto  Himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses 
unto  them,  and  hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of 
reconciliation.  Now,  then,  we  are  ambassadors  for 
Christ,  as  though  God  did  beseech  by  us"  &c.  This 
love  beseeching  sinnors  was  the  attribute  of  divine 
grace  in  the  person  of  Christ.  What  was  the 
result?  That  man  proved  there  was  no  possibility 
of  extricating  himself  by  any  means  that  God  put 
at  his  disposal :  that  if  it  were  a  question  of  man's 
delivering  himself,  no  matter  what  might  be  the 
mercy  or  the  blessing,  no  matter  how  deep  and  full 


ONE    BODY.  0 

the  grace  displayed  in  a  living  person,  man  was  too 
far  gone — nay,  so  truly  dead  in  sin,  that,  so  far  from 
being  won  by  God's  love,  he  only  took  advantage  of 
it,  and  when  Jesus  put  Himself  at  the  foot  of  man, 
he  lifted  up  his  heel  and  trod  on  Him,  the  Son  of  God. 
But  if  man  thus,  under  Satan's  malicious  guidance, 
cast  out  and  crucified  Christ,  Grod  in  the  cross  not  only 
demonstrated  His  love  (herein  is  love,  indeed!),  but 
wrought  out  redemption,  a  work  suited  even  for  those 
that  crucified  Jesus,  capable  of  blotting  out  the  foulest 
sin  man  was  ever  guilty  of.  God  has  triumphed  even 
where  man  did  his  worst  against  Him. 

But  this  is  not  all.  In  the  previous  dealings  of 
God,  when  He  had  given  His  law,  God  had  separated 
the  nation  that  was  called  out  of  Egypt — had  marked 
them  off  in  the  most  distinct  and  positive  manner 
from  all  others.  It  was  needful.  Men  might  have 
complained  that  there  had  been  no  fair  trial ;  the 
corrupt  examples  of  others  might  have  led  them 
astray.  God  set  Israel  apart  by  their  institutions, 
rites,  ordinances,  services,  and  His  law ;  and  by 
that  law,  and  by  those  rites,  He  severed  them  from 
all  others;  so  that  it  would  have  been  sin  against 
God  for  a  Jew  to  have  communion  with  a  Gentile, 
no  matter  how  godly  and  disposed  to  respect  the  law 
of  God.  No  doubt  there  might  be  such  a  thing  as 
being  brought  out  of  Gentilism,  at  any  rate  to  a 
certain  extent ;  but  still,  all  through  the  system  of 
God's  dealings  by  His  law  with  the  Jewish  people, 
there  was  the  express  and  total  severance  of  His 
people  from  all  others.     I  do  not  speak  of  the  abuse 


6  ONE    BODY. 

of  it,  working  upon  the  corrupt  heart  of  man  against 
others — the  pride  of  men's  heart,  who  despised 
others  because  of  their  divinely  isolated  position ;  but 
apart  from  the  evil  use  that  Israel  made  of  their 
separation,  faithfulness  to  God  then  required  it,  and 
His  will  was  in  the  thing  itself.  God  was  proving 
before  the  whole  world  the  painful  and  humbling 
truth,  that  let  a  nation  have  ever  such  mercies,  ever 
such  privileges,  ever  such  wisdom  directing  their 
movements,  outward  and  inward,  nay,  everything 
pertaining  to  them,  the  issue  of  all  is  increasing 
enmity  against  God  Himself. 

The  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  introduced  a 
new  thing  in  every  sense.  Now,  Christians  admit 
this  in  general,  as  to  the  work  of  Christ  in  its  appli- 
cation to  the  need  of  the  soul.  There  is  no  person, 
of  ever  so  little  spiritual  intelligence,  who  does  not 
confess,  with  more  or  less  clearness  and  thankfulness 
of  heart,  the  all-importance  of  the  cross  of  Christ 
for  his  need  before  God.  There  may  be  a  scanty 
perception  of  the  extent  of  the  deliverance ;  there 
may  be  feeble  enjoyment  of  the  perfect  peace  that 
has  been  made  by  the  blood  of  Christ's  cross;  but 
there  is  no  believer  who  does  not  in  some  measure 
hold  it,  and  enjoy  it,  and  thank  God  for  it. 

But  there' is  more  than  the  sinner's  need  met  in 
the  cross;  and  I  direct  your  attention  to  what  the 
Holy  Ghost  gives  us  in  Eph.  ii.,  as  showing  the  place 
of  the  cross  in  the  ways  of  God — not  merely  in  the 
salvation  of  the  soul.  At  the  13th  verse  it  is  written, 
"  Ye  who  sometimes  were  far  off,  are  made  nigh  by 


ONE    BODY, 


the  blood  of  Christ.  For  He  is  our  peace,  who  hath 
made  both  one,  and  hath  broken  down  the  middle 
wall  of  partition  between  us;  having  abolished  in 
His  flesh  the  enmity,  even  the  law  of  commandments 
contained  in  ordinances;  for  to  make  in  Himself  of 
twain  one  new  man,  so  making  peace ;  and  that  He 
might  reconcile  both  unto  (rod  in  one  body  by  the 
cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  thereby."  Now,  it 
is  evident  from  this  Scripture,  that  not  only  is  the 
cross  the  basis  of  peace  for  the  soul,  but  it  is  the 
foundation  also  on  which  rests  the  "  one  body  "  that 
God  is  now  making  of  Jew  and  Gentile  before  Him- 
self. And  we  see  this  most  plainly  if  we  only  look  back 
to  our  Lord's  own  presence  upon  earth.  He  forbids 
His  disciples  going  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles — 
forbids  their  entering  any  city  of  the  Samaritans. 
Need  it  be  said  that  it  was  from  no  lack  of  love  ?  It 
was  not  that  His  heart  did  not  yearn  over  the  most 
reprobate  of  Samaritans  ;  it  was  not  that  He  did  not 
appreciate  the  faith  of  a  Gentile — He  had  not  seen 
"such  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel."  Notwithstanding, 
they  were  to  go  only  to  the  lost  sheep  of  Israel, 
because  to  such  only  He  was  sent,  and  so  were  they 
too.  Now,  here  we  find  at  once,  that  while  there  was 
this  perfectness  of  grace  in  Christ,  there  was  the  full 
maintenance  of  the  holy  order  of  God.  There  was 
a  state  of  things  essentially  different  from  what  we 
have  described  in  Eph.  ii.  There  was  a  positive  bar- 
rier even  during  His  lifetime,  the  very  thing  being 
formally  prohibited,  which,  after  He  died  and  rose, 
was  not  merely  a  duty,  but  the  delight  of  love,  the 


8  ONE    BODY. 

only  adequate  answer  in  the  saints  to  that  death  and 
resurrection.    (See  Matt,  xxviii.  19.) 

How  comes  this  to  pass  ?  On  what  is  so  mighty  a 
change  founded  ?  Upon  the  cross.  It  brings  out  the 
worthlessness  of  man,  and  most  of  all,  the  worthless- 
ness  of  favoured,  privileged,  religious  man — of  man 
under  God's  law.  For  if  man  under  God's  law 
failed,  what  other  law  could  avail  ?  The  law  of 
(rod  was  the  wisest,  the  best,  the  holiest,  and  the 
justest  dealing  that  it  was  possible  to  bring  to  bear 
upon  man's  natural  state.  And  here  was  the  total 
failure  of  man  :  not  as  if  God  did  not  know  it  from 
the  first,  for  He  took  care  that  in  the  earliest  book 
of  Scripture,  and  all  through,  embedded  in  the  very 
law  itself,  there  should  be  plain  words  as  well  as 
shadows,  showing  that  man  would  sin,  and  that 
only  Christ,  by  His  blood-shedding,  by  His  death, 
could  avail.  The  very  first  revelation  of  the  garden 
of  Eden  is  a  witness  of  both.  Faith  had  no  other 
expectation.  But  nevertheless  there  was  a  full, 
patient,  long-suffering  trial  whether  it  was  possible 
to  get  any  good  out  of  man,  in  the  dealings  of  the 
only  wise  God  with  man.  And  now  it  was  demon- 
strated in  the  cross  that  all  was  ruined  in  man,  and 
that  the  highest  advantages,  short  of  the  cross  of 
Christ,  brought  out  the  ruin  most  distinctly.  Now 
there  was  room  for  God  to  work ;  and,  beloved  friends, 
it  is  upon  this  that  it  is  my  joy  to  speak  a  little  to- 
night. 

We  have  come  down  the  stream ;  we  have  seen 
what  man  was  when  it  was  a  question  of  his  work- 


ONE    BODY.  9 

ing  for  God :  we  shall  now  look  briefly  at  God 
when  He  puts  forth  His  glorious  power  to  work, 
not  merely  for  man,  but  for  His  Son ;  for  oh !  we 
never  get  the  full  blessing  until  we  see  this  great 
and  glorious  truth,  that  God  has  at  heart  His  Son — 
that  God  is  thinking,  not  merely  of  a  blessing  for 
you,  for  me,  for  any  of  those  that  love  Him — yea,  and 
in  sovereign  grace,  for  those  who  love  Him  not,  if 
they  repent  and  believe  the  Gospel — but  that  He  has 
His  eye  upon  Him  who  did  all  and  suffered  all  for 
His  glory,  and  has  bound  up  that  glory  of  God  with 
the  fullest,  richest,  everlasting  blessing  of  all  who 
believe  in  His  name.  And  now,  then,  as  the  fruit 
of  the  cross  of  Christ  (where  we  have  the  weakness  of 
God,  where  nevertheless  we  have  the  triumph  of  God 
— God  Himself  coming  clown  lower  and  lower  still 
in  love,  not  merely,  so  to  speak,  beseeching  man,  but 
laying  all  the  weight  and  burden  of  sin  upon  the  Lord 
Jesus,  thereby  meeting  the  desperate  need  of  sinners 
by  His  Son  suffering  for  them),  what  do  we  find? 
That  in  the  cross  He  has  given  the  death-blow  to  sin ; 
He  has  "  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself," 
as  we  are  told.  But,  besides,  by  it  all  the  distinctions 
of  Jew  and  Gentile  pass  away,  and  God  brings  out 
that  to  which  He  had  always  looked  onward — that 
which  was  in  His  counsels  not  only  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world,  but  before  it,  and  which  conse- 
quently He  had  shown  before  there  was  a  question 
of  law,  and  before  there  was  a  question  of  sin.  For 
it  is  remarkable,  that  the  magnificent  type  which 
the  apostle   applies  in  Eph.  v.  to  the  mystery  of 


10  ONE    BODY. 

Christ  and  the  Church,  was  brought  in  before  sin 
entered  (Gen  ii.)»  In  truth,  it  was  a  counsel  that 
flowed  out  of  what  God  was  and  is.  It  was  God  in 
His  own  love ;  it  was  God  working  from  what  was 
in  Himself.  No  doubt,  the  entrance  of  sin  has  given 
occasion  for  Grod  to  bring  out  His  grace  in  blessed 
ways ;  but,  for  all  that,  we  must  ever  remember  that 
there  were  thoughts  and  counsels  of  grace  in  Grod 
Himself.  There  was  that  which  He  ever  had  in 
His  own  mind,  for  the  revelation  of  which,  no  doubt, 
sin  might  furnish  the  fit  occasion.  But  sin  was 
in  no  wise  the  suggestive  spring  any  more  than  the 
measure.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  Grod  indulging, 
so  to  speak,  in  the  activity  of  His  own  perfect  love ; 
at  any  rate,  it  was  God  thinking  of,  filled  with, 
working  for,  His  own  Son.  And  I  think  it  is  of 
deep  interest  to  observe  the  fact  just  referred  to — the 
shadow  of  the  Church's  union  with  Christ  preceding 
the  entrance  of  sin  and  the  provisions  of  grace  in 
view  of  sin. 

And  observe  further,  that  as  we  see  in  the  types 
of  Genesis,  so  it  is  in  the  epistle  to  the  Ephe- 
sians.  Where  is  it  that  you  have  the  counsels 
of  God  traced  out  ?  Is  it  after  man's  sin  has  been 
portrayed  in  chapter  ii.  ?  No ;  but  in  the  earliest 
verses  of  chapter  i.,  where  God  gives  the  richest  de- 
velopment of  the  counsels  of  His  grace,  entirely 
passing  over  and  ignoring  in  the  first  instance  all 
question  of  man's  sin  and  of  man's  need.  This  we 
have  afterwards  and  in  the  profoundest  way.  There 
is,  perhaps,  no  part  of  the  word  of  God  which  shows 


ONE   BODY.  11 

lis  the  depth  of  human  evil  more  than  Ephesians  ii.  ; 
but  this  is  not  at  all  the  first  thought.  Hence  we 
find  in  the  first  chapter,  "Blessed  be  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  blessed  us 
with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ,  according  as  He  hath  chosen  us  in  Him  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  we  should  be  holy 
and  without  blame  before  Him  in  love."  And  then 
it  is  only  just  by  the  way  that  the  apostle  alludes  to 
the  fact  of  their  sins,  and  in  a  single  verse  (the  7th), 
where  we  read,  "In  whom  we  have  redemption 
through  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  according 
to  the  riches  of  His  grace."  "With  the  exception  of 
that  incidental  notice  of  the  fact  of  our  needing 
redemption,  the  remission  of  sins,  you  would  not 
know  from  the  first  chapter  of  the  epistle  that  the 
saints  of  God,  these  blest  ones,  had  a  single  evil,  or 
a  particle  of  sin  connected  with  them.  That  is,  it 
is  God  perfectly  acting  from  Himself,  in  and  for  His 
own  Son;  delighting  in  Him,  putting  honour  upon 
Him,  giving  Him  what  was  suited  to  Him  out  of  His 
own  resources  of  love,  and  hence  boundlessly  to  the 
saints,  the  body  of  Christ,  as  the  end  of  chapter  i. 
describes  them.  It  is  thus  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
pleased  to  introduce  these  astonishing  counsels  of 
grace. 

Then,  in  the  second  chapter,  we  have  man's  state 
looked  at  most  thoroughly.  We  see  him  weighed 
and  found  wanting  as  in  no  other  part  of  Scripture. 
We  have  him  here,  not  as  an  active  being,  alive 
in   sin,  but   as   a    lost   being  dead  in  sin — "  dead 


12  ONE    BODY. 

in  trespasses  and  sins."  He  is,  therefore,  hopelessly 
lost  and  utterly  powerless  in  sins.  The  whole  case 
is  closed  against  him ;  and  it  is  to  this  condition  of 
manifest  moral  death  and  subjection  to  Satan,  that 
the  grace  of  God  applies  itself,  in  His  quickening, 
raising,  heavenly  power  in  Christ  Jesus. 

But,  again,  we  find  that  in  the  latter  part  of  Ephe- 
sians  ii.  the  cross  of  Christ  is  taken  up,  not  merely 
in  connexion  with  God's  counsels,  as  in  chapter  i., 
nor  even  in  view  of  their  desperate  need  who 
are  the  objects  of  His  counsels,  as  in  the  begin- 
ning of  chapter  ii.,  but  in  contrast  to  the  previous 
ways  of  Grod  upon  the  earth.  He  is  addressing 
Gentiles.  Was  it  not  a  suitable  occasion  for  Grod  to 
unfold  to  them  the  one  new  man,  the  mystery  of 
Christ  and  the  Church,  the  body  of  Christ  ?  They 
were  hitherto  ignored,  evidently  outside  all  that 
God  had  been  doing  of  old.  God  had  taken  up  a 
separated  people  and  had  tried  them.  The  Gentiles 
were  as  non-existent,  so  to  speak,  before  God.  Not, 
of  course,  that  the  secret  providence  of  God  did  not 
watch  and  work — not  that  the  grace  of  God  did  not 
act  as  to  individuals ;  but,  regarded  as  Gentiles,  they 
were  outside.  But  now  these  are  the  very  objects  of 
heavenly  grace ;  toward  Gentiles  the  call  goes  out 
loud  and  large.  Not  that  they  alone  were  brought 
into  the  Church,  for  it  consists  of  Jews  also ;  but  it 
was  Gentiles  whom  it  seemed  meet  to  God  to  bring 
into  relief,  in  contrast  to  the  condition  in  which  they 
were  once,  so  as  to  make  more  manifest  the  blessing 
which  His  grace  now  confers  on  both,  in  Christ  the 


ONE    BODY.  13 

Lord.  "  "WTierefore  remember,  tliat  ye  being  in  time 
past  Grentiles  in  the  flesh,  who  are  called  Uncircum- 
cision  by  that  which  is  called  the  Circumcision  in  the 
flesh  made  by  hands  ;  that  at  that  time  ye  were  with- 
out Christ,  being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise, 
having  no  hope,  and  without  Grod  in  the  world  :  but 
now,  in  Christ  Jesus,  ye  who  sometimes  were  far  off 
are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  For  He  is 
our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  one." 

There  we  have  another  fact,  not  only  that  they  are 
made  nigh  to  Grod,  but  both  made  one — Jew  and 
Grentile  that  now  believe  made  one  body,  as  is 
explained  more  fully  afterwards,  the  middle  wall  of 
partition  broken  down,  the  enmity  abolished  in  His 
flesh,  "  even  the  law  of  commandments  contained  in 
ordinances,  for  to  make  in  Himself  of  twain  one 
new  man."  It  is  not  merely  a  new  life,  but  Christ 
and  the  Church  form  one  new  man,  a  condition  of 
things  that  had  never  before  existed — "  one  new 
man,  so  making  peace ;  and  that  He  might  reconcile 
both  unto  Grod  in  one  body  by  the  cross,  having  slain 
the  enmity  thereby :  and  came  and  preached  peace 
to  you  which  were  afar  off,  and  to  them  that  were 
nigh."  Thus  the  Grentiles  had  been  dispensationally 
afar  off,  the  Jews  were  comparatively  nigh ;  but  now 
they  were  taken  completely  out  of  their  old  condition. 
It  is  not,  you  will  observe,  that  the  Gentiles  who 
believe  are  raised  up  merely  to  the  privileges  which 
the  Jews  used  to  possess,  but  that  there  is  now  "  one 
new  man,"  wherein  is  neither  Jew  nor  Grentile.   Both, 


14  ONE    BODY. 

consequently,  quit  their  previous  states  for  a  new  and 
most  blessed  position  of  oneness  in  Christ,  which  had 
never  existed  before,  save  in  the  counsels  of  God. 

Here,  then,  is  the  Church,  the  body  of  Christ ; 
this  is  what  God  is  working  out.  He  is  not  only 
saving  souls,  He  is  gathering  ;  not  only  is  He  gather- 
ing into  one,  but  He  makes  the  believing  Jew  and 
Gentile,  while  they  are  on  earth,  though  previously 
by  His  own  command  the  most  separate,  now  to  be 
one  new  man  in  Christ,  even  His  one  body. 

There  is  another  truth  connected  with  the  Church, 
revealed  at  the  end  of  the  chapter,  which  I  merely 
notice  by  the  way.  Not  only  is  there  a  body 
formed — one  body  in  Christ,  but  there  is  a  building 
upon  earth,  in  which  God  dwells.  Although  it  is 
not  my  business  to-night  to  take  up  the  subject  of 
the  dwelling  or  habitation  of  God,  yet  I  cannot  deny 
myself  the  joy  of  saying  a  few  passing  words  on  this 
wonderful  place  which  God  has  given  to  His  Church. 

And  first  of  all,  it  is  to  be  noticed,  in  the  Old 
Testament  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  building  or 
dwelling  of  God,  until  there  was  a  type  of  redemp- 
tion. No  matter  what  might  be  His  mercy  or 
condescension  to  those  He  loved,  He  could  not  dwell 
with  man  until  there  was  a  basis  of  blood-shedding, 
by  which  He  could  righteously  abide  with  him. 
Hence,  all  through  the  book  of  Genesis,  for  instance, 
God  does  not  dwell  with  men ;  nay,  He  never  speaks 
of  it,  or  promises  it.  But  the  moment  the  blood  of 
the  passover  is  shed,  and  you  have  Israel  jmssing 
through  the  Eed  Sea — the  combined  types  of  redemp- 


ONE    BODY.  15 

tion  (one  answering  to  the  blood  of  Christ,  the  other 
to  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  in  which  a 
complete  redemption  is  set  forth  in  figure) — immedi- 
ately you  hear  of  God  having  a  habitation :  God 
could  now  dwell  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  It  is 
not  because  the  people  were  better :  who  could 
imagine  that  ?  Look  at  Israel  at  the  Bed  Sea ; 
what  were  they  to  be  compared  with  Abraham  or 
Isaac,  or  even  Jacob?  Yet  He  who  only  visited 
the  fathers  can  now  dwell  among  the  children,  and 
put  this  word  into  their  lips,  "  I  will  prepare  Him  a 
habitation."  How  comes  this  ?  Ah,  beloved  friends, 
how  little  any  of  us  estimate  the  mighty  change  and 
the  wondrous  effect  of  redemption?  It  is  not  a 
question  of  comparing  men,  or  their  faith,  or  their 
faithfulness.  God's  estimate  of  redemption  is  the 
point ;  and  He  shows  that  if  there  be  only  a  type 
of  redemption,  He  can  come  down  typically,  He 
can  then  dwell  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  I  admit 
this  was  only  a  preparatory  thing.  There  was  a 
visible  token  of  it,  suited,  of  course,  to  an  earthly 
people  ;  but  still  there  was  the  great  distinct  fact  in 
Israel's  history,  as  the  very  centre  of  their  blessing, 
that  God  Himself  deigned  then  to  dwell  in  their 
midst. 

The  same  thing  is  found  here  far  more  blessedly 
for  the  Church  on  earth.  On  earth — and  mark,  not 
before  the  cross,  but  since — God  is  pleased  to  make 
His  people  to  be  His  habitation.  He  came  down 
in  the  Person  of  Christ,  but  Christ  abode  alone  as  far 
as  the  dwelling-place  of  God  was  concerned.     "  De- 


16  ONE    BODY. 

stroy  this  temple ;"  He  was  the  only  true  temple. 
But  when  He  died  and  rose,  what  then  ?  Eedemp- 
tion  was  accomplished  ;  and  now  God  could  descend 
holily,  righteously,  suitably  to  His  own  character, 
and  could  dwell  in  His  people.  It  is  not  because 
the  New  Testament  saints  are  more  worthy  in  them- 
selves than  those  of  old.  He  that  knows  himself  and 
redemption,  knows  that  such  an  idea  is  a  fallacy 
and  a  falsehood ;  knows  that  human  nature  is  good 
for  nothing  as  before  Grod ;  knows  that,  in  His  pre- 
sence, there  is  no  question  of  flesh,  or  what  flesh  can 
glory  in,  "  but  he  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the 
Lord."  But  this  is  not  all;  not  only  is  there  a 
Lord  to  glory  in,  but  now  we  have  actual  redemption 
in  Christ  through  His  blood.  What  does  God  think 
of  the  precious  blood  of  His  Son  ?  "What  does  He 
feel  about  those  on  whom  that  blood  is  put  by  faith — 
those  who  are  washed  in  it  ?  Does  He  not  as  it  were 
say,  "  I  can  come  now  and  take  My  place  in  their 
midst  ?"  This  is,  indeed,  one  of  the  precious  charac- 
teristics of  the  Church.  It  especially  is,  even  now, 
the  habitation  of  Grod.  In  virtue  of  this  it  is  that 
the  Church  is  called  the  "  house  of  Grod,"  and  His 
"  temple "  in  different  parts  of  Scripture.  But  I 
must  not  dwell  longer  on  this,  because  my  subject 
is  "  the  body." 

We  find,  then,  in  Eph.  iv.,  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
presses  this  exhortation,  "  Endeavouring  to  keep  the 
unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace."  Next,  He 
explains,  "There  is  one  body  and  one  Spirit,  even  as 
ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling;  one  Lord, 


ONE    BODY.  17 

one  faith,  one  baptism ;  one  God  and  Father  of  all, 
who  is  above  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  you  all." 

Will  it  be  imagined  that  this  grand  truth  of  the 
"  one  body  "  does  not  affect  the  judgment  and  conduct 
of  the  Christian  as  well  as  his  affections  ?  We  have 
been  brought,  I  will  suppose,  to  the  knowledge  of 
Christ ;  we  have  found  in  Him  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Saviour ;  we  rest  upon  Him  as  our  peace  before  God ; 
we  call  on  Him  as  our  Lord.  But  have  I  no  relation- 
ship with  others  on  earth  ?  Am  I  left  here  simply 
and  solitarily  to  look  up  to  God  ?  Have  I  to  thread 
my  way  through  the  mazes  of  this  world,  only  usiug 
the  word  of  God  with  prayer  ?  I  repeat,  What  are 
my  relationships  ?  Am  I  only  a  child  of  God  with 
other  children  of  His  here  and  there  ?  What  am  I 
to  feel,  as  I  look  round  upon  those  that  name  the 
excellent  name — that  call  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
both  mine  and  theirs  ?  The  Oxe  Body  is  the  answer. 
God  has  formed  it ;  He  has  formed  it  for  Christ,  it 
is  His  body.  "  We  are  members, "  as  it  is  said,  "  of 
His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones."  It  is  not 
for  you,  it  is  not  for  me,  to  define,  even  in  our  natural 
relationships,  our  brothers  and  our  sisters.  Thank 
God,  we  are  not  asked  :  God  does  it;  He  gives  what 
suits  Him,  even  if  it  be  only  in  the  domain  of  earth 
and  flesh.  He  does  not  give  us  what  we  might  choose. 
We  know  our  folly  in  this  respect.  He  assigns  each 
man  a  place — puts  the  high  and  the  low  according 
to  His  own  wisdom.  And  in  that  which  He  is  doing 
for  His  beloved  Son,  has  He  less  to  do  or  less  to 
teach  us  ?     Is  God's  will  of  less  moment  there,  than 

c 


18  ONE    BODY. 

in  the  mere  outward  world?  Nay,  my  brethren, 
nay :  even  moral  men  dispute  not  the  will  of  God  as 
to  natural  relationships.  "We  know  what  human 
lust  may  do — how  it  may  break  through  every  line  of 
demarcation ;  but  still,  after  all,  poor  man  finds  even 
for  himself,  without  thinking  of  (rod,  the  need  and 
the  value  of  owning  the  relationships  which  have  been 
established  in  nature  here  below.  Now,  is  it  not  a 
most  solemn  thought,  and  is  it  not  a  fact  which  ought 
to  shame  every  Christian  heart,  that  in  that  Church 
which  is  so  near  to  God,  in  that  which  is  the  fruit  of 
His  own  perfect  love,  in  that  which  He  is  creating  for 
the  everlasting  glory  of  His  beloved  Son,  what  God 
orders,  what  God  wills,  what  pleases  God,  is  regarded 
as  of  infinitely  less  account  to  Christians  than  even 
their  natural  relationships  to  each  other  ?  Is  it  or 
is  it  not  the  fact  ?     Is  it  or  is  it  not  a  grievous  sin  ? 

How  do  you  account  for  this  ?  Whence  the  ter- 
rible triumph  of  the  enemy  ?  WTiy  is  it  that  there 
is  such  darkness  over  the  whole  subject  of  the  "  one 
body  "  now  ?  Is  it  because  God  has  not  revealed  His 
mind?  What  can  be  plainer  in  Scripture?  Only 
a  portion  of  the  proofs  has  been  produced  from  a  small 
portion  of  God's  word ;  but  what  can  be  clearer  than 
that,  founded  upon  the  cross  of  Christ,  a  new  condi- 
tion has  been  introduced  and  established  of  God ;  that 
He  is  now  calling  out  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  who 
believe,  and  forming  them  into  "  one  body  ?  " — that, 
as  He  owns  no  other  body  than  Christ's,  so  this  is  His 
will  about  us,  and  our  obligation  to  Him,  even  as  it 
is  the  evident  and  only  meaning  of  His  word  that 


ONE    BODY.  19 

speaks  of  His  Church  ?  How  is  it,  then,  that  such  a 
truth  escapes  the  thoughts  of  man — that  you  may 
search  in  vain  to  find  it  in  writings  new  or  old — that 
we  have,  some  of  us,  long  lived  as  Christians,  and 
many  of  us  once  churchmen  and  dissenters  so  called, 
yet  all  utterly  ignorant  of  its  character?  But  if 
so  patent,  and  with  such  a  fulness  of  truth  about  it 
in  God's  word,  how  comes  it  to  have  been  a  forgotten 
thing? 

It  is  not  because,  there  has  not  been  sincerity — 
"  godly  sincerity  "  if  you  will- — among  Christians. 
But  whatever  is  near  to  God,  whatever  is  the  present 
operation  of  God,  is  always  that  against  which  Satan 
sets  himself  with  all  his  might  and  subtlety.  And 
this,  because  it  is  bound  up  with  Christ,  because  it  is 
the  special  actual  will  of  Cod  for  His  people.  There- 
fore Satan  seeks  to  thwart  and  mar.  He  does  not  now 
try  so  much  to  darken  other  truths,  but  he  takes  up 
that  which  most  nearly  concerns  the  glory  of  Christ 
as  now  displayed;  whatever  that  may  be  at  any 
given  time,  there  is  the  battle-field,  there  the  arena, 
where  no  means  is  untried  to  blind  and  hinder  God's 
children  from  understanding  and  doing  the  will  of 
their  God  and  Father.  When  God  is  gathering  out 
His  Church,  then  is  the  enemy's  season  of  active, 
unceasing  effort,  to  oppose,  confound,  and  obscure 
all  the  truths  connected  with  it. 

Besides,  there  is  another  question.      How  comes 

it  that  Satan  finds  it  possible  to  succeed  in  the  face 

of  such  evidence   as  the   New  Testament  affords? 

Alas !  the  reason  of  this,  too — the  moral  reason — is 

c  2 


20  ONE    BODY. 

evident.  The  children  of  God  may  be  the  more  readily 
deceived,  because  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  the 
body  of  Christ,  brings  God  too  close  to  us — sets  His 
grace  too  richly  before  our  souls — makes  us  feel  (if  our 
souls  believe,  bow,  and  enter  into  it),  the  vanity  of  all 
things  here.  Alas !  our  hearts  shrink  from  the  feeling. 
"We  naturally  love  ease  ;  we  like  position  in  this 
world ;  we  are  fond  of  a  little  reputation,  it  may  not 
be,  perhaps,  in  the  vulgar  world,  but  in  the  so-called 
Church — something,  at  any  rata,  for  self,  something 
outside  the  portion  of  Christ  and  the  cross.  The 
body  is  only  for  the  Head,  for  the  glory  of  God,  that 
the  Son  of  God  may  be  glorified  thereby.  Man  in 
nature  disappears ;  his  glory  wanes  and  vanishes ; 
his  will  is  judged  as  sin.  "We  do  not  like  a  doctrine 
and  practice  so  peremptory,  and  withal  so  heavenly. 
Men  like  to  do  something,  and  be  somebody.  Man 
has  in  himself,  wherever  this  is  allowed,  that  which 
exposes  him  to  the  power  of  sin,  to  the  malice  and 
wiles  of  Satan ;  and  hence  it  is,  that  this  great  truth 
was  no  sooner  revealed,  than  it  began  to  fade.  There 
is  no  testimony  to  it  whatever  in  the  early  fathers, 
and  of  course  a  position  more  and  more  distant  and 
antagonistic  as  you  descend.  Take  up  any  writings 
you  please  : — Papists  and  Protestants,  Episcopalians, 
Presbyterians,  Lutherans,  Calvinists,  Arminians — 
all  ignore  it.  It  is  not  that  you  will  not  find  enough 
truth  asserted  and  preached  for  souls  to  be  saved  by ; 
but  the  bare  salvation  of  souls  is  not  the  whole  truth, 
nor  that  part  of  the  truth  which  reveals  the  Church 
of  God.     "Were  not  souls  saved  before  Christ  ?     Was 


ONE    BODY.  21 

not  salvation  of  the  Jews  ?  Were  there  not  faithful 
souls  before  God  had  a  people  upon  earth  ?  Was  it 
not  so  from  the  very  beginning,  before  the  flood  and 
after  it  ?     Most  clearly  and  certainly. 

But  there  comes  in  another  thing  which  was  not 
true  before,  which  God  had  not  revealed  or  esta- 
blished till  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  and  for  which 
He  had  reserved  the  sending  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from 
Heaven.  Now,  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  God  has  laid 
a  foundation  for  this  new  work,  and  is  gathering 
together  out  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  His  assembly, 
made  in  Christ  one  new  man.  Man  likes  to  be  of 
importance  to  himself,  and  in  this  world.  Just  in 
proportion  as  he  allows  this,  he  falls  a  prey  to  the 
working  of  the  enemy  ;  and  the  more  easily  does  he 
deceive  himself,  because  up  to  the  cross  of  Christ 
there  was  room  left  for  man  more  or  less.  His  total 
ruin,  his  enmity  to  God,  his  hatred  of  grace  in  the 
revealed  person  of  the  Son,  were  never  brought  out 
in  their  fulness  until  then.  Till  that,  God  was  not, 
could  not  be,  known  as  He  now  is.  But  the  only- 
begotten  Son  declared  Him,  and  this  in  respect 
both  of  sin  and  of  His  righteousness — a  new  kind  of 
righteousness,  which,  by  all  means  and  on  every  side, 
clears  and  blesses  the  guiltiest  who  now  believes  in 
Jesus. 

Now,  if  there  is  to  be  a  heart  growing  up  into  the 
revelation  which  God  has  made  of  Himself  in  Christ 
according  to  His  grace  towards  the  Church,  the  one 
body  of  Christ,  there  must  be  the  judgment  of  nature, 
root  and  branch — the  judgment  of  the  world  in  which 


22  ONE    BODY. 

man  arrogates  some  place  to  himself.  The  Church 
of  Grod  is  based  on  the  proved  ruin  of  man,  and  is 
for  the  glory  of  Grod  in  His  Son,  as  maintained  by 
the  Holy  Grhost.  Now,  this  will  show  the  immensely 
important  place  of  this  truth  as  a  matter  for  the 
soul,  both  in  communion  and  in  conduct.  Away  with, 
what  does  not  touch,  upon  practice  and  the  soul's 
relationship  to  Grod !  But  the  fact  is,  that  so  far 
from  the  truth  of  the  Church  leaving  out  heart  and 
conscience,  intercourse  with  Grod,  worship  and  service, 
there  is  nothing  which  brings  them  out  so  much,  and 
binds  them  so  fast  together,  save  only  the  truth  of 
Christ's  own  Person;  there  is  nothing  more  com- 
manding, comprehensive,  and  penetrating  for  the  life 
and  conversation  of  a  Christian  man. 

Take,  for  instance,  all  the  difficulties  men  gather 
from  the  Old  Testament :  on  what  are  they  founded  ? 
I  speak  now  of  the  legitimate  difficulties — at  any  rate 
what  seem  to  be  legitimate  and  authoritative  to  the 
mind  of  an  uninstructed  believer.  "What,  after  all, 
is  their  gist  ?  Eeasoning  founded  upon  Old  Testa- 
ment precept  or  practice.  But  is  the  analogy  just  ? 
How  can  we  reason  in  an  absolute  way,  if  there  be  this 
"  one  new  man"? — if  the  Church  is  a  novel,  special 
thing  which  did  not  even  exist  then  ?  It  is  evident 
that  conduct,  for  instance,  found  in  a  David,  or  a 
Solomon — in  an  Abraham,  or  an  Isaac,  or  a  Jacob, 
may  not  apply  now,  but,  on  the  contrary,  be  out  of 
harmony  with  the  ways  God  looks  for  in  His  Church. 
I  am  not  speaking  of  those  moral  landmarks  which 
always  condemn  falsehood,  corruption,  or  violence : 


ONE    BODY.  23 

no  Christian  is  supposed  to  produce  the  sin  of  any  of 
these  men  to  justify  his  own  evil.  I  speak  of  what 
was  right  and  according  to  the  will  of  Grod  as  then 
revealed.  The  moment  the  doctrine  of  the  Church, 
the  body  of  Christ,  is  seen,  all  such  reasonings  and 
difficulties  have  no  more  a  place.  Grod  has  now  His 
Son  in  His  presence  as  the  risen  man.  There 
could  not  be  such  a  thing  as  the  body  of  Christ  till 
Christ  was  there,  not  only  as  the  Son,  but  as  man, 
the  Head  of  the  body;  Christ  could  not  be  there  as 
man  till  the  work  of  redemption  was  accomplished. 
Of  old  He  had  the  title  of  the  Son  of  Man  given, 
looking  onward  to  His  assumption  of  humanity,  when 
He  who  was  Grod,  and  the  Son  of  God,  became  a  real 
man.  But  how  could  He  take  this  place  in  Heaven  ? 
He  was  born  a  man  on  earth.  He  was  not  a  man 
until  He  was  born  into  the  world.  How  take  this  place 
in  Heaven  ?  Christ  was  not  Head,  still  less  was  there 
the  body,  the  Church,  till  then.  "  The  Church,  which 
is  His  body,"  assumes  that  Christ  had  become  man, 
and,  more  than  this,  that  He  is  Head,  as  the  risen  and 
ascended  man.  It  is  only  after  He  died,  as  we  know 
by  His  own  figure  of  the  corn  of  wheat,  that  He  pro- 
duced fruit  (John  xii.).  But  more  than  that.  Not 
to  stand  upon  figures  only,  but  to  take  any  Scripture 
that  speaks  in  precise  terms  upon  it,  what  do  we  find  ? 
Eead  the  end  of  Ephes.  i. :  "  What  is  the  exceeding 
greatness  of  His  power  to  us- ward  who  believe,  accord- 
ing to  the  working  of  His  mighty  power,  which  He 
wrought  in  Christ  when  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead, 
and  set  Him  at  His  own  rigid  hand  in  the  heavenly 


24  ONE    BODY. 

places,  far  above  all  principality,  and  power,  and  might, 
and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not 
only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come  : 
and  hath  put  all  things  under  His  feet,  and  gave  Him 
to  be  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church."  Thus  He 
has  been  given  to  the  Church  Head  over  all  things ; 
but  it  is  after  He  was  raised  from  the  dead,  and  set 
at  God's  right  hand.  The  risen  man  is  Head 
there  :  even  He  never  was  Head  till  after  redemption. 
He  took  His  place  there  and  thus. 

What  is  the  consequence  of  that,  beloved  friends  ? 
The  body  of  Christ  is  heavenly,  as  the  Head  of  the 
Church  is.  Man  does  not  relish  this — nay,  many  a 
Christian  man  finds  it  too  high  and  hard.  If  he  is 
a  heavenly  man,  where  is  the  room  for  the  plans 
and  designs  and  pursuits  of  literature,  of  science,  of 
politics  ?  Where  are  all  these  things  that  fill  the 
mind  and  the  appetites  and  the  desires  of  men  ?  Are 
they  in  heaven  ?  Are  warlike  schemes— are  courtier 
dreams  in  heaven  ?  You  have,  no  doubt,  the  battle 
against  the  devil,  who  is  turned  out  of  heaven,  as 
the  Lord  wars  by  the  angels  of  His  power  by-and-by. 
But  I  need  not  say  there  is  no  place  in  His  body 
for  the  pride,  ambition,  or  energy  of  man. 

What,  then,  is  the  great  idea  of  the  Church  of 
God  ?  It  is  the  body  of  Christ,  after  He  has  accom- 
plished redemption;  and  consequently,  sin,  as  far 
as  God's  judging  the  believer,  is  completely  gone, 
put  away,  in  such  sort  as  to  glorify  God  and  justify 
the  believer.  Founded  upon  this,  those  who  believe 
are  consequently  not  only  regenerate  of  the  Spirit, 


ONE    BODY.  25 

and  justified  from  their  sins  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
but  united  to  Him,  their  blessed  Head,  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  The  Church  of  God  accordingly  does 
not  consist  merely  of  the  redeemed  or  saints.  A 
"  Christian  "  means  more  than  a  "  saint " — much 
more  !  I  am  aware  there  are  many  who  think  it  means 
much  less,  and  would  count  my  doctrine  strange; 
because  they  consider  everybody  in  these  ]ands  a 
Christian,  and  but  very  few  on  earth  a  saint — per- 
haps none  till  they  get  to  heaven.  But  it  is  to  me 
most  evident — nothing  more  certain — that  a  Chris- 
tian is  a  saint,  and  a  good  deal  more  ;  and  that  good 
deal  more  is,  that  he  is  a  saint  after  God  effected 
redemption  in  the  blood  of  Christ ;  that  he  is  a  saint 
united  to  Christ  at  God's  right  hand;  that  he  is  a 
saint  who  has  God  dwelling  in  him,  by  the  Spirit, 
for  God  now  can  dwell  there.  The  atoning  work  is 
done  :  the  blood  has  been  shed  and  sprinkled.  God 
can  take  up  His  abode  there — does !  How  do  I 
know  it  ?  Because  God  has  told  me  so  in  His  word. 
One  may  have  poor  enjoyment  of  it,  of  course — that 
is  another  thing;  but  the' enjoyment  of  the  truth 
depends  upon  the  measure  in  which  our  souls  first 
rest  upon  it,  believingly ;  and  then,  unless  we  judge 
the  flesh  that  hinders  the  realization  of  it,  we  cannot 
enjoy  it  either  long  or  much  if  at  all. 

God  shows,  then,  in  His  word,  that  the  Church  is 
the  union  of  believers — one  with  Christ,  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  after  He  died,  rose,  and  went  to  heaven. 
The  consequence  is,  that  we  must  consult  what  God 
enjoins  on  the  members  of  that  body,  if  we  would 


26  ONE    BODY. 

know  how  we  are  to  walk  and  worship  ;  how  we  are 
to  act  and  feel  towards  the  other  members  of  Christ ; 
and  how  to  behave  in  "  the  house  of  God." 

The  New  Testament  occupies  itself  with  these  sub- 
jects, more  particularly  the  epistles  of  St.  Paul.  It 
could  not  be  formally  or  definitely  in  the  Gospels, 
because  they  are  devoted  for  the  most  part  to  a 
living  Christ,  closing  with  the  facts  of  His  death, 
resurrection,  and  ascension.  You  may  find  there 
preparations  for  the  new  work  and  testimony — not  a 
few  intimations  of  what  was  going  to  be  done ;  but 
all  show  that  the  building  of  the  Church  was  not  yet 
begun.  In  the  epistles,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have 
revelations  altogether  founded  upon  the  great  fact 
that  the  building  was  going  on,  the  body  was  being 
formed.  And  mark  another  thing,  which  I  hope  to 
develop  on  the  next  occasion  I  address  you,  namely, 
that  along  with  the  body  of  Christ  goes  the  presence 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  It  is 
only  just  referred  to  here,  to  show  the  connexion: 
we  shall  find  its  importance  afterwards.  Those  who 
have  not  examined  fully  the  testimony  of  Scripture, 
will  feel  the  weight  and  value  of  the  instruction 
there  furnished,  when  that  point  comes  more  at 
length  before  us.  But  this  at  least  is  plain,  that 
though  it  is  a  new  work,  entirely  distinct  from  all 
that  God  had  wrought  before,  there  are  great  moral 
principles,  as  already  hinted,  which  always  abide. 
In  every  part  of  Scripture,  in  that  which  speaks  of 
the  times  before  the  law,  or  during  the  law,  as  well 
as  now  under  the  Gospel,  God  is  the   righteous, 


ONE    BODY.  27 

holy,  almighty,  faithful  One,  a  God  of  longsufiering, 
goodness,  truth :  all  this  remains ;  and  as  to  it,  the 
difference  is,  that  all  these  attributes  of  Grod  shine  out 
more  gloriously,  and,  in  consequence,  deepen  the 
revelation  of  Grod,  in  addition  to  there  being  ways 
and  workings  of  Grod  which  were  not  and  could 
not  be  expressed  before.  What  an  accession  of  light 
when  Christ,  the  true  light,  shone  !  What  an  infinite 
display  of  God  Himself  in  His  Person !  And  what 
shall  we  say  of  the  cross,  and  death,  resurrection  and 
glorification  of  Jesus  as  the  manifestation  of  Grod ! 

Hence,  in  this  new  man,  all  the  moral  glory  of  Grod, 
of  course,  abides ;  but  now,  in  presence  of  that  infi- 
nitely fuller  manifestation,  and  the  accomplishment 
of  eternal  redemption,  is  there  to  be  no  answer  in 
the  thoughts,  and  hearts,  and  ways  of  His  children  to 
what  the  Grod  and  Father  of  Christ  is  doing  ?  If,  for 
instance,  God  calls  a  person  into  the  place  of  a  servant, 
there  are  certain  responsibilities  that  attach  to  a  ser- 
vant. But  suppose  these  servants  turn  out  thoroughly 
unfaithful,  and  end  in  rebellion,  and  God  says,  "I 
will  have  no  more  of  this  ;  I  will  create  a  family  and 
adopt  children  to  Myself ;  I  will  bring  people,  accord- 
ing to  My  sovereign  pleasure,  out  of  the  old  condition 
into  this  new  place."  What  then  ?  It  is  evident  that 
to  go  back  to  what  was  true  of  the  servants  might  be 
a  most  misleading  guide  when  it  became  a  question 
of  the  children ;  and,  in  point  of  fact,  it  is  and  must 
be  so.  It  is  on  this  ground  that  Christians  meddle 
with  the  world — occupy  themselves  with  those  things 
that  please  the  flesh  and  give  importance  to  man. 


28  ONE    BODY. 

In  contrast  with  this,  (rod  has  given  us  the  glorious 
truth  that  He  has,  as  it  were,  but  one  man  (the 
first  Adam  being  done  with,  and  pronounced  to  be 
ruined,  dead,  buried  in  the  grave  of  Christ).  We, 
Christians,  belong  to  the  second  Man,  the  Lord  from 
Heaven  (1  Cor.  xv.).  There  is  "one  new  man,"  not 
only  in  contrast  with  old  distinctions,  but  as  uniting 
all,  Jewish  or  Grentile  saints,  in  one  body — His  body ; 
for  that  is  the  way  in  which  it  is  presented  in 
Ephes.  ii. 

The  consequence  is,  that  we  need,  and  Grod  gives 
us,  a  new  revelation ;  He  furnishes  fresh  instructions 
which  had  no  place  before.  Supposing  you  had  the 
New  Testament  in  Old  Testament  times,  what  would 
have  been  (I  will  not  say  the  worth,  but)  the  effect 
of  it  then  ?  Perplexing  beyond  measure  !  A  Jew 
would  not  have  known  what  to  do  with  it.  He 
might  have  been  struck  with  the  wisdom,  beauty, 
holiness,  and  love  of  it  all ;  but  how  to  act  upon  it 
and  reconcile  it  with  the  law  given  by  Moses,  it  would 
not  have  been  possible  for  him  to  know.  He  would 
have  been  commanded  by  the  Old  Testament  to  keep 
wholly  apart  from  the  Grentiles ;  he  would  have  been 
told  by  the  New  Testament  that  they  formed  one 
body,  and  that  they  were  all  one  in  Christ — that  both 
had  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father.  He  could 
not  have  put  these  things  together ;  and  no  wonder : 
they  were  not  meant  to  be  together.  They  belong 
to  distinct  times  and  to  totally  different  states.  The 
confusion  of  the  two  is  one  way  in  which  Satan 
has  triumphed  in  the  professing  Church.     Alas!  it 


ONE    BODY.  29 

was  not  otherwise  under  God's  dealings  with  the 
Jews.  While  He  was  standing  by  His  law,  they 
were  breaking  it ;  while  He  was  holding  up  the 
unity  of  the  Godhead,  they  were  set  upon  idols  and 
going  after  the  gods  of  the  nations.  They  were 
utterly  unfaithful  to  their  testimony ;  but  I  am  per- 
suaded that  a  Jew,  dark  as  he  was  and  little  versed 
in  the  mind  of  God,  would  have  perceived  that  the 
instructions  of  the  New  Testament  were  irreconcilable 
with  his  calling.  But  God  never  gave  it  thus. 
When  the  work  of  atonement  was  finished  on  the 
cross,  God  brought  out  these  new  revelations  by 
degrees.  Why  ?  Because  there  was  a  new  state  of 
things — "one  new  man" — that  did  not  exist  before. 
Consequently,  there  was  a  new  word  of  God  suited 
to  bring  out  the  due  relationship  of  Christians  to 
one  another,  and  the  working  of  God  in  the  Church, 
the  body  of  Christ. 

Let  me  notice,  briefly,  before  I  close,  the  practical 
effect — "  endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bond  of  peace. ' '  What  interest  this  has,  if  really 
applicable  in  the  face  of  our  divisions  !  Consider  for 
a  moment  the  case  of  a  Christian ;  he  is  awakened, 
finds  peace,  but  questions  what  he  is  to  do.  How 
truly  it  has  been  the  fact  that  many  of  us  have  been 
perplexed  in  such  circumstances.  We  may  have 
known  very  little  of  the  word  of  God ;  but  still  we 
found  difficulties  in  reconciling  that  word  with  what 
we  saw  around  us — especially  such  a  word  as  this, 
"endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit. " 
But  it  is  really  a  plain  and  humble  path.     I  have 


30  ONE    BODY. 

nothing  to  do  with  making  the  unity ;  I  have  not  to 
set  up  something,  or  join  what  others  make.  What 
then  ?  I  am  to  be  diligent  in  keeping  the  unity  of 
the  Spirit.  In  other  words,  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  made  a  unity ;  and  the  business  of  the  believer 
is  to  observe  that  unity — to  keep  it.  What  an 
amazing  relief  for  a  humble  soul,  that  feels  his 
liability  to  mistake,  in  danger  of  being  either  too 
lax  on  the  one  hand,  or  too  narrow  on  the  other ! 

What  is  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  ?  Where  does  it 
begin  and  end  ?  What  is  its  nature  and  character  ? 
Scripture  tells  us  that  He  has  established  a  unity 
among  men,  yet  apart  from  and  above  them.  What 
is  it  ?  The  answer  is,  It  is  in  the  Church,  which  Grod 
has  made  the  body  of  Christ.  What  a  comfort  it  is 
for  a  believer  that  he  has  simply  to  judge  by  the  word 
of  Grod  where  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  is  !  But  how  ? 
I  come  to  a  place,  and  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know  where 
to  turn.  Where  shall  I  find  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  ?  How  do  I  know  it  ?  God  has  left  land- 
marks ;  He  has  given  clear,  distinct  light  in  His 
word.  I  search  and  see  that  He  is  gathering 
together  the  children  of  God  into  one ;  He  gathers 
them  unto  the  name  of  Christ,  assuring  them  that 
where  they  are  thus,  He  is  in  their  midst.  I  never 
get  the  key  to  any  spiritual  difficulty  without  Christ. 
Do  I  merely  look  for  the  unity  of  Christians  ?  It  is 
a  delusion  and  a  danger  without  Christ.  Christians 
— where  shall  I  not  find  them  ?  In  what  pit  of  error 
may  I  not  discover  some  stray  child  of  God  ?  If  I 
go  in  quest  of  the  children  of  God,  I  may  easily 


ONE    BODY.  31 

see  them  in  this  form  of  worldliness  or  in  that;  I 
may  know  them  unattached  here,  close  and  bigotted 
there ;  I  may  find  them  gathered  together  according 
to  human  rules,  and  for  entirely  minor  objects  ;  I 
may  hear  them  setting  up  the  names  of  men,  certain 
special  doctrines,  favourite  views,  as  their  centres  of 
union.  Is  this  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  ?  What,  then, 
is  His  unity,  and  how  is  it  to  be  kept  ?  It  is  that 
which  He  forms  for  the  glory  of  Christ. 

Christians,  of  course,  are  those  that  compose  the 
unity;  yet  keeping  it  consists  not  in  the  bare  fact 
that  they  are  Christians,  but  that  they  are  gathered 
unto  Christ — gathered  not  to  His  bodily  presence,  but 
unto  His  name,  now  that  He  is  in  heaven  ;  none  the 
less,  however,  for  that,  but  the  more  counting  on  His 
presence  with  them,  though  unseen,  faithful  to  His 
own  word.  If  I  isolate  myself  where  I  may  thus 
meet,  I  am  indifferent  to  that  which  was  an  object  of 
the  death  of  Christ  (John  xi.  52),  and  I  am  setting  at 
nought  the  unity  of  the  Spirit ;  if  I  value  the  one 
and  am  diligent  to  keep  the  other,  I  shall  meet  on  that 
ground  and  on  none  other.  Many  members  of  Christ, 
no  doubt,  are  elsewhere  now,  who  ought  to  be  there, 
as  truly  as  any  that  are  gathered  to  that  name ;  but 
am  I  to  hold  aloof,  who  know  my  Master's  will, 
because  others  see  it  not,  or  are  faithless  if  they 
see  it  ?     Am  I  to  say  His  will  cannot  be  done  ? 

Therein  lies  part  of  the  ruin  of  Christendom ;  there 
is  the  painful  fact,  that  what  Christ  died  for,  Satan 
has  set  himself  to  oppose,  and  has  succeeded  in  it. 
Wonder  not ;  for  everything  that  Grod  undertakes  is 


32  ONE    BODY. 

first  of  all  put  into  man's  hand,  who  is  responsible 
to  use  it  for  Him.  Alas  !  there  is  but  one  issue — the 
utter  failure  of  man  ;  and  there  will  be  no  reversal  of 
the  tale  till  Jesus  comes  again.  Nay,  even  then  will 
be  another  trial  of  man,  to  show  whether  he  uses 
the  coming  and  kingdom  of  Jesus  for  God's  glory  ; 
and  the  end  of  the  millennium  will  prove  that,  as  it 
was  before,  so  it  will  be  then.  Nevertheless,  faith 
overcomes  at  all  times.  See  that  you  hold  the  truth 
fast.  Let  none  cheat  you  out  of  the  blessing  which 
God  has  given,  and  calls  you  to  enjoy.  Founded  on 
the  cross,  united  to  Christ,  waiting  for  His  return, 
the  Church  is  the  precious  fruit  of  God's  grace. 
After  His  people  departed  from  its  power,  and  even 
let  slip  the  bare  form  of  this  great  truth,  He  has 
brought  it  before  them  anew.  I  cannot  doubt  that 
its  recovery,  in  any  measure,  is  vouchsafed  of  Grod 
in  view  of  the  Lord's  speedy  coming :  else  how  do 
you  account  for  it  that  Grod  has  been  pleased  to  recall 
the  bride  to  put  herself,  as  it  were,  in  readiness  for 
the  Bridegroom,  signally  bringing  out  again  that 
mass  of  heavenly  testimony  which  had  been  despised, 
deserted,  and  forgotten  ?  Happy  are  they  who 
not  only  bow  and  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  it, 
but  keep  the  treasure  faithfully  !  "  Behold,  I  come 
quickly ;  hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no 
man  take  thy  crown."  Be  assured,  brethren,  that 
we  are  in  the  same  danger  as  men  ever  were  in,  of 
letting  slip  that  which  God  has  given  us ;  and  that 
every  engine  which  Satan  can  devise  to  drag  us 
away — taking  advantage  of  carelessness,  difficulties, 


ONE    BODY.  33 

trials,  or  anything  that  can  tax  us  to  the  utmost — 
will  all  be  put  in  force,  because  he  hates,  not  only  us, 
but  Christ  and  His  truth.  But  as  the  Lord  has  been 
pleased  to  raise  up  again  a  testimony  to  His  person, 
work,  and  heavenly  glory,  so  I  pray  and  beseech  you, 
especially  the  younger  of  my  brethren  and  sisters, 
who  are  here — all  who  may  not  have  felt  its  force 
and  preciousness — more  particularly  you  who  have 
been  trained  from  your  earliest  perceptions  of  truth, 
brought  in,  as  it  were,  rather  than  out,  at  compara- 
tively little  cost,  and  who  have  not  known  (as  some 
others)  the  wrenching  of  many  a  tie,  with  a  deep 
disciplinary  work  in  the  heart,  realizing  gradually 
the  true  condition  of  Christendom; — I  call  upon  you 
all  to  beware  lest  Satan  should,  in  any  insidious 
way,  lead  you  from  the  only  solid  divine  rock,  in  the 
midst  of  the  rising  surges  of  apostasy.  Fully  do  I 
admit,  that  all  who  are  brought  into  this  glorious 
place,  the  body  of  Christ,  ought  to  walk  and  carry 
themselves  in  a  way  suitable  to  such  a  position.  It 
is  a  deep  shame  where  there  is  no  devotedness  beyond 
what  existed  before  this  further  measure  of  truth 
dawned  on  our  souls  ;  not  only  a  shame  to  us,  but  a 
serious  hindrance  to  the  truth,  and  a  reproach  upon 
the  grace  of  Grod  that  revealed  it  and  brought  our 
souls  into  it,  that  after  all  there  should  be  such  an 
unworthy  manifestation  of  its  power.  But  how  are 
we  to  deal  with  this  ?  Are  we  therefore  to  slight  or 
doubt  the  truth  ?  Are  we,  because  of  our  unfaith- 
fulness, to  put  aside  the  plain  word  of  God,  that 
condemns  us,  for  a  lower  ground  on  which  we  can 

c 


34  ONE    BODY, 

rest  more  consistently  and  comfortably  P  Are  we  to 
yield  to  that  which  the  fleshly  mind  has  often  sought 
and  fallen  into — to  set  up  other  centres  than  Christ, 
other  ministry  than  that  of  the  Spirit  ?  Are  we  to 
abandon  the  only  place  and  principle  which  the  New 
Testament  allows  for  the  members  of  Christ's  body, 
on  the  -unbelieving  plea,  that,  as  to  walking  according 
to  this  heavenly  light,  it  is  a  thing  impracticable 
in  such  a  world  as  this  ?  There  are,  beyond  ques- 
tion, difficulties  and  perils  neither  few  nor  small  in 
maintaining  it.  There  is  constant  need  of  self- 
denial,  most  surely,  if  it  is  to  be  walked  in  with 
God. 

But  how  are  we  to  judge,  if  not  by  the  word  of 
God?     Are  we  prepared  to  surrender  His  word  as 
our  only  standard  of  judgment  ?    Now,  while  that 
word  of  course  condemns  deeply  the  shortcomings 
of  those  who  are  thus  privileged  of  Gfod — not  only 
brought  into  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  as  all  saints 
are,  but  brought  into  the  conscious  knowledge  and 
faith  of  it ;  while  the  failure  of  such  is,  in  a  certain 
sense,  more  inexcusable  than  that  of  any  others,  yet  at 
least  such   are  justifying  God   and  His  word  and 
Spirit  against  themselves  in  a  humbling  way.    Taking 
our  stand  upon  this,  that  no  one  should  glory  save 
in  the  Lord,  we  shall  find,  and  painfully  too,  that 
we  are  brought  into  this  place  to  learn  our  faults  as 
we  never  knew  them — the  shortcomings  of  others  as 
we  never  suspected  them.     We  may  be  astonished 
at  the  manifold  failures,  trials,  hairbreadth  escapes, 
and  deep  occasions  of  shame ;  but  how  come  these 


ONE    BODY.  35 

to  be  so  seen  and  felt  ?  Because  it  is  not  the  ground 
of  the  Church  ?  Nay  !  but  because  it  is.  And  one  of 
the  most  comforting  things  to  our  faith,  in  that  which 
naturally  might  perplex,  is,  that  we  learn  the  present, 
permanent  value  of  the  Scriptures  as  we  never 
proved  it  before.  Take  all  the  ways  of  God  in  dis- 
cipline :  they  did  not  apply  while  we  were  mixed 
up  with  the  world-church ;  but  how  precious,  profit- 
able, and  indispensably  needed  when  we  endeavour 
to  keep  the  Spirit's  unity !  Take  again  all  the 
warnings  about  the  world :  we  hardly  knew  what  it 
was.  Is  it  not  with  Christians  a  constant  question 
what  the  world  is  ;  or  is  not  the  answer  that  they  give 
us  the  proof  of  an  unsuspected,  blinding  influence? 
They  have  something  or  other  which  they  avoid  doing, 
and  this  they  call  "  the  world."  But  the  moment  we 
see  the  body  of  Christ,  the  world  acquires  a  plain 
meaning  :  if  we  realize  what  it  is  to  be  among  those 
"within,"  those  "without"  are  no  longer  a  vague, 
uncertain  thing. 

Let  us  not  fear,  then,  to  quit  all  for  the  honour  of 
God  in  this  world ;  let  us  look  to  Him  for  grace  that 
we  may  bear  all  rather  than  abandon  it.  There  may 
be  only  two  or  three ;  but  yet  if  they  contemplate 
the  body  of  Christ,  shutting  out  none  save  according 
to  His  will,  not  for  any  feelings  of  their  own,  it  is  the 
only  thing  that  is,  or  ever  was,  divinely  large  in  this 
selfish  world,  as  far  as  men  are  concerned.  I  do  not 
mean  that  any  who  blaspheme  Christ,  or  who  make 
light  of  blasphemers  in  their  deeds,  if  not  in  their 
words,  should  be  sanctioned.  "  0  my  soul,  come 
c  2 


36  ONE    BODY. 

not  thou  into  their  secret ;  unto  their  assembly,  mine 
honour,  be  not  thou  united."  It  is  vain  to  argue 
that  the  Spirit's  unity  can  make  so  light  of  Christ 
and  His  glory.  I  say  not  that  individually  such 
may  not  be  Christ's :  we  know  what  Satan  may  do 
even  with  one  who  really  loves  the  Lord — how 
he  may  ensnare  him  into  denying  his  Master,  and 
denying  Him  with  oaths,  too ;  but  who  would  con- 
tend for  justifying  such  sin,  or  having  communion 
with  the  guilty,  till  it  was  put  away  ? 

I  repeat,  then,  if  there  be  only  two  or  three,  and 
they  endeavour  to  "  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
bond  of  peace/'  with  them  is  my  place  as  a  Christian. 
My  heart  should  go  out  to  every  Christian,  in  what- 
ever circumstances,  whether  nationalist,  dissenting, 
or,  if  there  be  such,  in  popery ;  my  heart  should  go 
out,  spite  of  the  error  and  evil — yea,  the  rather 
because  of  these  things,  in  intercession.  But  then, 
am  I  to  give  up  diligent  observance  of  the  Spirit's 
unity  ?  Am  I  to  follow  and  join  them  in  what  I 
know  to  be  unscriptural  and  sinful,  because  there  is  a 
Christian  or  many  Christians  there  ?  Surely  not !  We 
ought  to  get  them  out,  with  and  for  the  Lord.  How 
is  this  to  be  done  ?  Not  by  plunging  ourselves  into 
the  mud,  but,  on  the  contrary,  by  taking  our  stand 
resolutely  on  the  rock  outside  of  it;  and  there, 
seeking  grace  from  Grod  that,  by  the  manifestation  of 
the  truth  in  every  man's  conscience,  and  by  holding 
out  the  light  of  Christ  in  the  word — pressing,  too,  the 
responsibility  of  Christ's  body  on  His  members,  they 
may  be  turned  from  the  error  of  their  way.     Never 


ONE    BODY.  37 

deny  that  they  are  members  of  the  body  of  Christ ; 
remind  them  of  that  very  fact  and  of  its  gravity — 
that  they  are  members  of  His  body:  why  should 
they  value  any  other  body?  If  members  of  that 
"  one  body,"  why  not  own  it,  and  own  it  always, 
and  nothing  else  ?  If  they  belong  to  the  unity  of 
the  Spirit,  why  not  endeavour  to  keep  it  ?  Grod  is 
now  raising  a  question,  not  about  Popery  and 
Protestantism,  but  about  Christendom's  denial  of 
His  Church,  Christ's  body.  Our  business  is  not  to 
originate  a  Church  of  the  present  or  future,  but  to 
cleave  to  the  Church  Grod  has  made,  and  consequently 
to  confess  the  sin  of  all  rivals — to  repudiate  them 
and  come  out  from  them.  Let  us  put  away  every 
human  invention  in  the  things  of  Grod,  and  keep 
ourselves  from  idols.  The  word  of  Grod  at  all  times 
calls  upon  His  children  to  be  subject  to  Himself  and 
to  His  will.  Are  we  so  doing  ?  On  the  one  hand,  "  If 
ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them ;" 
on  the  other,  "  To  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good  and 
doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin."  Surely,  if  there  be 
one  thing  in  which,  more  than  another,  human  will  is 
most  evidently  sin,  it  is  in  that  place  where  Grod 
exalts  the  Lord  Christ ;  where  He  has  sent  down  the 
Holy  Grhost  that  He  may  be  a  spring  of  power  in 
His  people's  obedience. 

Though  this  be  merely  an  introductory  lecture,  and 
therefore  I  cannot  be  supposed  to  enter  into  all  the 
proofs  now — only  laying  down  a  kind  of  foundation, 
for  the  subjects  which  we  hope  to  pursue ;  yet  I  do 


38  ONE    BODY. 

trust  that  enough  has  been  said  to  make  plain,  even 
to  the  least  mature  of  those  who  hear  me,  the  im- 
mense importance  of  their  seeking  from  Grod  to 
realize  that  they  are  not  only  saints,  but  Christians, 
resting  upon  redemption,  united  to  Christ,  and  re- 
sponsible to  act  as  members  of  His  body,  diligent 
in  keeping  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  and  none  other  in 
this  world.  This  is  a  divine  obligation,  superior  to 
any  changes  in  the  Church's  state  here  below.  It  is 
no  question  of  numbers,  but  a  duty  always  binding, 
even  though  there  were  only  two  or  three  who  saw 
the  truth. 


"ONE    SPIRIT." 

1  Cor.  xii.  1—13. 

LECTURE   II. 


My  task  to-night  is  that  which  I  am  persuaded 
ought  to  be  the  business  of  every  Christian  man, 
not  in  word  only,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth — to 
assert  the  rights  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  Church 
of  God.  I  say,  to  assert  His  rights,  for  I  assume  here 
the  personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  needless 
now  to  give  any  proofs  of  this  any  more  than  of  His 
Deity.  These  truths  can  be  taken  for  granted,  not  as 
if  there  were  not  abundant  proofs  in  the  word  of 
God,  but  because  they  are  at  present  uncalled  for. 
But  it  is  another  thing,  beloved  friends,  when  we 
speak  of  the  rights  of  the  Holy  Ghost — His  proper 
sovereign  action  in  the  Church,  flowing  from  His 
personal  presence  as  sent  down  from  heaven.  On 
this  subject  many  find  difliculties  and  obscurities; 
and  great  ignorance  exists  even  among  the  children 
of  God,  and  those,  too,  who  may  have  been  greatly 


Z  ONE    SPIRIT. 

blessed ;  in  and  by  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  may  have 
acted  powerfully  for  the  good  of  souls.  Unless, 
however,  we  know  this  truth  from  God,  unless  we 
have  it  as  a  divine  certainty  in  our  souls,  it  is  clear 
that,  whatever  grace  may  do  in  giving  one  practical 
subjection,  yet  there  must  be  much  lost,  if  we  do  not 
know  the  special  ways  in  which  it  is  the  will  of  God 
that  the  Holy  Ghost,  present  both  in  the  individual 
and  in  the  Church  of  God,  should  be  honoured.  On 
this  theme — a  large  one  for  a  single  discourse — I 
propose  now  to  enter. 

Here,  too,  as  in  treating  of  the  "  one  body,"  I 
would  show  from  God's  word  that  which  was  always 
true  of  the  Spirit,  and  which,  therefore,  has  no 
special  connexion  with  the  present  time,  in  order 
that  we  may  the  better  discern  in  what  God  is  now 
manifesting  Himself,  and  how  it  is  that  Christians 
— for  of  them  I  speak — are  apt  to  be  mistaken  as  to 
this.  A  mistake  here  is  so  much  the  more  serious 
a  thing,  as  it  is  a  question  of  duly  recognizing  a 
divine  Person.  If  we  maintain  the  title  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  act  as  He  will  in  the  Church,  no  question  is 
raised  about  His  work  in  souls  from  the  beginning. 
No  person  intelligently  acquainted  with  the  Scrip- 
tures doubts  the  fact  or  its  importance  ;  neither  is 
there  the  least  thought,  wish,  or  motive  to  do  so.  The 
Holy  Spirit  has  always  been  the  direct  agent  in 
whatever  God  Himself  has  undertaken.  If  we  look 
at  creation,  the  Spirit  had  His  part  there.  If  we  look 
again  at  the  elders  who  obtained  a  good  report 
through  faith,  no    believer  questions  for  a  moment 


ONE    SPIRIT.  3 

that  it  was  only  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
that  man  believed  then  as  now.  He  wrought  in 
Abel,  Enoch,  Noah,  and  in  all  others  whom  the 
Scriptures  testify  as  the  line  of  saints.  So,  again, 
when  God  espoused  His  people  Israel,  if  He  wrought 
in  any  especial  fashion  suited  to  the  display  of  His 
glory  in  their  midst,  it  was  the  Spirit  of  God  who 
was  the  energetic  power  behind  and  within.  It  was 
He  that  wrought,  for  instance,  from  a  Moses  down 
to  a  Bezaleel,  from  Samson  up  to  David.  When 
we  come  to  the  prophets,  it  need  scarcely  be  said 
it  was  under  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  holy 
men  of  God  spoke ;  the  Spirit  of  Christ  made  them 
to  be  witnesses  beforehand  of  His  sufferings,  and  of 
His  glories  that  were  to  follow,  little  as  they  might 
themselves  understand  His  sufferings.  Thus,  there 
is  no  disposition  whatever  in  those  who  stand  for 
present  privileges,  to  obscure,  but  on  the  contrary 
to  give  the  fullest  value  to,  all  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  ever  wrought ;  for  in  truth  there  never  was  any- 
thing of  God  in  which  He  did  not  work. 

But  when  we  come  to  the  New  Testament,  a  new 
thing  comes  to  view.  A  despised,  crucified,  depart- 
ing Son  of  man  was  a  strange  sound  (John  xii.  34). 
They  looked  for  Christ  to  abide  for  ever,  and  to  reign 
in  glory  and  righteous  blessing  upon  earth.  But 
gradually,  as  man,  and  Israel  especially,  rejected  Him, 
the  truth — astonishing  to  the  Jew — dawned  more 
and  more,  that  He,  the  Messiah  and  Son  of  God,  was 
going  to  leave  the  earth.  Gentiles,  I  am  aware, 
think  little  of  this;  but  do  they,  therefore,  show 
a  2 


4  ONE    SPIRIT. 

superior  wisdom  ?  To  the  Jew  it  was  a  most  start- 
ling announcement,  and  at  first  sight  irreconcileable 
with  the  law  and  prophets.  They  had  looked  for 
Him,  the  promised  One,  and  their  hearts  delighted 
in  His  presence  :  it  was  what  kings  and  prophets  had 
desired  most  earnestly.  God  had  put  the  desire 
into  their  souls ;  but  now  that  it  was  gratified  in  His 
coming,  He  is  going  to  leave  them,  to  sink  down  in 
sorrow  and  shame  and  death — the  death  of  the  cross 
— under  man's,  ay,  and  under  God's,  hand ;  and  not 
merely  this,  hut  when  He  rose  again  (instead  of 
maintaining  His  glory  from  the  throne  of  His  father 
David,  and  filling  the  earth  with  the  blessedness 
that  was  foretold,  and  accomplishing,  and  more  than 
accomplishing,  all  that  their  hearts  had  so  fondly 
hoped  was  just  about  to  dawn  and  for  ever  brighten 
this  world),  He  was  about  to  leave  the  world  in  its 
darkness ;  at  any  rate,  He  was  about  to  retire  again  to 
the  heavens  whence  He  came.  But  if  He  was  about 
to  go  on  high,  it  was  not  as  He  came  down ;  for  as 
the  Son  of  (rod,  He  had  come  down  to  become  man — 
"the  "Word  was  made  flesh;"  and  now  as  man, 
risen  from  the  dead,  He  was  leaving  the  world  to 
take  His  place  at  the  right  hand  of  God ;  and  during 
His  absence  on  high,  He  would  send  down  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  a  way  never  before  known.  The  Old 
Testament  prepares  the  heart  for  a  present  Messiah, 
and  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  needed 
appropriate  meed  paid  to  the  reign  of  the  Messiah 
over  the  earth ;  but  the  Messiah,  on  His  death  and 
resurrection,  disappearing  from  the  view  of  the  world 


ONE    SPIRIT.  0 

that  had  cast  Him  out,  entering  into  a  new  and 
heavenly  scene,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down 
personally  in  His  absence  to  be  here  while  He  was 
there — all  this  was  something  wholly  unexpected  by 
the  Jew.  If  Gentiles  do  not  turn  aside  and  wonder 
at  the  great  sight,  it  is  certainly  not  from  excess  of 
spiritual  feeling  or  intelligence.  We  may  find,  of 
course,  the  wonder  of  stupidity ;  but  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  no  wonder,  just  because  there  is  no  real 
thought  about  it.  I  believe  this  is  the  reason  why, 
if  there  be,  on  the  one  hand,  the  wonder  of  men 
who  are  surprised,  there  is  a  lack  of  wonder  in  others, 
because  they  are  too  engrossed  in  earthly  things  to 
be  really  concerned. 

Now  this,  next  to  Christ,  is  the  central  truth  of 
the  New  Testament ;  but  so  far  from  its  being  the 
solid  ground  on  which  Christians  are  now  walking, 
in  point  of  fact,  all  is  reduced  in  their  minds  to  a 
mere  continuation  of  the  influence  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  always  exerted.  The  consequence  is,  that 
all  men  who  reject  His  special  presence  in  Person  on 
earth,  as  a  consequence  of  redemption,  are  driven  into 
the  most  painful  expedients  in  order  to  evade  the 
plainest  Scriptures.  I  may  just  mention  one  case :  it 
will  perhaps  startle  some  that  such  assertions  should 
be  made,  and  especially  by  a  person  of  large  reputa- 
tion for  spiritual  knowledge.  It  will  show  where 
want  of  faith,  as  to  the  great  truth  of  the  actual 
presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  way  never  experi- 
enced before,  lands  those  who  oppose  it  systematically. 
In  order  to  escape  the  clear  intimation  of  a  new  and 


6  ONE    SPIRIT. 

incomparable  blessing  in  the  shape  of  the  Comforter, 
they  allege  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  had  always 
been  given,  departed  from  the  earth  when  the  Lord 
was  here,  in  order  that  the  Lord  should  give  Him 
once  more  on  His  own  ascension  to  heaven.  Thns, 
the  time  of  the  Saviour's  presence  on  earth  would  be, 
not  a  bright  and  happy  feast,  but  dearth,  as  regarded 
the  Spirit  of  God  !  I  just  name  the  thought,  in  order 
that  you  may  see  the  excessive  violence,  not  to  say 
folly,  to  which  unbelief  reduces  even  intelligent  men 
of  Grod.  Need  I  say,  on  the  contrary,  that  those  who 
surrounded  the  Saviour,  and  were  blessed  by  His 
teaching,  had  all  the  Old  Testament  saints  ever 
enjoyed,  and  a  great  deal  more  ?  The  Holy  Ghost 
had  quickened  their  souls,  like  their  predecessors,  by 
giving  them  faith  in  Christ.  Besides,  the  disciples 
had  the  Messiah's  presence,  and  the  manifestation  of 
grace  and  truth  in  Him  and  all  His  words  and  ways. 
No  doubt  there  was  much  they  could  not  then  bear, 
as  the  Lord  Himself  told  them ;  but  still  they  were  as 
truly  believers  as  any  had  ever  been  before  them. 
The  fact  is,  such  reasoning  is  the  puny  effort  of  man 
to  escape  from  the  solemn  truth  of  God. 

The  New  Testament  is  most  explicit.  Our  Lord  first 
of  all  brings  out  the  doctrine  of  the  Spirit;  and  this,  as 
fully  meeting  the  need  of  man  to  be  born  of  the  Spirit 
and  to  have  the  Holy  Ghost  in  order  that  he  should  be 
able  to  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  But 
more  than  this,  He  prepares  the  disciples  for  the 
mighty  work  in  spreading  the  truth  and  the  grace  of 
God.     The  Holy  Ghost  was  necessary  for  this ;  and 


ONE    SPIRIT. 


accordingly  we  have  it  in  chap.  vii. — a  Scripture  which 
it  is  impossible  to  escape.  The  Lord  had  put  it  in  a 
figurative  way,  that  out  of  the  belly  of  him  who 
believed  should  flow  rivers  of  living  water.  "  This 
spake  He  of  the  Spirit,"  which  should  not  only  be 
given  to  a  person  in  order  to  make  him  believe,  but 
"  which  they  that  believe  should  receive ;  for  the 
Holy  Grhost  was  not  yet  [given],  because  that  Jesus 
was  not  yet  glorified."  Lengthy  reasoning  on  such  a 
Scripture  would  be  a  dishonour  to  the  word  of  God. 
Where  there  is  an  obscurity,  we  may  try  to  explain  and 
illustrate ;  but  where  the  language  employed  is  plainer 
than  any  that  could  be  substituted  in  its  stead,  I  feel 
that  it  is  due  to  Scripture  simply  to  press  that  plain 
meaning. 

In  the  later  chapters  of  the  same  gospel,  again, 
we  have  our  Lord  bringing  out,  not  merely  the  fact 
that  after  the  glorification  of  Jesus  the  Holy  Grhost 
was  to  be  given,  as  He  had  not  been  before;  but, 
besides,  we  have  His  personal  action,  when  sent  and 
come,  entered  into  fully  and  definitely.  Hence  in 
John  xiv.  He  is  spoken  of  as  the  Comforter.  Mark 
the  importance  of  this.  We  may  reason  about  the 
Holy  Grhost  being  given,  as  if  it  meant  no  more  than 
a  spiritual  power,  but  we  cannot  thus  attenuate  the 
sent  Comforter.  Who  is  He  but  the  Holy  Grhost 
Himself?  No  one  can  say  that  "  Comforter "  means 
a  miracle,  or  a  tongue,  or  any  operation  you  please. 
Doubtless  He  works  in  all  these  various  ways ;  but 
it  is  a  real  Person  who  replaces  the  Messiah  when 
He  leaves  the  earth.     Just  read  a  few  verses  of  the 


8  ONE    SPIRIT. 

chapter,  in  order  to  make  this  still  plainer :  "  I  will 
pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  yon  another 
Comforter,  that  He  may  abide  with  you  for  ever." 
There,  again,  we  have  what  is  most  evident.  Miracles 
have  been ;  tongues  cease ;  prophecies  and  knowledge 
pass  away ;  but  here  we  have  a  divine  Person,  who 
abides  with  the  saints  for  ever — "  even  the  Spirit  of 
truth;  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it 
seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him :  but  ye  know 
Him ;  for  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you." 
The  world  was  bound  to  receive  Jesus,  and  after 
an  outward  manner  it  had  Him  there ;  but  here  we 
find  One  who,  not  having  become  incarnate,  could  not 
in  any  way  be  brought  before  the  eyes  of  the  world. 
I  admit,  of  course,  the  world  does  not  really  receive 
Jesus  in  a  spiritual  manner  any  more  than  the  Holy 
Grhost ;  but  still  there  is  a  pointed  reference  to  the 
manner  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  presence  here  below, 
which  excludes  Him  from  all  apprehension  on  the 
world's  part,  as  an  object  either  of  sight  or  of 
knowledge. 

Again,  in  John  xiv.  26,  we  read,  "  the  Comforter, 
which  is  the  Holy  Grhost,  whom  the  Father  will  send 
in  my  name,  He  shall  teach  you  all  things, 
and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance,  what- 
soever I  have  said  unto  you."  It  is  not  a  gift 
or  power  or  influence  merely,  but  a  Person  sent, 
and  a  Person  who  teaches  all  things,  and  brings 
all  the  Lord's  sayings  to  their  remembrance.  Then, 
in  chap.  xv.  26,  "  but  when  the  Comforter  is  come," 
it  is  not  merely  in  this  case  "  sent "   (because  one 


ONE    SPIRIT.  9 

might  argue,  perhaps,  about  the  sending  of  an  in- 
fluence), but  "come"  "When  the  Comforter  is 
come,  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  Father, 
even  the  Spirit  of  truth  [in  every  way  guarding  this 
most  weighty  theme],  which  proceedeth  from  the 
Father,  He  shall  testify  of  me  :  and  ye  also  shall  bear 
witness,  because  ye  have  been  with  me  from  the  be- 
ginning." Assuredly  we  have  the  Holy  Spirit's 
coming  presented  with  solemnity  and  distinctness. 
In  the  former  chapter  the  Father  sends  Him  in 
Christ's  name ;  in  this,  Christ  sends  Him  from  the 
Father.  In  the  one  case,  He  is  said  to  bring  all 
things  Christ  had  spoken  to  their  remembrance  ;  in 
the  other,  He  comes  down  from  the  Son,  and  bears 
witness  of  Him.  They  had  been  conversant  with  Him 
upon  earth,  and  were  to  attest  it  as  witnesses ;  also 
the  Spirit  from  Him  in  Heaven  comes  down,  that 
there  should  be,  as  it  were,  these  joint  witnesses  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Then  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  John  we  have  the 
truth  still  further  unfolded,  and,  if  possible,  with 
increasing  energy,  as  it  is  indeed  of  the  deepest 
interest  and  importance.  In  chapter  xiv.  the  Lord 
had  told  them  that  they  ought  to  rejoice,  because 
He  went  to  the  Father.  He  was  leaving  a  scene  of 
humiliation  and  suffering  to  be  in  the  home  of  the 
Father's  love  and  glory.  Had  their  love  been  simple, 
had  they  been  thinking  of  Him,  not  of  themselves, 
they  would  have  rejoiced  because  He  was  going  to 
the  Father.  But  now,  in  chapter  xvi.  He  puts  it 
upon  other  ground :  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  [and 


10  ONE    SPIRIT. 

not  only,  as  it  were,  for  me]  that  I  go  to  the  Father." 
What!  expedient  for  those  poor,  weak,  trembling 
disciples  that  He  had  watched  over,  in  the  face  of  all 
Israel  who  despised  Him  and  wonld  not  be  gathered 
to  Him  ?  Surely  under  His  wing  He  had  gathered 
those  little  ones,  and  sheltered  them  ;  yea,  in  the 
very  hour  of  His  own  rejection  He  had  turned  His 
hand  upon  them.  And  now  He  must  leave  them. 
Yet  it  was  expedient  for  them  that  He  should  go  to 
the  Father.  How  could  this  be  ?  There  is  but  one 
answer ;  and  it  is  the  answer  that  the  Lord  gives. 
It  is  what,  in  His  mind,  made  it  expedient.  Blessed 
as  it  was  to  have  the  Messiah,  His  presence,  just  be- 
cause He  was  a  man  upon  earth  with  a  group  of 
disciples  around  Him,  was  necessarily  limited.  He 
could  not  thus  be,  as  man,  everywhere  throughout 
the  earth.  The  Holy  Ghost  had  not,  like  the  Son, 
taken  human  nature  into  union  with  His  Person. 
But  more  than  that,  when  redemption  was  effected, 
He  could,  in  the  most  intimate  way,  bring  into  the 
hearts  of  the  disciples  all  the  value  that  flowed  from 
Christ  and  His  work — Christ  exalted  to  heaven  and 
estimated  of  God  the  Father  there. 

Thus,  then,  were  the  great  foundations  of  truth 
laid.  The  Lord  Jesus  would  not  leave  this  world 
or  go  to  the  Father,  until  every  question  that  God 
had  with  guilty  man  was  settled  for  ever.  When 
sin  was  put  away  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself  on  the 
cross,  when  righteousness  was  established  in  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead  and  exalted  on  high,  it  was 
not  merely  all  pure  grace,  as  before,  but  now  it  be- 


ONE    SPIRIT.  11 

came  a  question  of  God's  righteousness  through  the 
work  of  the  Saviour.  The  efficacy  of  His  blood 
turned  the  scale  in  favour  of  man  ;  for  it  was  the  man 
Christ  Jesus  who  had  thus  glorified  God  about  sin. 
No  doubt,  He  was  His  own  beloved  Son,  the  inesti- 
mable gift  of  His  own  grace ;  and  man  could  boast 
nothing,  for  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  man — 
hated  without  a  cause.  Still,  there  was  the  fact,  that 
God  had  so  looked  down  upon  earth,  more  especially 
upon  the  cross,  to  find  the  man  who  suffered  all,  that 
Grod  Himself  might  be  glorified.  This  truth  changed 
everything.  Now,  it  became  a  question,  so  to  speak, 
for  Grod  :  what  could  He  do  for  this  blessed  man  ?  If 
He  was  God's  Son,  was  this  a  reason  why  He  should 
love  or  exalt  Him  less  ?  He  raises  up  from  the  grave 
the  man  Christ  Jesus,  and  sets  Him  at  His  own  right 
hand.  That  was  not  only  a  personal  act  in  honour 
of  Christ,  but  for  believers  it  is  the  measure,  in 
infinite  grace,  of  acceptance  which  is  now  theirs  in 
virtue  of  Him.  All  heaven  was  filled  with  wonder 
and  praise  at  the  sight  of  man,  made  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels,  taken  up  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  far 
above  all  principalities  and  powers,  to  sit  on  the 
throne  of  God.  Yea,  God  Himself  from  that  moment 
has  made  it  His  business  and  delight  to  show  His 
value  for  the  man  who,  in  the  face  of  sin,  death, 
Satan,  and  divine  judgment,  retrieved  all  His  cha- 
racter, and  brought  glory  to  His  name  in  delivering, 
by  suffering  for,  the  guilty  to  the  uttermost.  Before 
that,  man  had  been  the  constant  public  agent  in 
dishonouring  God.     Never  was  God  so  slighted,  in- 


12  ONE    SPIRIT. 

suited,  provoked  by  any  of  His  creatures  as  by  man. 
Satan,  when  he  left  his  first  estate,  once  and  for  ever 
forfeited  his  place.  There  might  still  be  a  more 
terrible  judgment  awaiting  him  ;  but  there  was  no 
mercy — no  beam  of  hope  pierced  through  the  dark- 
ness into  which  sin  plunged  a  fallen  angel.  But  now, 
after  man  had  preferred  darkness  to  light,  after  his 
manifold  course  of  rebellion  against  God  was  run, 
the  tide  was  turned  in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  (rod 
was  placed  by  His  work  under  an  obligation,  so  to 
say,  to  man  to  bless  him  through  and  in  Christ  the 
Lord. 

Hence  that  expression  of  which  St.  Paul  is  so  full, 
"  the  righteousness  of  Grod."  If  man  was  more  than 
ever  proved  to  be  lost,  God  now  had  a  debt  to  pay. 
As  a  part  of  His  discharge  of  it,  He  sets  the  Lord 
Jesus,  as  man,  at  His  own  right  hand  ;  He  justifies 
freely  and  fully  every  believer ;  and  He  sends  down 
the  Holy  Ghost,  in  order  that  He  might  be  the 
divine  link  between  that  blessed  Man  in  glory  and 
those  who  believed  in  Him,  even  such  as  had  trem- 
bled at  the  thought  of  His  departure.  What  a 
change  there  is  now !  It  was  not  only  that  there 
was  intelligence,  but  there  was  power.  Peter,  who 
had  denied  the  Lord,  could  now  stand  boldly  for- 
ward and  say,  "  But  ye  denied  the  Holy  One  and 
the  Just."  They  were  all  dumb.  His  denial  was 
completely  gone,  and  I  might  venture  to  say,  more 
gloriously  to  the  Lord,  than  if  he  had  never  uttered 
it.  There  was  a  positive  strength  and  triumph  in 
his  soul ;  there  was  a  knowledge,  not  only  of  his  own 


ONE    SPIRIT.  13 

weakness  and  worthlessness,  but  of  God  and  His 
grace — a  sense  of  what  Christ  was  for  him,  that  was 
beyond  all  he  had  ever  known  before.  I  do  not  say 
beyond  grace,  unless  Peter  had  done  what  he  did ; 
but  surely  there  was  immense  force  in  his  words. 
They  knew  well  what  he  had  done,  publicly  done, 
in  the  high  priest's  hall,  and  before  people  ready 
enough  to  see  the  faults  of  a  disciple.  Yet  this 
repeated  and  recent  denier  of  his  Lord  was  so  full 
of  courage,  through  abundance  of  grace,  as  to  stand 
forth  and  confront  and  tell  them  that  it  was  they 
that  "denied  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just."  His 
conscience  was  purged ;  he  had  no  more  conscience 
of  sins  (Heb.  x.)  ;  all  was  blotted  out  that  could  be 
against  him  before  Grod.  Yea,  he  was  justified  from 
all  things. 

This  was  merely  one  fruit,  precious  as  it  was ;  and 
what  did  it  grow  out  of  ?  Peter  had  been  a  believer 
before,  and  had  already  eternal  life  :  what,  then, 
was  its  spring  ?  It  was  part  of  the  result  of  the 
great  salvation  made  good  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  Grod  come  down  from  heaven,  and  thus  working 
in  Peter.  No  doubt  there  was  previous  moral  exer- 
cise, deep  penitence  for  his  sins,  and  the  restoration 
of  his  soul ;  but  then  there  was  more  than  all  this, 
there  was  the  positive  power  of  the  Spirit.  It  is 
here,  though  not  here  only,  that  the  Church  shows 
its  weakness  through  unbelief.  To  the  believer  it 
is  not  a  mere  negative  question  now,  but  one  of  real 
present  power;  as  was  said  of  Timothy — who  needed 
to  be  reminded  of  it — that  it  was  not  a  Spirit  of  fear 


14  ONE    SPIRIT. 

he  had  received,  but  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a 
sound  mind. 

But  now  we  must  return  to  the  great  fact :  the 
Lord  Jesus,  in  John  xiv.,  xv.,  xvi.,  shows  what  was 
to  replace  His  personal  presence  upon  earth — a  real 
divine  Paraclete — He  whom  we  call  the  third  Person 
in  the  Trinity.  I  do  not,  however,  admire  the  ex- 
pression " second "  or  "third"  Person;  and  for  this 
reason,  that  it  tends  to  bring  in  a  subordination  in 
the  Godhead  where  Scripture  does  not.  You  cannot 
have  a  secondary  God.  You  may  bring  human 
reasonings  into  the  subject,  and  talk  about  a  son, 
and  his  subjection  to  his  father ;  but  therein  is  the 
very  thing  which  is  so  dangerous,  and  of  which,  to 
my  mind,  the  devil  has  taken  great  advantage.  The 
Scripture  shows  that  the  Father  is  Grod,  the  Son 
is  God,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  God ;  that  they  are,  one 
and  all,  equally  Jehovah.  Subordination  in  respect 
of  Deity  is  only  a  means  of  undermining  the  proper 
Godhead  of  the  Son  and  the  Spirit.  The  notion  of 
subordination  is  true  only  when  we  look  at  the  place 
of  manhood  the  Son  deigned  to  take,  or  at  the  office 
the  blessed  Holy  Ghost  is  now  filling  to  the  glory  of 
the  Son,  just  as  the  Son  served  and  will  yet  reign  to 
the  glory  of  God  the  Father. 

To  return,  however.  The  Lord  Jesus  tells  us  it 
was  expedient  that  He  should  go  away — "  For  if  I 
go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you ; 
but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  Him  unto  you.  And  when 
He  is  come,  He  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment:  of  sin,  because  they 


ONE    SPIRIT.  15 

believe  not  on  me  ;  of  righteousness,  because  I  go 
to  my  Father,  and  ye  see  me  no  more  ;  of  judgment, 
because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged."  Any 
particular  notice  of  this  Scripture  is  not  the  point 
now,  but  rather  the  general  truth.  This  was  the 
twofold  purpose  of  the  Holy  Grhost  in  coming  here 
below.  He  proves  that  the  world  was  under  sin ; 
that  there  is  no  righteousness  here,  but  only  in  the 
Just  One  with  the  Father  ;  and  that  as  to  the  prince 
of  this  world,  he  is  judged — the  sentence  not  executed, 
but  he  judged.  There  was  hope  for  the  world  with 
the  Jew ;  but  now,  from  the  point  of  view  in  which 
the  Lord  speaks  of  His  own  going  and  the  Holy 
Ghost's  coming,  the  world  is  evidently  lost,  and  the 
Spirit  here  is  but  its  reprover.  Next,  this  same 
Holy  Spirit  should  lead  the  disciples  into  the  truth, 
taking  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  glorifying  Him. 
There  is  thus  a  double  relation  of  the  Holy  Grhost — 
to  the  world,  as  a  system  outside  and  condemned  ;  to 
the  saints,  whom  He  leads,  telling  them  of  things  to 
come,  yea,  of  all  things  pertaining  to  Christ  and  His 
glory.  Such  is  the  plain  doctrine  of  the  Apostle 
John  as  to  the  Spirit. 

Thence  we  come  to  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles :  is 
there  anything  there  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  an- 
swers to  our  Lord's  promises  ?  There  need  not  be  a 
doubt.  In  chapter  i.  the  disciples  are  with  the  Lord, 
entering  but  very  feebly  into  that  which  had  filled 
His  heart  before  He  goes  away.  They  were  still 
looking  for  the  kingdom,  and  great  things  for 
the  earth   and   for   Israel.      They   were    not,  it   is 


16  ONE    SPIRIT. 

true,  sunk  so  low  as  the  unbelieving  thoughts  of 
Gentile  Christendom — i.e.,  a  millennium  without 
Christ !  the  shame  of  those  who  boast  so  proudly  in 
our  day;  but  still  they  were  not  far  raised  above 
the  ordinary  thoughts  of  Jews.  They  did  not  yet 
enter  into  the  precious  Christian  hope,  and  for  this 
simple  reason :  the  thoughts  of  the  Christian  are  the 
thoughts  of  heaven.  They  are  the  communications 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  suit  the  Father,  because 
centring  in  the  Son  and  His  heavenly  glory.  Into 
that  communion  we  are* brought ;  and  truly  it  is  not 
merely  with  the  prophets  and  with  their  blessed 
visions  of  coming  glory  for  the  earth,  but  "  with  the 
Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  But  as  for 
the  disciples  in  Acts  i.,  the  power  of  entrance  was 
not  yet  there,  for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  personally 
come ;  and  yet  they  had  not  only  life  at  this  time, 
but  life  in  resurrection.  The  Lord  had  actually 
breathed  upon  them  the  very  day  He  rose,  and  said, 
"  Eeceive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost."  Of  course,  this  was 
not  the  gift  of  the  Comforter,  as  such,  the  promised 
One  that  was  to  take  the  place  of  Christ  upon  earth  ; 
but  rather  the  communication,  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
of  His  own  risen  life.  Therefore,  I  believe,  did  He 
breathe  upon  them  :  a  clear  allusion  to  the  Lord 
God  breathing  on  Adam.  Of  old,  it  was  the  breath  of 
natural  life  given  to  Adam.  Here  was  One  upon 
earth  who  was  both  Lord  and  God  (as  acknowledged 
by  Thomas  a  little  after),  and  also  the  risen  man  or 
last  Adam,  the  quickening  Spirit.  Accordingly,  He 
communicates  this  life,  as  life  must  always  be  com- 


ONE    SPIRIT.  17 

municated,  by  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  therefore  it  is 
said,  "  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost."  But  for  all 
that,  we  know  from  Acts  i.  that  the  Spirit,  the 
Comforter,  was  not  yet  come.  Indeed,  we  ought  to 
gather  it  from  the  simple  fact,  that  the  Lord  was 
not  yet  gone.  "  And  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter 
will  not  come."  He  was  seen  there ;  and  He  com- 
mands them,  when  assembled  together,  that  they 
should  not  depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  should  wait  for 
the  promise  of  the  Father.  Whatever  the  blessing, 
then,  they  had  received  on  the  resurrection-day,  it  was 
not  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise  of  the  Father. 
The  next  chapter  shows  us  the  Holy  Ghost  act- 
ing on  earth  in  the  absence  of  Christ ;  and  this  in 
various  ways.  It  records  that  extraordinary  display 
of  divine  grace  in  the  gift  of  tongues,  which,  without 
removing,  surmounted  the  confusion  that  man's  sin 
and  divine  judgment  had  brought  into  the  world  in 
the  various  nations,  and  tribes,  and  tongues,  which 
have  subsisted  since  Babel  to  this  day.  Now  the 
Spirit  was  going  out  with  the  news  of  God's  wonder- 
ful works  of  grace  to  all,  just  as  they  were  proving 
that  where  sin  had  abounded,  grace  much  more 
abounded.  At  the  same  time  let  us  not  forget  that 
new  tongues,  although  the  magnificent  fruit  of  the 
Spirit's  operation,  are  not  the  same  thing  as  His 
presence ;  they  were  an  effect  and  characteristic  sign 
of  a  crucified  but  now  exalted  Lord,  the  witness  of 
gospel  grace  and  its  universal  testimony,  in  contrast 
with  the  law,  but  not  the  same  thing  as  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  Himself.     This  is  exceedingly  im- 

B 


18  ONE    SPIRIT. 

portant,  because  the  unbelief  of  some  has  gone  so 
far  as  to  think  and  say,  that  if  the  tongues  exist  no 
more,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  absent.  What  blindness  to 
the  Saviour's  promise !  What  a  lowering  of  the 
Spirit's  presence  !  What  denial  of  Christianity  and  the 
Church  !  The  truth  is,  that  the  tongues  and  the  other 
powers  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  was  pleased  then 
to  work,  were  but  the  miraculous  tokens  that  befitted 
His  presence,  and  inaugurated  the  gospel  and  the 
Church.  It  was  all  a  new  and  unprecedented  state 
of  things.  When  the  Son  was  on  earth,  miracles 
followed  His  steps  and  word,  as  it  was  only  meet, 
and  the  accomplishment  of  prophecy.  Another 
Divine  Person  being  come,  was  it  not  suitable  there 
should  be  proofs  of  it,  more  especially  as  He  took 
no  permanent  form,  as  the  Son  of  Grod  had  done,  so 
as  to  be  visible  ?  It  was,  therefore,  the  more  needed 
that  there  should  be  palpable  effects  and  tokens, 
arresting  the  mind,  and  causing  the  heart  of  man  to 
weigh  what  God  is  and  is  doing,  not  only  as  displayed 
in  the  Son,  but  as  witnessed  by  the  Holy  Grhost  pre- 
sent upon  earth. 

This  is  the  cardinal  truth  upon  which  all  hinges 
that  we  find  in  the  great  body  of  the  New  Testament. 
There  was  now  before  men  a  fact  without  precedent, 
altogether  unknown  to  the  world,  if  it  did  not  sur- 
prise even  those  that  had  been  taught  by  the  Lord 
Himself  to  expect  it — the  wondrous  fact  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  had  come  down  in  person,  making  His  pre- 
sence known  by  a  signature  of  gracious  power,  so  as 
to  be  then  known  and  read  of  all  men.    Accordingly, 


ONE    SPIRIT. 


19 


throughout  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  you  have  ever 
aud  auou  the  testimony  not  only  to  His  action  and 
its  results,  hut  to  the  glorious  truth  that  He  Himself 
was  there.  Look  at  the  first  outbreak  of  the  world's 
religious  rancour  in  chapter  iv.,  and  His  answer  to  it  in 
Verse  31.  Take,  again,  the  first  public  sin  and  scandal, 
where  Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  charged  on  the 
spot  with  lying  not  to  man  but  to  God.  But  how 
was  this  proved  ?  They  had  lied  to  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  was  there.  The  standard  of  judgment  was  that 
dishonoured  Person  who  was  in  their  midst.  This 
measure  of  sin,  let  me  say,  is  as  true  individually,  as 
it  is  in  the  Church.  Hence,  in  Ephesians  iv.  30,  it 
is  not  merely  that  you  should  not  violate  this  or 
that  command,  but  "  grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemp- 
tion."    Let  us  note  it  well. 

The  more  this  is  reflected  upon,  the  more  its 
immense  moment  will  be  felt  by  the  children  of  God. 
Supposing  you  take  the  presence  of  one  you  most 
value  and  delight  in,  does  not  his  or  her  coming 
affect  all  your  ways  and  words,  just  in  proportion  as 
you  realize  and  love  their  presence  ?  We  might  be 
ever  so  much  at  ease ;  but  still,  if  there  be  one  staying 
with  us,  who  draws  out  our  honour  and  esteem,  the 
influence  is  felt  deeply  and  at  once,  except  by  a  stone. 
Surely  one  does  think  of  that  which  will  give  plea- 
sure, one  does  fear  to  wound;  the  heart  is  on  the 
alert  and  active,  and  it  is  a  joy  to  do  that  which  will 
gratify  those  we  love.  And  so,  in  virtue  of  redemp- 
tion, the  Holy  Ghost  is  here,  because  all  is  gone,  as 
b  2 


20  ONE    SPIRIT. 

regards  each  believer,  that  was  offensive  to  God ;  and 
the  saint  stands  in  divine  righteousness  before  God — 
made  this  in  Christ.  How  indeed  could  the  Holy 
Ghost  be  away  ?  He  must  have  His  part  when  that 
which  was  most  precious  to  God  and  man  was 
wrought.  If  the  Father  accomplished  His  thoughts 
in  and  by  the  Son,  could  the  Holy  Ghost  be  absent 
or  inactive  ?  And  now  God  had  done  His  greatest 
work — the  atoning  work  of  Christ.  Where,  there- 
fore, the  blood  of  the  accepted  sacrifice  is,  the  Holy 
Ghost  not  only  can  work,  but  must  dwell.  If  Christ, 
by  His  own  blood,  has  entered  in  once  for  all  into 
the  holies,  having  found  an  everlasting  redemption, 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  to  abide  with  us  for  ever. 
All  hangs  on  and  is  measured  by  this.  Accordingly, 
the  book  of  the  Acts  is  far  more  the  acts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  than  of  the  apostles,  important  vessels  of  His 
power  as  they  were,  though  not  they  only.  We  have 
seen,  where  it  was  a  question  of  sin,  He  judges  by 
His  presence,  and  acts  upon  this  ground.  We  have 
seen  that,  when  they  were  in  danger  of  being  alarmed 
by  the  threats  of  man,  the  Spirit  gave  cheering 
evidence  of  His  mighty  presence.  It  was  not  merely 
Peter  and  John,  or  anybody  else ;  but  the  place  was 
shaken  where  they  were.  Whose  presence  was  this, 
or  in  whom  particularly  ?  It  was  the  presence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  not  merely  in  this  or  in  that  individual, 
but  in  the  assembly  of  God.  More  than  that,  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  chapter  xiii.  of  the  Acts  takes  an 
active  place,  and  sends  out  Paul  and  Barnabas. 
"  Separate  me,"  He  says,  "  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the 


0XE    SPIRIT.  21 

work  whereimto  I  have  called  them."  "So  they, 
being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  departed."  I 
am  now  referring  to  the  case,  only  to  show  that  it  is 
not  a  question  of  miracles,  tongues,  or  powers,  but  of 
a  real  Divine  Person,  who  was  the  chief  agent  as  pre- 
sent in  the  Church  of  God ;  and  that  this  personal 
presence  of  the  Spirit  in  man  was  a  new  thing,  pre- 
viously unexampled  in  the  word  and  ways  of  God. 
(Compare  also  Acts  viii.  29,  39  ;  xv.  28  ;  xvi.  7 ;  xx. 
23;  xxi.  11.) 

Now  we  come  to  the  Epistles,  passing  by  the 
Scriptures  which  attest  the  Holy  Ghost's  presence  in 
the  individual.  All-important  as  this  is,  it  is  not 
my  subject,  but  His  presence  in  the  Church.  Hence 
we  must  omit  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  which 
takes  up  our  individual  relation  towards  God,  and 
for  this  simple  reason,  that  there  you  have  the  chil- 
dren. We  are  brought  out  of  the  place  of  wrath  and 
sin,  made  children  of  God,  and  if  children,  then 
heirs :  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  the  spirit  of  adoption, 
and  fills  the  heart  with  hopes  of  the  inheritance 
which  is  to  follow.  But  in  the  Epistles  to  the 
Corinthians  you  have  not  merely  the  state  of  man 
and  the  revelation  of  divine  righteousness,  with  their 
consequences  in  sinners  and  saints,  as  in  Romans, 
but  the  Church  of  God,  in  a  grievous  state  of  sin, 
shame,  and  disorder,  but  still  the  Church  of  God. 
Accordingly,  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  there 
dwelling,  is  shown  as  in  its  capital  seat.  The  portion 
read  (1  Cor.  xii.  1 — 13)  developes  His  action  in  the 
Church.     What  can  be  plainer  ?     Here  we  have  the 


22  ONE    SPIRIT. 

Holy  Ghost  viewed  as  a  real  Person  present  and 
working,  in  gifts  of  outward  sign,  no  doubt,  as  well 
as  in  ways  of  edification.  But  whatever  might  be  the 
form  of  His  action,  the  great  truth  was  that  He  was 
there,  and  at  work  in  the  many  members  of  (rod's 
assembly.  The  question  is,  was  all  this  a  temporary 
display,  or  was  His  presence  for  ever  the  substratum 
of  it  all  ?  Was  that  which  we  here  read  confined  to 
a  particular  local  assembly  and  a  special  epoch  long 
past,  or  is  there  anything  for  us,  for  the  Church  of  Grod 
at  large,  for  this  time  and  all  times  ?  The  answer 
cannot  be  doubtful,  if  we  are  subject  to  the  word  of 
Grod.  Certainly  our  Lord  had,  in  John  xiv. ,  laid  down, 
in  contrast  with  His  own  temporary  absence,  that 
the  Spirit  of  truth  was  to  abide  with  His  disciples 
for  ever. 

But,  next,  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians 
could  not  open  without  the  Holy  Grhost's  giving  it 
the  most  enlarged  application.  In  the  first  verse  of 
the  first  chapter  we  read — "  Unto  the  Church  of  Grod 
which  is  at  Corinth,  to  them  that  are  sanctified  in 
Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,  with  all  that  in  every 
place  call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord, 
both  theirs  and  ours."  This  is  not  said  in  the  Second 
Epistle :  indeed,  I  am  not  aware  that  there  is  any- 
thing exactly  like  it  anywhere  else  in  the  New 
"Testament.  Are  we  to  suppose  this  was  a  mistake  ? 
Let  who  will  be  guilty  of  such  a  speech  or  thought, 
I  trust  there  is  no  soul  here  that  would  not  denounce 
it  as  a  sin  against  Grod.  A  mistake  in  the  word  of 
Grod !     Oh  the  contrary,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  the 


ONE    SPIRIT.  23 

special  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Spirit,  who  fore- 
saw the  unbelief  of  Christendom  ;  it  was  the  Spirit 
of  God  who  knew  that  this  Epistle  would  be  treated 
as  if  it  were  of  private  application,  as  if  it  belonged 
to  a  bygone  time  and  place,  and  did  not  appertain 
to  all  that  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  —  "both  theirs  and  ours."  This  He  has 
guarded  against  at  the  very  threshold,  and  made 
such  an  objection  to  be  plain  fighting  against  the 
word  of  God. '  Thus  it  ceases  to  be  a  question  of 
opinion.  ,  Grod  has  spoken,  and  has  written,  that  we 
may  believe  Him ;  and  this  epistle  has  a  purposely 
enlarged  scope,  so  that  unbelief  as  to  the  perpetuity 
of  the  Holy  Ghost's  action  in  the  Church,  as  long  as 
the  Church  is  here,  should  be  treated  as  a  sin,  as  a 
positive  rejection  of  God's  plain  word.  Is  it  not  un- 
belief which  makes  nothing  of  the  Holy  Ghost's 
personal  presence  in  the  Church  ? 

It  is  not  at  all  contended  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
necessarily  works  in  every  way  as  of  old,  and  still  less 
in  the  same  measure  of  power.  In  the  latter  part  of  the 
New  Testament  we  do  not  read  much  about  miracles 
— very  little — less  and  less  too  as  time  passes  on.  We 
can  understand  that,  in  the  opening  of  a  new  dealing 
of  God,  there  should  be,  in  His  goodness,  a  won- 
derful working  and  display  of  these  mighty  powers 
to  awaken  the  attention  even  of  careless  men.  But,, 
as  the  truth  of  His  presence  was  established,  and  the 
new  communications  of  God  were  gradually  written, 
and  there  was  thus  not  merely  the  evidence  of 
outward  tokens,   but  positive   Scripture  committed 


24  ONE    SPIRIT. 

to  human  responsibility,  we  can  easily  see,  that  ex- 
ternal vouchers  were  no  longer  so  requisite,  and  that 
the  Spirit  of  God,  grieved,  as  we  know,  by  much 
found  in  those  who  professed  the  name  of  Christ, 
might  gradually  withdraw,  not  Himself,  but  the 
manifestation  of  mighty  signs,  and  refuse  to  put  out- 
ward ornaments  upon  that  which  dishonoured  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

It  is  certain  and  evident,  at  least,  when  we  come 
to  the  churches  of  the  Apocalypse,  that  we  see  or 
hear  no  more  of  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.  Not 
a  doubt  have  I  that  there  was  the  wisdom  of  (rod  in 
thus  ordering,  in  view  of  the  state  of  things  that  was 
fast  coming  in.  I  think  we  can  readily  discern  by 
spiritual  considerations  why  it  would  not  have  been 
suitable  to  the  glory  of  God  to  continue  those  mira- 
culous powers.  Supposing,  for  instance,  God  were 
to  work  now  in  the  way  of  miracle,  is  it  not  evident 
that  in  one  of  two  ways  it  must  be?  Either  He 
must  work  wherever  the  name  of  Christ  is  preached 
and  known  at  all ;  and  what  would  be  the  conse- 
quence of  this?  Miracles  in  Rome,  miracles  in 
Canterbury,  miracles  among  Presbyterians,  Inde- 
pendents, Wesleyans,  Baptists,  Psedo-baptists,  Cal- 
vinists,  Arminians,  Lutherans :  Greek  Church,  and  all 
sects  and  denominations  in  Christendom  would  have 
their  miracles !  There  may  be  those  who  would  en- 
joy the  sight,  but  I  envy  them  not.  Every  one  here, 
I  trust,  would  feel  deeply  the  anomaly  of  such  an 
outward  seal  on  such  a  mass  of  confusion.  On  the 
other  hand,  supposing  God  were  pleased  to  say,  He 


ONE    SPIRIT.  25 

could  not  give  these  tokens  of  His  power  and  glory 
where  the  Church  was  thus  in  disorder  and  rebellion, 
but  must  single  out — whom  shall  I  say  ?  It  could 
not  be,  it  ought  not  to  be  :  God  forbid  that  ourselves 
should  desire  it,  as  things  are.  But  let  us,  for  the 
moment,  imagine  the  Lord  looking  on  the  unworthy 
children  of  (rod  here  present,  and  saying,  "I  see 
where  My  people  are  subject  to  My  word,  and  where 
I  find  two  or  three  here  and  there  gathered  unto  My 
name,  there  I  will  work  miracles."  What  would 
be  the  consequence  ?  "We  should  not  know  how  to 
behave  ourselves :  so  weak  are  we,  so  foolish,  so  apt 
to  be  full  of  ourselves,  even  now  in  the  face  of  con- 
tinual weakness,  as  well  as  hatred  and  contempt,  that 
we  should  not  be  able  to  contain  ourselves  if  we 
had  these  displays  of  divine  power.  Besides,  what 
a  slight  to  those  we  own  to  be  as  truly  members  of 
Christ,  and  as  truly  indwelt  of  the  Spirit,  as  any  of 
us!  I  am  persuaded,  then,  there  is  perfect  grace 
and  wisdom  as  to  this  in  the  ways  of  Grod.  He  no 
longer  works  thus.  But  here  is  the  truth  on  which 
I  take  my  stand  this  night:  the  Holy  Ghost  was 
given,  not  merely  as  a  display  of  power  in  the  earth, 
but,  if  I  may  so  say,  as  the  sign  and  substance  of 
the  divine  value  for  the  cross.  God  the  Father  gave 
the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  seal  of  that  redemption  which 
is  always  unchangeably  perfect,  and  infinitely  effica- 
cious. I  dare  to  say  it,  and  yet  say  it  with  all  rever- 
ence, that  if  the  Holy  Ghost  were  now  taken  from 
the  poorest,  feeblest  of  His  saints  upon  earth,  it 
would  not  be  a  dishonour  to  Him  so  much  as  to  the 


26  ONE    SPIRIT. 

Son  of  God  and  His  atoning  work.  It  would  be 
virtually  to  say  that  the  ruin  of  the  Church  has  made 
the  blood  of  Christ  less  precious ;  but  will  God  ever 
confirm  a  lie  ?  And  here  is  the  stronghold  of  faith, 
in  this  we  can  be  confident,  not  only  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  expressed  the  mind  and  intentions  of 
Grod,  but  that  we,  through  His  grace,  can  and  ought 
to  enter,  in  measure,  into  its  ground,  reason,  charac- 
ter, and  aim,  as  well  as  meaning. 

All  this  we  may  by  faith  appreciate  and  enjoy,  for 
He  has  explained  it  to  us.  Wherefore,  indeed,  is 
the  word  of  God  given,  if  it  be  not  that  we  should 
understand  His  mind,  feel  His  love,  and  be  sure  of. 
His  truth,  wisdom  and  goodness  ?  Hence  we  are  sure 
that  God,  in  sending  the  Spirit  to  abide  always, 
whatever  may  be  the  sorrowful  condition  of  believers 
individually  and  collectively,  did  not  give  a  mere 
token  of  approving  them,  but  rather  the  only  ade- 
quate pledge  of  His  delight  in  the  personal  work  of 
His  beloved  Son.  The  Holy  Ghost,  we  know,  de- 
scended on  Christ  when  He  was  upon  earth  without 
blood,  because  He  was  always  sinless,  as  perfect 
here  morally  as  He  was  and  is  in  heaven,  no  less 
absolutely  holy  as  man  than  as  God.  It  is  not,  of 
course,  that  He  was  not  made  perfect  in  another 
sense,  as  becoming  captain  of  salvation,  and  author  of 
salvation,  and  consecrated  as  heavenly  priest.  It  is 
clear  that  there  was  a  work  to  be  done,  and  an  official 
place  of  glory  to  be  taken ;  but  nothing  ever  did 
or  could  add  to  His  moral  perfectness.  Hence,  I 
repeat,  He  could  and  did  receive  the  Holy  Ghost 


ONE    SPIRIT.  27 

for  Himself  as  man,  without  blood.  But  when  Christ 
went  up  on  high,  He  received  of  the  Father  the 
promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  amazing  comfort, 
confidence,  and  rest  should  this  give  us !  Had  the 
Holy  Ghost 'been  given  directly  to  us,  we  might  well 
think  that,  if  we  did  not  carry  ourselves  as  we  ought, 
there  might  be  a  revocation.  We  can  understand 
a  soul  troubled  with  such  a  thought ;  but,  thanks  be 
to  God,  the  Father  gave  the  Holy  Ghost  a  second 
time  to  Christ.  When  He  went  on  high,  He  received 
of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
shed  forth  that  which  was  seen  and  heard  at  Pente- 
cost. Thus  the  gift  is  entirely  in  virtue  of  Christ, 
after  He  had  blotted  out  our  sins  and  received  it  as 
a  consequence.  There  we  have  the  firmest  and 
surest  ground  on  which  the  perpetuity  of  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  saint  and  in  the 
Church  rests  before  God — His  love  to  Christ,  and 
His  estimate  of  Christ's  work  for  us,  not  to  speak  of 
His  immutable  word. 

And  now  for  a  few  practical  words  on  this  before 
I  have  done.  We  shall  have  other  applications  and 
results  of  it  in  subsequent  lectures,  so  that  the  less 
may  be  said  now.  If  there  be  a  Divine  Person  on 
earth  who  is  now  with  each  saint  individually,  and 
with  all  as  the  Church  of  God,  I  ask,  can  this  be  a 
secondary  consideration  ?  Is  this  a  truth  that  can 
be  subordinated  to  circumstances  ?  Is  it  something 
that  can  be  pushed  aside  for  the  sake  of  not  disturb- 
ing oneself  or  others  ?     Can  men  who  so  think,  and 


28  ONE    SPIRIT. 

speak,  and  act,  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  Spirit's 
personal  presence  and  present  operation  according  to 
Scripture  ?  Do  they  believe  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
really  in  the  Church  on  earth  ?  I  am  not  now,  of 
course,  alluding  to  His  divine  glory  whereby  He 
fills  all  things,  because  it  is  always  true  ;  as  true 
before  Christ  came  as  it  has  been  since,  and  equally 
true  of  all  the  Persons  in  the  Trinity.  But  as  the 
Son  came  down  from  heaven,  and  was  here  a  man 
for  some  thirty  or  more  years  upon  the  earth, 
and  as  He  is  gone,  so  now  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
come  down  personally  to  abide  with  and  in  us,  in 
such  sort  as  was  unknown  before,  save  only  in  Christ. 
The  Holy  Spirit,  I  say,  has  come  now  to  be  in  us 
personally ;  and  just  as  Christ  was  God's  only  true 
temple,  so  now  the  Church  is  the  temple  of  God ;  for 
both  these  truths  are  taught  in  the  word  of  God. 
But  if  this  be  believed,  if  it  be  received  as  God's 
truth,  what  can  compare  with  it  in  importance  as  a 
present  practical  thing,  as  well  as  privilege,  for  the 
saint  and  for  the  Church?  Accordingly  the  responsi- 
bility of  Christians,  if  we  apply  it  to  their  meeting, 
is  that  their  assemblies  should  be  governed  by  the 
truth  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  there. 

But  how  does  the  Holy  Ghost  work  when  owned 
as  there  ?  That  we  have  answered,  if  it  were  only 
in  the  Scripture  already  read.  He  distributes,  or 
divides,  to  every  one  severally  as  He  will.  Is  His 
presence,  then,  not  to  be  recognized  ?  Is  His  work- 
ing not  to  be  respected  ?  What  do  we  find,  if  we 
test  present  facts  in  Christendom  by  the  word  of 


ONE    SPIRIT.  29 

God  ?  It  is  far  from  my  desire  needlessly  to  trouble 
any  one,  nor  is  it  my  wish  to  provoke  controversy  ; 
but  there  are  truths  which  manifestly  admit  of  no 
compromise — indeed,  all  divine  truth  refuses  such 
unworthy  dealing.  How,  then,  I  would  ask,  is  it 
with  our  souls  in  the  feeling,  in  the  faith,  in  the 
allegiance  that  we  pay  to  this  truth,  so  vital  to  the 
Church,  so  essential  to  the  right  honouring  of  the 
Holy  Grhost,  and  of  the  Lord  Himself?  Do  you 
doubt  that  the  Church  of  Grod  is  hi  disorder  ?  Where 
is  the  serious-minded  Christian  that  does  not  own  it, 
more  or  less  ?  Is  there  a  spiritual  man  who  would 
maintain  that  the  present  state  of  the  Church  answers 
to  what  we  read  in  the  New  Testament  ?  Am  I  not 
to  feel  and  to  humble  myself  before  Grod  for  my  own 
sin  in  this  grave  matter  ?  Must  I  not  seek  to  be  where 
the  Holy  Ghost's  presence  is  owned  ?  It  matters  not 
where  I  have  been  ignorantly;  I  have  doubtless 
been  where  there  was  not  even  the  show  of  owning 
His  presence  and  action  according  to  the  Scriptures ; 
I  may  have  joined  others  in  praying  Grod  to  pour  out 
again  the  Holy  Grhost,  as  if  He  were  not  come  and 
in  the  Church  of  Grod.  And  do  you  call  such  prayer 
as  this  a  Scriptural  recognition  of  His  presence  ? 
What  can  be  conceived  a  more  decided  or  more 
evident  ignoring  of  the  truth  that  the  Holy  Grhost  is 
there  ?  Were  it  prayed  that- the  Spirit  of  Grod  might 
not  be  grieved,  or  that  the  saints  might  be  filled 
with  Him,  it  were  Scriptural.  What  would  it 
have  been  for  a  disciple,  in  the  presence  of  Jesus,  to 
have  asked  the  Father  to  send  His  Son  ? — to  raise 


30  ONE    SPIRIT. 

up  the  Messiah  when  the  Messiah  was  actually  there  ? 
Is  it  not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  which  cannot  receive 
the  Spirit  because  it  seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth 
Him?  But  we  know  Him,  at  least  we  ought  to 
know  Him.  Well,  if  we  do  know  that  He  is  here,  is 
it  a  light  thing  whether  or  not  we  are  subject  to  His 
operation  in  the  Church  ?  It  is  in  vain  to  say,  "  I 
acknowledge  the  truth  of  His  presence;"  so  much 
the  worse,  if  I  am  not  subject  to  the  Scripture  which 
leaves  no  doubt  how  He  acts  for  Christ's  glory. 
Mere  words  do  not  suffice  :  God  looks  for  faithful- 
ness, for  subjection  to  His  word,  for  practical  recog- 
nition of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

"We  come  together,  it  may  be  ever  so  few :  what  do 
we  count  on  ?  We  are  weak  and  ignorant,  but 
we  have  One  in  our  midst  who  knows  all  things,  and 
is  the  source  of  all  power.  Are  we  content  with 
Him  ?  Can  we  confide  in  Him  in  the  face  of  dangers 
and  difficulties  ?  Why  is  it  that  the  Church  is  weak  ? 
Why  is  it  that  there  is  such  want  of  power  and  joy 
and  peace  and  comfort  among  the  children  of  God  ? 
Can  it  be  wondered  at  ?  What  I  wonder  at  is  rather 
the  mercy  and  astonishing  patience  of  God,  blessing, 
as  He  does,  in  spite  of  so  much  unbelief.  Do  you 
really  suppose  that  it  can  be  an  indifferent  thing  to 
God?  Does  He  not  call  for  my  unhesitating  ad- 
hesion to  His  will,  duly  owning  His  Spirit's  presence 
and  free  action  ?  What  about  your  bowing  down  to 
the  great  present  fact  that,  in  virtue  of  redemption 
and  in  honour  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
here  personally  in  the  Church  on  earth  ?     This  puts 


ONE    SPIRIT. 


31 


the  soul  to  the  test ;  indeed,  it  seems  to  me  the  great 
test  for  Christians.  Christ,  of  course,  is  the  practical 
touchstone  for  everything  and  every  person ;  but 
still  if  He  is  known  and  valued  by  my  soul  as  the 
way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,  is  it  nothing  to  Him 
that  my  ways  in  the  Church  of  God  should  be 
on  the  ground  He  has  given  me — faith  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  promised  Holy  Ghost?  Is  it  not  the 
truth  God  Himself  presupposes  as  the  very  soul, 
so  to  speak,  of  the  Church  ? 

This  does  not  in  the  slightest  degree  touch  God's 
working  by  individuals.  He  sends  out  one  to  preach 
the  gospel  to  the  world,  He  raises  up  another  to 
edify  the  children  of  God.  This  is  another  branch 
of  truth ;  and  I  refer  to  it  now  only  to  show  that, 
when  we  contend  for  the  Church's  inalienable  obliga- 
tion to  own  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  this  does 
not  in  the  least  interfere  with  the  individual  action 
of  the  Spirit  in  ministry.  Granting  this  in  all  its 
integrity  and  importance,  I  would  put  the  question 
to  the  conscience  of  each  before  me,  Where  is  there 
an  assembly  of  jjrod's  saints  coming  together,  and 
His  Spirit  left  perfect  liberty  of  action  that  He  may 
employ  whom  He  will  as  the  vessels  of  His  power  ? 
Are  there  any  Christians  here  present  who  never  thus 
find  themselves  in  the  only  assembly  which  God's 
word  sanctions  ?  If  there  are,  I  can  only  say,  Ponder 
that  word  with  prayer,  and  ask  your  soul,  how  comes 
this  ?  You,  a  member  of  God's  assembly,  yet  you 
never  know  that  assembly  gathered  according  to 
Scripture,  or  the  action  of  the  Spirit  proper  to  it ! 


32  ONE    SPIRIT. 

You,  a  member  of  Christ's  body,  yet  the  Holy  Ghost 
never  allowed  to  use  you,  or  other  members  of  it,  to 
the  glory   of    Christ  and  the   edification   of  your 
brethren  !     If  it  be  so,  how  eomes  it  ?     Why  should 
you  go  on  thus  ?     Oh !  there  are  serious  questions 
here,  and  many  obstacles ;  and  I  am  sure  we  ought 
to  pray  much  for  those  that  are  thus  perplexed  and 
encumbered.     Let  me  not  disguise  from  them  what 
it  costs  in  this  world  to  be  true  to  the  Lord  and  the 
unerring  word  of  God.     It  is  not  for  any  one  (the 
Lord  keep  us  far  from  it !)  to  look  lightly  or  coldly 
on  those  who  are  in  this  grievous  trial :  we  may  have 
known  some  of  its  bitterness  ourselves.     What  do 
we  desire  for  God's  children?     Nothing  less  than 
their  deliverance,  yea,  of  every  one.      Do  not  all 
saints   who   rest    upon    the    redemption    of   Christ 
belong   to    the    body?      Has   not    God    set   them, 
as  it  pleased  Him,  in  His  Church  ?     And  what  are 
we  doing  ?     Are  we  gathering  together  to  improve 
on  the  Spirit's  action  in  the  church  of  God  ?     God 
forbid  :  rather  is  it  to  honour  the  Lord  in  the  assur- 
ance that  He  is  in  our  midst.     Our.  only  true  reason, 
if  we  have  a  divine  reason  at  all,  for  meeting  together 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  is  that  it  is  His  own 
will  and  way ;  it  is  to  please  Him.     And  if  it  has 
been   done   at  cost,   God   blesses   this  greatly,  and 
blesses  it  too  to  the  softening  of  the  spirit  quite  as 
much  as  to  the  exercise  of  faith :  if  it  is  not  so,  there 
is  something  wrong  with  our  souls.     Am  I,  then,  as 
the  centre  of  my  church-action,  cleaving  to  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?     If  I  am  not,  I  have  not 


ONE    SPIRIT.  33 

got  God's  centre  for  mine,  and  am  still  under  the 
dominion  of  tradition  in  some  shape  or  another; 
carrying  on  either  what  my  father  did,  or  something 
else  that  suits  my  mind  better :  but  where  is  God  in 
all  this? 

You  may  be  taunted,  as  we  all  know,  with  bigotry 
and  exclusiveness.  Did  these  censors  ever  weigh  what 
either  means  ?  I  call  bigotry  an  unreasonable  attach- 
ment, without  solid  divine  warrant,  to  one's  own 
particular  doctrine  or  practice  in  defiance  of  all 
others.  Allow  me  to  ask,  Is  it  bigotry  to  give  up 
one's  most  cherished  associations  because  nf  God's 
word,  in  order  to  do  His  will  ?  Is  it  exclusive  to 
abandon  sects,  one  and  all,  in  order  to  be  always 
and  only  where  I  can  meet  all  saints  according  to 
the  word,  and  in  dependence  on  the  Holy  Ghost, 
gathered  unto  Christ's  name  ?  I  am  not  assuming 
this  for  any  one  who  does  not  own  Scripture  as 
the  unchanging  truth  of  God;  but  I  ask  you 
who  do,  are  you  to  allow  yourselves  to  depart 
from  the  known  ground  of  God,  no  matter  what 
may  be  the  trial  within,  or  the  temptation  without 
you  ?  There  are  often  attachments  of  other  kinds 
that  create  difficulty.  Friends  may  ask  you  to  go 
here  or  there,  for  once  at  any  rate ;  and  it  seems  hard 
to  refuse,  especially  as  they  understand  not  the  force 
of  a  divine  conviction,  which  they  lack  themselves. 
You  invite  them,  perhaps,  to  come  with  you,  and 
you  decline  going  with  them.  Does  it  not  look 
proud  and  unbrotherly  ?  Well,  it  may  seem  sin- 
gular to  them,  but  it  ought  to  be  perfectly  plain  to 


34  ONE    SPIRIT. 

you  ;  it  may  be  real  humility,  and  love  too,  haughty 
and  unkind  as  rash  ignorance  counts  it.  Let  us  con- 
ceive a  godly  churchman  or  dissenter  to*  put  this  plain 
question  :  "  How  is  it  that  you,  who  are  so  free  and 
hearty  in  receiving  Christians  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
will  not  come  with  me  to  my  church  or  chapel  ?  " 
The  answer  is,  "  On  your  own  principles,  as  a 
Protestant  Christian,  you  can  come  here  with  a  good 
conscience,  where  we  are  sure  the  one  desire  is  to  he 
subject  to  the  Lord  and  His  word,  in  the  unity  of 
His  body,  and  in  the  liberty  of  His  Spirit.  You 
surely  acknowledge  it  is  no  sin  to  meet,  as  we  do, 
according  to  Scripture,  and  therefore  you  can  meet 
with  us.  But  I,  for  my  part,  am  clear  that  it  is 
unscriptural  to  desert  the  Scriptural  ground  for  that 
of  dissent  or  Anglicanism,  and  therefore  it  is  not 
want  of  love,  but  fear  of  sin  that  keeps  me  from 
going  with  you,  who  do  not  pretend  to  be  meeting 
on  the  ground  of  God's  assembly."  Surely  he  is  a 
bigot,  or  worse,  who  would  urge  or  expect  me  to 
join  him,  against  my  positive  conviction  that,  in  so 
doing,  I  should  sin  against  Cod.  Sin  is  a  man 
doing  his  own  will,  or  another's,  which  is  not  Cod's. 
If  you  ask  me  to  depart  from  what  I  know  to  be  the 
will  of  Cod,  it  would  of  course  be  sin  in  me  to 
comply.  It  is  not  only  a  thing  that  is  sinful  in 
itself,  but  it  would  be  most  especially  a  sin  in  me, 
because  I  know,  if  you  do  not  know,  that  it  is  infi- 
delity to  the  Spirit's  operation  in  the  Church. 

Be  not  moved,  then,  by  reproaches,  any  more  than 
by  fair  speeches.     For  there  is  no  real  love,  save  in 


ONE    SPIRIT.  35 

obeying  God  (1  John  v.  2,  3).  Never  swerve  from 
what  you  believe  to  be  His  will.  You  may  have 
come  in,  at  first  little  acquainted  with  the  truth  or 
with  the  solemn  responsibilities  it  involves ;  perhaps 
it  was  on  that  slender  reason,  that  you  were  here 
converted :  but  how  is  it  with  you  now  ?  Have  you 
been  searching  the  word  of  God,  to  ascertain  His 
mind  and  will  ?  Do  you  see  the  presence  and  action 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  assembly  to  be  the  truth 
of  God  ?  Is  it  not  perfectly  plain  and  sure  that  God 
has  sent  down  His  Spirit,  and  that  this  truth,  has  to 
be  owned  and  acted  upon  by  you  and  all  Christians  ? 
That  truth  you  cannot  deny :  you  know  very  well  it 
is  of  God ;  you  may  not  value  it  as  you  ought  (who 
does  ?)  but  that  is  another  thing.  The  Lord  grant 
we  may  all  value  it  more  and  increasingly. 

Search  the  Scriptures,  examine  the  word  of  God 
for  your  own  souls  ;  by  this  means  we  obtain  true 
spiritual  intelligence,  but  we  get  it  in  obedience,  and 
do  not  want  it  otherwise.  The  intelligence  that  is 
gathered  in  disobedience  seems  to  me  perilous  and 
untrustworthy ;  to  learn  the  truth,  step  by  step 
acting  it  out,  is  a  happier  and  holier  path,  and  of 
simple  faith  too.  At  the  same  time  that  we  value 
intelligence,  we  must  remember  that  there  is  another 
thing  yet  more  important — singled-eyed  subjection 
to  the  will  of  God,  even  if  we  are  not  very  intelligent 
about  much.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning 
of  wisdom."  That  Scripture  is  not  out  of  date ;  and  I 
believe  such  is  the  divine,  and  therefore  the  best,  way 
as  a  beginning.     There  is  blessedness  in  gradually 


36  ONE    SPIRIT. 

growing  up  into  the  truth  of  God,  above  all  looking 
to  this — that  we  walk  in  that  which  we  know. 

For  the  present,  I  pray  the  Lord  that  the  great 
truths  of  the  "one  body"  and  "one  Spirit,"  which 
have  been  before  us,  may  be  brought  home  by  His 
own  power ;  so  that  all  of  us  who  know  them  may 
be  cheered  and  confirmed,  and  that  those  who  are 
ignorant  may  be  taught  them  of  Himself. 


THE 

ASSEMBLY,  AND  MINISTRY, 

1  Cor.  xiv. 

LECTURE   III. 


The  two  subjects  which  are  now  to  come  before  us  may 
seem,  at  first  sight,  to  be  rather  widely  separated ; 
but  in  truth,  far  as  they  appear  to  diverge,  they 
equally  flow  from  Christ.  They  are  founded,  both  of 
them,  upon  His  work,  as  an  accomplished  fact.  They 
are  derived  from  Him  in  His  present  place  of  exalta- 
tion at  the  right  hand  of  Grod;  they  are  esta- 
blished for  the  express  object  of  magnifying  the  Lord 
Jesus,  even  as  they  are  now  called  to  subserve, 
in  a  very  direct  way,  His  Lordship.  And  this 
last  point  is  one  of  immense  practical  importance. 
For  whatever  may  be  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in 
ministry,  whatever  may  be  the  privileges  of  the 
assembly,  still  the  Lordship  of  Christ  is  a  truth  of 
the  utmost  account  in  the  mind  of  Grod,   and  of 

A 


Z  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

exceeding  moment  for  the  practical  working  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  both  in  individual  members,  who  are 
His  servants,  and  in  the  assembly — the  body  of  which 
He  is  the  Head.  Hence  we  can  at  once  see  that, 
whatever  may  be  the  different  lines  that  either  the 
ministry  or  the  assembly  may  take,  yet  they  spring 
from  a  common  source,  and  they  are  both  intended 
of  Grod  to  be  subject  to,  and  the  means  of  exalting, 
the  same  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  it  will  be  my 
business  to-night  to  direct  attention  to  the  testimony 
we  have  in  the  word  of  God,  as  to  both  these  sub- 
jects, in  order  to  show,  as  far  as  limits  permit,  wherein 
they  differ,  wherein  also  a  common  principle  binds 
them  together;  and,  above  all,  their  common  end, 
as  well  as  the  Christian's  consequent  responsibility. 

First  of  all,  as  to  the  assembly,  we  may  be  the 
more  brief,  inasmuch  as  we  have  had  already  the 
"  one  body  "  before  us,  as  well  as  the  "  one  Spirit." 
But  I  may  direct  you  to  a  few  scriptures  which 
prove  what  I  have  just  advanced,  that  the  assembly 
of  God  is  founded  upon  the  accomplished  work  of 
Christ,  and  His  exaltation  to  heavenly  glory. 

Let  me  premise  that  the  Church  has  the  same 
meaning  with  the  assembly ;  hence  the  word  "  assem- 
bly "  is  often  used  in  order  to  avoid  misunderstanding. 
There  might  be  many  questions  raised  as  to  the 
meaning  of  "  church  : "  it  is  hardly  possible  to 
create  difficulties  as  to  the  word  "  assembly."  Now, 
the  fact  is,  the  Church  is  the  assembly.  Assembly 
is  the  proper  English  word,  rather  than  "  church," 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  6 

which  has  become  anglicized,  no  doubt,  but  it  really 
conveys  notions  not  only  vague,  but  even  opposite  to 
different  minds. 

Now,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  as  compared 
with  Matthew  xvi.,  we  find  clear  light.  The  Lord, 
at  a  very  critical  point  in  His  dealings  with  the 
disciples,  tells  Peter,  more  particularly,  but  all  His 
followers,  in  fact,  that  He  was  going  to  build  His 
assembly.  "  Upon  this  rock,"  says  He,  "  I  will 
build  My  Church."  The  reason  of  this  was  that  the 
unbelief  of  the  Jewish  people  was  complete,  after  He 
had  given  the  fullest  divine  proof,  both  in  miracles 
and  signs,  in  accomplished  prophecies,  and,  above 
all,  in  the  moral  power  which  ever  hung  around  Him 
— a  brighter  crown  of  glory  than  anything  in  either 
miracle  or  prophecy.  But  when  the  Lord  had,  so  to 
speak,  exhausted  all  the  means  which  even  His  good- 
ness and  wisdom  could  suggest  in  acquiescence  with 
the  will  of  (rod  the  Father,  and  the  result  of  His 
patient  grace  was,  that  the  unbelief  and  scorn  of  the 
true  Messiah  became  more  and  more  decided,  and  the 
spirit  of  hostility  more  evidently  deadly  in  its  cha- 
racter, He  brings  all  to  issue,  by  asking  who  men 
said  that  He  was.  The  answer  showed  the  total 
uncertainty  of  Israel;  nay,  rather  the  only  cer- 
tainty was  that  men,  the  best  and  wisest  of  them, 
humanly  speaking,  those  that  had  seen  most  of  Him, 
were  completely  wrong.  He  appeals,  then,  not  to 
some  great  one,  but  to  a  heart  that  was  true — to 
Simon  the  son  of  Jonas ;  and  from  his  lips  falls  that 
confession,  for  which  the  Lord  Himself  pronounced 
a  2 


4  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

him  blessed — blessed  because*  it  was  not  of  flesh  and 
blood,  with  their  mere  weakness  and  opposition  to 
God.  It  was  the  Father  who  was  in  heaven  who  had 
revealed  to  his  soul  the  glorious  truth,  that  under- 
neath that  despised  form — that  outcast,  the  Naza- 
rene,  was  not  only  the  Christ,  but  the  Son  of  the  living 
Grod.  The  Lord  Jesus  immediately  lays  hold  of  this 
confession,  and  with  especial  reference  to  the  latter 
part  of  it — not  merely  His  being  the  Messiah  or 
Christ,  but  His  being  the  Son  of  the  living  God, 
He  says,  "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  My  Church. " 
The  Messiah,  in  shame  and  humiliation,  was  a 
stumbling-stone  to  Israel ;  but  the  Son  of  the  living 
God  confessed  was  the  rock  upon  which  the  Church 
is  built.  This  was  a  fuller  confession,  and  a  deeper 
one — in  all  its  fulness  certainly  new,  and  so  treated 
of  the  Lord.  Not  but  what,  of  course,  Christ  was 
the  Son  of  the  living  God  from  all  eternity ;  but  still 
for  the  first  time  He  was  so  confessed  by  human  lips, 
and  by  a  heart  taught  of  God  the  Father.  The 
Lord  Jesus,  then,  also  for  the  first  time,  intimates 
that  upon  this  confession  His  Church  was  to  be 
built ;  and  immediately  He  forbids  them  to  tell  that 
He  was  the  Christ,  showing  that  it  was  no  question 
now  of  being  received  and  reigning  as  Messiah.  He 
was  to  be  rejected,  and  to  suffer.  Hence,  on  His 
rejection  by  the  people,  but  the  recognition  of  the 
higher  glory  of  His  Person  by  the  remnant  repre- 
sented by  Peter,  we  have  His  sufferings  and  death 
at  once  announced.  This  it  is  which  opened  the 
door  for  that  new  work  of  God — the  Church  that  was 


AND    MINISTRY.  5 

• 

to  be  built  upon  the  confession  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  the 
Son  of  the  living  Grod."  Accordingly  soon  follows 
the  Lord  dying  on  the  cross,  and  determined  to  be 
the  Son  of  Grod  with  power  by  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead  then  glorified,  and  in  due  time  sending 
down  the  Holy  Grhost  from  heaven.  The  second 
chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  which  shows  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  gives  us,  for  the  first 
time,  the  assembly  as  an  existing  fact  on  earth.  This 
is  worthy  of  all  note.  The  Lord,  in  Matt,  xvi.,  had 
spoken  of  His  assembly  as  a  thing  that  had  yet  to  be 
reared  up:  "Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  My  Church." 
But  now,  in  Acts  ii.,  we  find  the  Church  is  in  process 
of  being  built ;  as  it  is  said  in  the  end  of  the  chapter, 
"  the  Lord  added  to  the  Church  daily  such  as  should 
be  saved." 

This  is  a  very  important  lesson,  and  full  of  weighty 
results.  It  proves  that  the  Church  does  not  mean 
merely  people  that  are  saved,  or  in  process  of  being 
saved.  Salvation  was  true  before  the  assembly. 
The  Lord  took  such  as  should  be  saved,  and  brought 
them  into  the  Church.  If  there  had  been  no  assembly 
to  bring  them  into,  this  would  not  have  negatived 
the  fact  that  they  were  "  such  as  should  be  saved." 

What  is  the  meaning  of  "  such  as  should  be 
saved  ?  "  It  means  those  in  Israel  destined  to  be 
saved — those  Jews  whom  grace  was  looking  upon 
and  dealing  with  in  their  souls.  In  the  approaching 
dissolution  of  the  Jewish  sjTstem  Grod  reserved  to 
Himself  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace. 
There  was  always  this  remnant,  which  a  time  of  de- 


6  THE    ASSEMBLY,    ANP    MINISTRY. 

• 

clension  and  ruin  served  but  to  define.  Thus,  during 
the  Lord's  lifetime  the  disciples  were  the  remnant,  or 
"  such  as  should  be  saved."  All  those  that  were  soon 
to  confess  Jesus  as  Messiah  by  the  Holy  Ghost  were 
"  such  as  should  be  saved ;  "  but  there  was  no  such 
thing  yet  as  the  Church  to  add  them  to.  Now,  at 
the  time  referred  to  in  Acts  ii.,  the  assembly  or 
Church  was  there  to  which  they  might  be  added. 
Coincident  with  the  Holy  Ghost's  presence,  we  have 
the  Church ;  and  this  agrees  with  1  T3or.  xii.  13,  where 
it  is  said  that  "  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into 
one  body;"  that  is  to  say,  the  formation  of  the  body 
depends  upon  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit.  Acts  i. 
shows  that  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit  had  not  yet 
taken  place;  Acts  ii.  shows  that  it  had;  and  im- 
mediately the  fact  is  apparent  that  the  Church  was 
there  as  a  thing  actually  found  upon  the  earth,  to 
which  "such  as  should  be  saved"  were  being  added  by 
the  Lord.  That  is,  the  Lord  now  had  a  house  upon 
the  earth.  The  stones  were  there  before — living 
stones,  but  they  were  separate :  there  was  no  build- 
ing of  God  in  this  sense  here  below. 

Now  the  Lord  acts  upon  His  words,  "  Upon 
this  rock  I  will  build  My  Church."  He.  brings  the 
living  stones  together ;  He  builds  them  into  one  and 
the  same  house — the  house  of  God,  and  this  not  by 
faith  merely,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from 
heaven.  We  know  that,  before  they  thus  entered 
the  Church,  there  were  at  least  a  hundred  and  twenty 
names  who  are  expressly  mentioned  in  Acts  i.  They, 
too,  were  "  such  as  should  be  saved."     And  I  do  not 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  7 

doubt  that  there  were  considerably  more  who  really 
were  brethren.  Thus,  in  1  Cor.  xv.  6,  we  hear  of  "  above 
five  hundred  brethren  "  who  saw  the  Lord  after  His 
resurrection.  Therefore,  it  is  plain,  there  were  pretty 
many  believers  in  the  land  of  Israel.  The  "  hundred 
and  twenty  "  were  those  who,  at  or  after  the  cruci- 
fixion, lived  in  Jerusalem.  But  whatever  might  be 
the  number  of  the  brethren  throughout  the  land,  or 
of  the  names  in  Jerusalem,  there  was  no  such  thing 
as  "the  Church,"  the  assembly  of  God,  until  the 
Holy  Ghost  was  sent  down  to  give  unity — to  form 
them  into  one  existing  corporation,  whether  you 
regard  it  as  the  house  of  God,  or  as  the  body  of 
Christ.  There  are  very  important  differences  con- 
nected with  these  views  of  the  assembly ;  but  still  it 
is  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  makes  it 
either  Christ's  body  or  the  temple  of  God.  In  1  Co- 
rinthians it  is  spoken  of  as  constituted  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  present  and  operating  in  it ;  there  also  it  is 
called  the  body  of  Christ,  as  we  see  from  the  scripture 
just  referred  to  :  "  By  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized 
into  one  body." 

Obviously  this  is  extremely  important,  because 
what  people  think  and  talk  about  as  the  "  invisible 
Church  " — though  Scripture  never  uses  the  expression 
— was  substantially  in  existence  before  "  the  Church; " 
and,  in  fact,  this  invisible  state  of  things  is  what  the 
Lord  was  putting  an  end  to,  when  He  formed  the 
Church.  In  Old  Testament  times,  we  all  know, 
there  was  a  nation  which  God  accounted  and  called 
His  people,  in  the  midst  of  whom  there  were  isolated 


8  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

believers,  as  no  doubt  there  were  other  believers 
among  the  Gentiles.  Thus,  there  was  Job,  for 
instance,  in  early  days;  and  every  now  and  then, 
throughout  the  Scriptures,  we  have  one  Gentile  and 
another  who  evidently  manifested  divine  life  in  them, 
and  a  looking  for  the  Eedeemer,  outside  the  limits 
of  Israel.  For  all  that,  there  was  no  such  thing  as 
"the  Church" — no  gathering  together  of  the  scat- 
tered believers  into  one,  till  the  death  of  Christ.  The 
children  of  God  had  been  scattered  abroad,  but  then 
they  were  gathered  together.  Henceforth  disciples  in 
Israel  were  not  only  destined  to  salvation,  but  they 
were  gathered  into  one  upon  the  earth.  This  is 
the  Church.  The  assembly  necessarily  supposes  a 
gathering  of  the  saints  into  one  body,  separate  from 
the  rest  of  mankind.  There  was  no  such  body 
before.  Hence,  to  talk  of  "  the  Church  "  in  Jewish 
times,  or  in  earlier  days,  is  altogether  a  mistake. 
The  mixture  of  believers  with  their  unbelieving 
countrymen  {i.e.,  what  is  called  "the  invisible 
Church ")  was  the  very  thing  which  the  Lord  was 
concluding — not  beginning — when  He  "added  to 
the  Church  daily  such  as  should  be  saved." 

The  common  error  upon  this  subject  is,  that  the 
aggregate  of  those  that  are  to  be  saved  composes  the 
Church.  But  the  contrary  appears  from  this  scrip- 
ture and  many  others.  Up  to  this  time  "  such  as 
should  be  saved  "  were  not  in  the  Church.  Now  the 
Lord  takes  and  adds  them  day  by  day  together, 
making  up  one  assembled  body.  Thus,  it  is  quite 
evident  that  "  the  assembly  "  is  one  thing,  and  the 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  9 

being  saved  is  another.  Of  course,  salvation  is  true 
of  those  that  are  in  and  of  the  Church.  The  Lord 
does  not  leave  "such  as  should  be  saved"  in  their 
old  associations,  but  gradually  builds  them  together 
into  the  Church.  But  the  two  ideas  are  so  totally  dis- 
tinct, that,  all  through  the  Old  Testament,  there  were 
"  such  as  should  be  saved,"  and  yet  there  was  no 
"  Church  of  God,"  in  the  sense  we  are  now  deducing 
from  Scripture.  The  assembly  of  Israel  no  doubt 
there  was,  and  it  is  called  the  "  congregation  of 
Jehovah  " — the  "  assembly,"  if  you  will,  of  Jehovah ; 
but  then,  that  was  merely  the  nation,  the  entire 
mass  of  the  Jewish  people.  It  was  out  of  this  very 
nation  that  the  first  nucleus  of  "  the  Church  "  was 
taken ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  having  just  come 
down  to  dwell  in  those  that  were  already  there,  the 
Lord  takes  the  others  that  were  converted  at  Pente- 
cost or  afterwards,  and  adds  them  to  the  existing 
body — the  Church  now  in  course  of  formation.  Evi- 
dently, therefore,  the  first  covenant  state,  that  was  now 
ready  to  vanish  away,  answers  to  what  people  mean 
when  they  speak  of  "a  visible  and  invisible  Church." 
They  would  call  the  Jewish  nation  the  visible  Church, 
and  "  such  as  should  be  saved "  in  their  midst,  the 
invisible  Church.  Well,  let  them  so  speak,  if  they 
will ;  but  all  I  now  affirm,  and  wish  to  impress  upon 
every  one  who  is  subject  to  the  word  of  God,  is 
that,  as  applied  to  what  the  New  Testament  calls 
"  the  Church  of  God,"  this  kind  of  thought  and  lan- 
guage is  condemned  by  the  clear  and  positive  state- 
ments of  God's  word.    I  would  not  speak  so  strongly, 


10  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

if  Scripture  left  the  smallest  shadow  of  doubt  upon 
the  point.  But  if  the  word  of  God  is  express,  it 
seems  to  me  criminal  for  a  believer  to  speak  doubt- 
fully. Not  only  is  he  not  doing  all  he  should  do, 
but  he  is  really  helping  on  the  spirit  of  infidelity 
in  the  world.  We  owe  it  to  our  Grod  to  be  firm 
where  His  word  is  plain ;  we  owe  it  to  Him  to  be 
uncompromising  as  well  as  obedient.  If  the  word 
of  Grod  be  thus  explicit,  that  now  for  the  first  time 
we  have  "  the  Church,"  formed  by  the  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  vouchsafed  to  believers,  and  that  those 
who  were  destined  to  salvation,  "  such  as  should  be 
saved,"  were  taken  out  of  Israel  and  added  to  that 
assembly,  then  I  say  that  the  Church,  in  the 
New  Testament  sense  of  the  word,  never  did  nor 
could  exist  before — that  it  began  there  and  then — 
that  it  consists  of  saved  people  taken  out  of  the  Jews 
first,  and  then  out  of  the  Gentiles  afterwards,  as  we 
know,  but  both  brought  into  one  existing  body  upon 
the  earth.  That  body  is,  and  is  called  "  the  Church," 
.  or  the  assembly  of  Cod. 

In  due  time  the  Lord  began  to  extend  the  work. 
Thus,  in  Acts  viii.,  we  find  Samaria  receiving  the 
gospel,  and  the  Holy  Grhost  subsequently  given  to 
the  believers.  We  have  afterwards  the  Ethiopian 
eunuch  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  Then  the 
great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  is  so  converted  as  to  be 
the  fittest  witness  of  grace,  as  well  as  of  the  Church 
— one  with  Christ  in  heaven  ;  as  indeed  in  Col.  i.  he 
styles  himself  not  only  minister  of  the  Gospel,  but  of 
the  Church.    Only  he  treats  of  it  as  the  body  of  Christ. 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  11 

By  the  way,  in  passing,  I  would  remark  that 
Acts  ix.  31  has  its  force  impaired,  to  say  the  least, 
in  the  common  Greek  text  and  English  version. 
"  Then  had  the  churches  rest,"  we  read,  "  through- 
out all  Judsoa,  and  Galilee,  and  Samaria,  and  were 
edified;  and  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in 
the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  were  multiplied." 
Now  the  best  copies  and  most  ancient  versions  give 
"  the  Church"  not  "  the  churches."  I  admit  fully 
there  were  churches  in  all  these  districts ;  but  there 
is  nothing  peculiar  in  this.  But  that  which,  I  am 
persuaded,  the  Spirit  of  God  wrote  here,  was  "  the 
Church."  Minds  were  perplexed  very  early  indeed. 
The  idea  of  the  Church  as  a  subsisting  united  society 
upon  the  earth,  is  easily  lost  sight  of,  particularly 
when  we  look  at  different  districts  and  countries,  such 
as  Judsea,  and  Galilee,  and  Samaria.  The  true  read- 
ing at  once  leads  us  back  to  the  substantial  unity 
that  belonged  to  the  Church,  or  assembly  of  God, 
here  below.  There  might  be  ever  so  many  assemblies 
throughout  Judsea,  and  Samaria,  and  Galilee,  but  it 
was  the  Church.  I  admit  that  we  often  hear  of  the 
churches  of  Judsea,  and  of  other  countries,  as  Galatia 
for  instance.  No  one  questions  the  fact  of  many 
different  assemblies  in  these  different  lands.  But 
then  there  is  another  truth  which  has  not  been  seen 
for  a  long  while  by  the  great  mass  of  God's  children 
— not  only  that  God  set  up  a  body  which  did  not 
exist  before,  but  that  wherever  assemblies  might  be, 
it  was  all  the  assembly.  Not  only  did  He  constitute 
this  Church  upon  earth,  susceptible  of  daily  growth, 


12  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

but  while  He  extended  the  work,  while  He  formed 
fresh  assemblies  in  this  or  that  district  and  country, 
it  was  nevertheless  one  and  the  same  Church  wherever 
it  might  be.  This  scripture,  rightly  read,  furnishes 
a  strong  proof  of  it ;  and  I  will  now  just  add  that 
the  best  authorities  leave  no  doubt  on  my  mind  as 
to  this.  The  word  churches  supplanted  the  Church  at 
an  early  day ;  and  probably  it  is  due  to  the  fact  that, 
very  soon,  the  copyists,  like  other  people,  began  to  lose 
sight  of  the  unity  which  Grod  was  establishing  among 
His  children  upon  the  earth.*  It  is  so  much  more 
natural  to  conceive  merely  of  distinct  churches,  than 
to  take  in  the  precious  truth  of  the  Church  wherever  it 
is  found  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  This  may  have 
led  to  assimilating  the  true  phrase  to  another  and 

*  The  external  authority  stands  thus.  The  Alexandrian,  the  Vati- 
can, the  Palimpsest  of  Paris,  and  the  Sinai  MSS.  are  documents  of  the 
highest  value,  which  agree  in  reading  "the  Church,"  not  "the 
churches."  In  this  they  are  supported  by  the  most  important  cursive 
extant,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  along  with  a  fair  number  of 
others.  Of  the  ancient  versions,  there  is  not  one  of  first-rate  authority 
which  does  not  confirm  the  singular — the  Peschito  Syriac,  Coptic, 
Sahidic,  Vulgate,  iEthiopic,  Armenian,  and  the  Erpenian  Arabic. 
The  most  ancient  Uncial  which  gives  the  plural  form  is  that  of  Laud, 
in  the  Bodleian  Library,  of  about  the  sixth  or  seventh  century,  sup- 
ported by  two  others  of  the  ninth  century,  with  the  mass  of  cursives,  the 
Philoxenian  Syriac,  and  an  Arabic  version.  But  even  here  it  is  to 
be  remarked  that  the  weightiest,  or  Laudean  copy,  is  unquestionably 
wrong  in  reading  "  all  the  churches ;"  and  the  others  may  have  been 
influenced  by  Acts  xvi.  5.  It  is  certainly  easier  to  suppose  that  the 
less  usual  form  might  have  been  changed  by  scribes  to  a  common  type, 
than  that  the  very  old  authorities  joined  in  an  error,  which  the  crowd 
of  juniors  escaped.  Ordinarily,  the  tendency  runs  in  a  direction 
exactly  opposite. 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  13 

more  familiar  one,  especially  when  the  sense  of  unity 
decayed  and  disappeared. 

From   the  historical   account  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,   let  us  turn  to  the  instruction  which  the 
rest  of  the  New  Testament  affords  as  to  the  assembly. 
First,  the  Lord,  in  Mat.  xviii.,  had  laid  down  the 
spirit  in  personal  matters  that  was  to  actuate  the 
assembly,  beginning  with  one  of  its  members.     He 
had  shown  there,  that  the  legal  spirit  is  quite  out  of 
place.      He  had   pointed  out  in  the  most  beautiful 
manner  how  He  Himself  was  the  Son  of  Man  that 
came  "  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost " — 
not  merely  that  He  was   the   Shepherd  of  Israel, 
gathering  His  own  people,  but  that  He  was  come 
in  quest  of  the  lost,  in  the  pure  and  simple  and  full 
grace  of  (rod.     Take  a  case  which  He  knew  might 
occur  in  the  assembly  He  was  going  to  build — the 
case  of  one  brother  trespassing  against  another :  what 
was  to  guide  ?    Not  law,  nor  nature,  but  grace.     The 
righteousness  of  man  would  say  :  "  The  man  that  has 
done  the  wrong  must  come  and  humble  himself." 
"  No,"  says  grace,  "  go  you  after  him."     "  What ! 
after  the  man  that  did  me  this  wrong?"     "  Yes,  it 
is  exactly  what  the  Lord  has  done."     That  is,  the 
Lord  puts  His  own  grace  as  the  pattern,  and  spring, 
and  power  that  is  to  govern  the  individual,  and  of 
course  also  to  be  the  life-breath  of  the   assembly. 
Consequently   we   find :    "If  thy  brother   trespass 
against   thee,    go  and   tell   him   his   fault   between 
thee   and   him    alone."      He    that   was    trespassed 
against,   becomes   in   grace  the  active  party.      He 


14  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

goes,  and  for  what  purpose?  To  tell  his  brother 
his  fault.  What  a  call  for  the  painstaking  and 
self-abnegation  of  love !  And  if  his  brother  hear 
him,  he  has  "  gained  his  brother."  "What  a  requital, 
even  now  from  the  Lord!  It  would  be  indeed  a 
sorrow  to  the  heart  that  he  should  go  farther  astray. 
Thus  it  is,  that  love,  divine  love,  reproduces  itself 
in  those  that  the  Lord  is  not  ashamed  to  call  His 
brethren.  He  calls  them  to  be  the  witnesses,  not 
of  the  servant  by  whom  the  law  was  given,  but  of 
Himself,  who  was  full  of  grace  and  truth.  Accord- 
ingly, then,  grace  is  the  energetic  influence  that 
works ;  but  truth  is  not  set  aside  for  a  moment.  Still 
less  can  the  Christian  entertain  that  pride  of  heart 
and  indifference  that  would  say,  "  Well,  he  has  acted 
wrongly ;  I  am  above  it,  and  will  take  no  notice  of 
it."  There  would  be,  in  this,  a  spirit  of  hard  forget- 
fulness  of  Christ  and  His  grace,  as  well  as  the  world's 
indifference  about  one's  brother.  There  is  no  allow- 
ance of  either  in  our  Saviour's  words.  Again,  the  legal 
principle,  right  as  it  is  in  itself,  of  dealing  with  a  man 
as  he  deserves,  is  entirely  excluded.  Divine  grace, 
as  seen  in  the  person  and  mission  of  the  Saviour  of 
the  lost,  works  in  the  soul  if  we  follow  His  voice. 
We  know  well  how  easily  it  might  be  forgotten,  and 
how  the  heart  might  reason :  "  Because  he  is  my 
brother,  he  is  the  less  excusable — he  ought  to  know 
better."  There  is  truth  in  this :  no  doubt,  he  ought 
to  know  it ;  but  if  he  does  not,  you  may  at  least  feel 
what  is  your  place  and  privilege.  "  Gro  and  tell 
him,"  &c.     Thus  the  Lord  does  not  lay  down  a  law 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  15 

for  the  wrong-doer  to  find  his  way  back,  bnt  calls  the 
man  that  is  in  the  right  to  go  forth,  not  in  the 
spirit  of  right,  but  of  grace,  to  win  him  who  is 
wrong ;  and  if  the  latter  hears,  the  former  has  gained 
his  brother.  If  the  wrong-doer  refuses  to  hear,  the 
thing  is  to  be  laid  before  others.  "  If  he  will  not 
hear  thee,  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more,  that  in 
the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every  word  may 
be  established."  There  would  be,  as  it  were,  a  com- 
bined action  of  grace  brought  to  bear  upon  the 
offender's  soul,  that  he  may  hold  out  no  longer.  It 
was  bad  enough  to  refuse  one :  can  he  refuse  one  or 
two  more?  Well,  but  if  he  does  neglect  to  hear 
them,  what  then?  The  whole  Church  hear  and 
speak ;  all  the  objects  and  witnesses  of  divine  grace 
who  are  in  the  place  are  intent  and  occupied  with 
the  trespasser.  Can  he  reject  the  Church?  If  he 
does,  "  let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and 
a  publican. " 

Brethren,  what  sentence  so  terrible  as  the  sentence 
of  grace  and  truth  rejected?  And  thereby  is  seen 
the  sad  mistake  that  is  often  made  when  men  talk 
about  love,  but  I  am  afraid  with  little  appreciation  of 
it.  There  must  be  a  love  in  deed  and  in  truth  from 
Christ  Himself,  to  begin  and  go  on  with  such  a  work 
as  this.  But  observe,  the  very  same  delight  in  and 
submission  to  Christ  which  can  carry  one  after  a  per- 
sonal offender  thus,  not  as  a  bare  duty,  but  with  fervent 
desire  to  win  him  back — the  self-same  spirit  of  faith 
regards  him,  if  refractory,  "  as  a  heathen  man  and  a 
publican."     He  may  be  really  a  converted  man  ;  but 


16  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

he  who  rejects  the  grace  of  Christ  thus  flowing  out 
according  to  the  truth,  is  no  longer  to  be  counted  as 
a  brother.  No  matter  whether  he  is  really  a  brother 
or  not  before  Grod,  he  is  rejecting  the  Lord,  as  it 
were,  in  those  that  represent  Him  on  earth  in  His 
assembly.  "  Let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen 
man  and  a  publican." 

This,  then,  is  the  Lord's  weighty  and  standing 
lesson  before  the  assembly  came  into  existence ;  but 
we  are  not  left  only  to  these  preliminary  preparations 
of  the  Lord.  In  1  Cor.,  and  more  particularly  in  the 
chapter  that  was  read,  is  a  very  full  account  of  the 
way  in  which  the  Lord  orders  the  assembly.  Before 
calling  your  attention  to  this,  let  me  refer  first  of  all 
to  chapter  xii.,  where  the  subject  of  spiritual  mani- 
festations begins.  There  you  find  the  Holy  Grhost 
in  active  operation.  He  is  at  work  in  the  various 
members  of  the  assembly  of  Grod.  For  "  there  are 
diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same  Spirit ;  and  there 
are  differences  of  administrations,  but  the  same  Lord ; 
and  there  are  diversities  of  operations,  but  it  is  the 
same  God  who  worketh  all  in  all.  But  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit 
withal ;  for  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit  the  word  of 
wisdom ;  to  another,  the  word  of  knowledge  by  the 
same  Spirit ;  to  another,  faith,  by  the  same  Spirit ; 
to  another,  the  gifts  of  healing,  by  the  same  Spirit " 
— and  so  on.  But  if  we  have  here  spiritual  acting 
in  the  assembly,  observe  that  the  subject  opens  by 
tests  that  decide  between  the  spirits  that  were  not  of 
Grod,  and  the  Holy  Grhost.     It  is  not  a  question  of 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  17 

settling  who  are  Christians  and  who  are  not,  but  of 
discriminating  what  is  of  the  Holy  Spirit  from  the 
spirits  that  are  opposed  to  Him — the  spirits  of  the 
enemy. 

And  what  may  these  tests  be  ?  "  No  one  speaking 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  says  Jesus  [is]  accursed  (or 
anathema)  ;  and  no  one  can  say  Lord  Jesus  but  by 
the  Holy  Spirit."  Thus  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God 
would  never  treat  Christ  as  in  His  own  person,  or 
relationship  to  God,  under  a  curse.  This  is  a  very 
simple  and  solemn  test,  and  ought  to  be  weighed  by 
us1 — I  think  I  may  say,  beloved  brethren,  by  us 
especially.  For  in  our  own  days  a  most  audacious 
effort  of  the  devil  has  been  put  forth.  Have  not  men 
dared  to  assert  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  His  own 
relationship  to  God,  as  a  man  upon  the  earth,  was 
under  the  curse  of  the  broken  law? — that  He  was 
under  the  effects,  as  between  His  soul  and  God,  of 
man's  distance  from  God  ?  At  once  we  discern 
what  spirit  this  is.  "  No  man  speaking  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  calleth  Jesus  accursed."  On  the  other  hand, 
"  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the 
Holy  Ghost."  When  an  evil  spirit  works,  he  may 
utter  many  fine  things  ;  he  may  appear  to  exalt 
Christ  and  His  servants,  as  we  see  in  the  Gospels 
and  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  but  he  never  owns 
Jesus  as  Lord.  It  is  the  sure  mark  of  an  evil  spirit 
to  lower  Jesus  by  bringing  Him,  in  some  way  or 
other,  for  Himself,  under  the  curse.  I  am.  not 
speaking  of  His  taking  that  place  upon  the  Cross  by 
grace,  but  of  His  own  place  as  man  with  God,  apart 

B 


18  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

from  atonement.  The  pretence  may  be  thereby  to 
increase  His  sympathy  toward  us,  or  to  enhance  His 
triumph  over  the  difficulty,  and  His  extrication  from 
it ;  but  no  one  speaking  by  the  Holy  Ghost  says  Jesus 
is  accursed.  Then  you  have  the  counter-test,  that 
those  who  own  the  Lordship  of  Jesus,  own  Him  in 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Grhost.  This  is  no  question 
of  souls  being  saved,  but  a  means  of  detecting  what 
manner  of  spirit  is  active  in  the  Church.  It  is  the 
scriptural  touchstone  for  discovering  those  that  are 
under  the  power  of  an  evil  spirit,  and  those  that  speak 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
really  exalts  Christ,  and  gives  Him  His  due  place  as 
Lord.  The  spirit  of  error  as  surely  seeks  to  debase 
His  Person  and  frustrate  His  work. 

The  Holy  Spirit  invariably  maintains  two  things 
— the  glory  of  Christ  as  to  His  Person,  and  the 
Lordship  of  Christ  as  to  His  place :  the  one  fitting 
for,  and  the  other  flowing  from,  His  work.  Now 
this  at  once  prepares  the  way  for  the  important  and 
practical  truth,  that  the  great  object  of  the  assembly 
of  God  is  the  recognition  of  Christ  as  Lord.  "We 
are,  therefore,  at  once  cast  upon  the  question,  Has 
the  Lord  given  regulations  for  His  assembly,  or  has 
He  left  us  to  ourselves  ?  Have  we  no  directing  prin- 
ciple for  the  manner  in  which  the  assembly  of  God  is 
to  conduct  itself  in  this  world  ?  Is  the  Church  wholly 
abandoned,  as  it  were,  to  its  spiritual  instincts  ?  Is 
it  to  be  moulded  by  the  particular  age  or  country 
in  which  the  saints  may  be  found  ?  I  trust  there 
is  no  person  here  who  would  endorse  thoughts  so  evi- 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  19 

dently  of  mere  nature  as  these.  What !  the  Christian 
assembly  dependent  on  age  or  country  !  Can  those 
who  so  speculate  or  act,  really  believe  that  the  Church 
of  God  is  a  creature  of  the  world  after  all ;  that  God 
has  left  it,  like  a  foundling,  to  be  one  thing  here 
and  another  thing  there  ?  Institutions  such  as  these 
might  be  good  or  bad  churches  of  man,  but  certainly 
one  is  at  a  loss  to  conceive  what  pretensions  they 
can  set  up  to  be  the  Church  of  Grod.  It  is  of  all 
consequence  that,  be  it  the  simplest  believer,  his 
heart  should  understand  and  keep  firm  hold  of  this, 
so  patent  in  Scripture,  that  if  there  be  one  thing 
that  is  precious  to  Grod  upon  the  earth,  it  is  His 
Church ;  that  if  there  be  one  thing  Grod  is  above  all 
jealous  of  maintaining  therein,  it  is  the  glory  of 
Christ ;  and  that  it  is  not  in  the  world  yet,  but  in  the 
children  of  Grod,  that  Grod  Himself  is  now  active  by 
His  Spirit,  for  the  purpose  of  glorifying  Christ.  But, 
as  usual  in  His  ways,  whatever  is  set  up  on  the  earth 
is  always  first  tried  here,  and  then  it  is  put  into 
Christ's  hands,  by  whom  the  divine  counsels  are 
accomplished  infallibly.  To-day  is  the  time  of  trial. 
When  Jesus  comes,  there  will  be  no  further  trial  in 
this  respect.  The  Church  will  then  enter  into  the  due 
place  which  is  reserved  for  it  in  the  purpose  of  God. 
The  hour  of  our  responsibility  will  be  over.  But 
now  is  the  time  when  the  children  of  God  are  being 
put  to  the  test. 

Remark,  moreover,  that  one  object  of  the  First 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is  to  show  that  theirs  was 
an  infant  Church,  an  assembly  of  persons  not  long 
b  2 


20  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

gathered  out  of  the  world,  and  hence  in  much  prac- 
tical ignorance.  You  see  them  assailed  by  evils  that 
in  these  days  would  not  be  ordinarily  a  trial  among 
the  children  of  God.  There  was  certainly  a  very  low 
state  of  moral  thought  and  feeling,  and,  in  one  case 
at  least,  such  grossness  of  outward  conduct  as  was 
not  heard  of  even  among  the  Gentiles.  It  would 
seem  that  the  devil  had  used  particular  pains  to  take 
advantage  of  the  happy  liberty  of  these  young  Chris- 
tians. They  forgot  all  about  the  flesh,  being  so 
occupied  with  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  They  do  not 
seem  to  have  reflected  upon  their  dangers.  They  did 
not  walk  in  self-judgment.  You  must  remember  that 
they  had  few  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  as 
yet,  and  that  the  apostle  had  not  been  long  teaching 
them.  Of  course,  afterwards,  there  was  an  amazing 
advantage  gained,  through  their  very  fall,  by  the  in- 
struction which  the  Holy  Ghost  gave  from  it  to  others, 
and,  we  may  trust,  to  themselves.  Yet  the  epistle 
clearly  shows  that  the  infant  church  at  Corinth  had 
the  responsibility  of  the  Church  of  God.  It  is  the 
only  one  that  is  expressly  thus  addressed — "  the 
Church  of  God."  At  that  time  no  apostles  were 
there,  nor,  it  would  seem,  elders  either ;  but  I  shall 
have  an  opportunity  of  adverting  to  this  more  fully 
by-and-by.  There  was,  however,  no  lack  of  gifted 
people ;  yet  remark,  spiritual  order  is  not  produced 
by  such  manifestations  of  power,  but  by  subjection 
to  Christ  as  Lord.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  enriched 
in  all  utterance  and  knowledge.  Few  churches  had 
gifts  more  abundantly  than  the  assembly  in  Corinth. 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AXD    MINISTRY.  21 

It  was,  notwithstanding,  a  most  disorderly  spectacle  ; 
and  the  reason  was,  that  they  were  exercising  those 
powers  without  reference  to  the  Lord's  will  and 
glory,  and  so  for  their  own  ends.  They  were  pleasing 
themselves — exalting  themselves.  In  their  new-born 
exuberance,  they  were  giving  the  loose  rein  to  all  the 
spiritual  energy  that  had  been  bestowed  upon  them, 
and  the  consequence  was  that  there  was  the  special 
need  of  bringing  them  back  into  the  ways  of  Grod. 

Whatever  may  be  the  power  of  the  Spirit  by  and 
in  men  on  the  earth,  it  should  always  be  made  sub- 
servient to  Christ  the  Lord.  The  Corinthians  did 
not  understand  this,  and  they  are  reminded  of  it 
from  the  very  beginning  of  chapter  i. — "  Those  that 
call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  both 
theirs  and  ours."  So,  all  through  the  epistle,  you 
will  find  great  emphasis  laid  upon  His  being  Lord. 
We  have  it  here  in  reference  to  the  bestowal  and 
character  of  these  gifts.  So,  again  in  chapter  xiv.,  we 
have  the  exercise  of  these  gifts  regulated  in  the 
assembly.  The  Church  comes  together  into  one 
place ;  there  the  saints  meet  as  the  assembly  of  Grod. 
Did  they  then  speak  in  a  tongue  ?  It  was  in  vain  to 
plead  that  the  Spirit  of  Grod  undoubtedly  enabled 
them  so  to  speak.  Again,  there  is  no  question  raised 
as  to  the  quality  of  the  unknown  subject-matter  :  it 
might  be  all  true,  sound,  and  good;  but  the  Lord 
proscribes  what  does  not  edify  the  assembly.  As 
a  general  rule,  in  the  absence  of  one  who  could 
interpret,  the  exercise  of  these  tongues  is  forbidden 
in  the  assembly. 


22  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

This  is  a  most  momentous  matter  for  practice.  No 
matter  how  truly  a  man  has  a  power  which  comes  from 
the  Holy  Ghost,  he  is  not  always  to  use  it ;  more  than 
this,  he  is  bound  to  use  it  in  obedience  to  Christ. 
There  are  certain  regulations  laid  clown  to  which 
he  must  submit  himself.  The  apostle  takes  up 
prophesying  particularly,  because  it  was  the  highest 
form  of  acting  on  the  conscience  ;  as  in  mentioning 
the  various  gifts,  he  (chap.  xii.  28)  put  diversities 
of  tongues  in  the  lowest  place.  Thus  he  rebuked 
the  vanity  of  the  Corinthians  ;  for  what  they  made 
more  of  than  anything  else,  the  apostle  reduces  to  the 
last  rank.  "  Grod  hath  set  some  in  the  Church,  first 
apostles,  secondarily  prophets,  thirdly  teachers,  after 
that  miracles,  then  gifts  of  healings,  helps,  govern- 
ments, diversities  of  tongues."  Then,  after  the  most 
precious  unfolding  of  love  in  chapter  xiii.,  (how  need- 
ful in  these  matters !)  he  comes  to  the  due  exercise  of 
gift  in  the  assembly  in  chapter  xiv.  "  If  therefore, 
the  whole  Church  be  come  together  into  one  place, 
and  all  speak  with  tongues,  and  there  come  in  those 
that  are  unlearned,  or  unbelievers,  will  they  not  say 
that  ye  are  mad  ?  But  if  all  prophesy,  and  there 
come  in  one  that  believeth  not,  or  one  unlearned,  he 
is  convinced  of  all,  he  is  judged  of  all ;  and  thus  are 
the  secrets  of  his  heart  made  manifest,  and  so,  falling 
down  on  his  face,  he  will  worship  Grod,  and  report 
that  Grod  is  in  you  of  a  truth."  Observe  the  weight 
of  the  principle  which  the  apostle  here  insists  upon. 
Grod  has  formed  the  Church,  the  assembly,  as  a 
testimony  to  Christ  upon  the  earth — a  testimony  to 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  23 

His  Lordship.  The  consequence  is,  whatever  would 
give  a  false,  or  even  a  vainglorious  testimony,  what- 
ever would  prompt  men  to  say,  "  Ye  are  mad,"  is 
forbidden,  no  matter  how  certainly  the  power,  thus 
misused,  itself  might  be  of  Grod.  The  gift  of  tongues, 
for  instance,  evidently  was  of  the  Holy  Grhost  and 
not  of  nature ;  but  its  use  is  subjected  to  divine 
regulations,  as  we  see  here.  And  this  has  a  wide 
scope :  indeed,  I  hold  it  to  be  the  grand  criterion 
for  every  Christian  man  to  apply,  both  for  his  own 
conduct  and  for  judging  that  of  others.  But  when  we 
speak  of  judging  what  others  do  or  say,  need  I  add 
that  it  becomes  us  to  weigh  all  humbly  and  in  love, 
seeing  well  to  it  that  we  are  not  thinking  of  ourselves 
but  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  ?  But  I  do  say  that  we 
are  always  bound  to  think  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord ; 
and  therefore,  no  matter  under  what  circumstances, 
no  matter  where,  we  are  responsible  to  judge  in 
subjection  to  Him. 

Prophesying  here,  evidently,  does  not  mean  pre- 
dicting, as  some  might  suppose ;  nor,  as  others  say, 
mere  preaching.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  preaching 
which  is  not  prophesying.  Indeed,  it  might  well  be 
affirmed  that  the  preaching  of  the  Grospel  is  never, 
rightly  considered,  prophesying ;  for  this  last  is  that 
character  of  teaching  which  lays  the  conscience  bare 
in  the  presence  of  Grod,  and  brings  Grod  and  man 
thus  close  together,  if  I  may  venture  so  to  put  it. 
Therefore  this  is  what  the  apostle  contrasts  with  the 
exercise  of  a  tongue.  The  tongue  was  forbidden,  if 
there  were  no  interpreter;  and  for  the  plain  reason,  that 


24  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

otherwise  it  would  not  edify  the  Church.  The  object 
of  all  that  is  done  there,  must  be  "  unto  edifying." 
Whatever,  therefore,  does  not  edify,  is  not  fit  for  the 
assembly  of  Grod,  and  ought  not  to  be  allowed  there. 
It  may  be  well  meant ;  it  may  be  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
as  regards  power ;  but  whatever  is  not  intelligible, 
and  has  not  the  character  of  building  up  the  saints 
of  Grod,  is  not  fit  for  the  assembly.  These  things 
might  be  very  well  out  of  the  assembly ;  nay,  it  was 
their  proper  place,  as  a  testimony  to  unbelievers. 
But  they  had  no  business  in  the  assembly,  if  then1 
exercise  did  not  tend  to  the  instruction,  exhortation, 
or  comfort  of  the  assembly ;  and  edify  the  assembly 
they  could  not,  unless  there  was  one  who  had  the 
gift  of  the  interpretation  of  tongues,  and  could,  there- 
fore, turn  them  to  present  account  in  the  building 
up  the  saints  of  Grod,  in  the  grace  and  truth  which 
came  by  Jesus  Christ. 

This,  then,  is  the  rule  by  which  all  is  to  be  go- 
verned. "  If  any  man  speak  in  an  unknown  tongue, 
let  it  be  by  two,  or  at  the  most  by  three,  and  that  by 
course  ;  and  let  one  interpret.  But  if  there  be  no 
interpreter,  let  him  keep  silence  in  the  Church ;  and 
let  him  speak  to  himself,  and  to  God."  But  suppose 
you  are  prophets ;  suppose  you  can  speak  to  edifica- 
tion in  this  powerful  way,  "  let  the  prophets  speak 
two  or  three,  and  let  the  other  judge."  Here  the 
apostle  takes  the  example  of  the  prophets  in  con- 
tradistinction to  the  tongues ;  for  everything  the 
prophet  said  was  for  the  express  purpose  of  edifying. 
While,  therefore,  he  admits  them  to  be  in  the  first 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  25 

rank  of  the  gifts  of  edification,  there  is  this  other 
important  guard  asserted,  that,  precious  and  profit- 
able as  prophesying  may  be,  no  more  than  two  or 
three  were  to  speak  on  the  same  occasion.  Doubtless, 
they  were  to  speak  one  after  another ;  they  were  to 
speak  in  order  and  by  course ;  mutually  subject,  but 
not  more  than  two  or  three.  "Why  so  ?  Because  it 
would  not  tend  to  the  very  edification  which  was 
the  great  object  of  prophesying ;  it  would  be  over- 
doing, being  more  than  the  saints  could  really  profit 
by;  and  therefore  there  are  these  defined  limits. 
Granted  that  prophets  give  the  highest  character  of 
Christian  instruction;  but  only  two  or  three  were 
to  speak,  and  the  others  were  to  judge. 

"  If  anything  be  revealed  to  another  that  sitteth  by, 
let  the  first  hold  his  peace."  There  might  be  then 
that  which  no  longer  exists,  any  more  than  speaking 
in  a  tongue  ;  that  is,  revelation.  This  must  be  care- 
fully remembered.  The  truth  of  Grod  may  be  brought, 
in  the  most  powerful  manner,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  to 
bear  upon  the  conscience,  so  that  even  now,  as  then, 
there  may  be  the  firmest  conviction  conveyed  to  an 
unbeliever  who  might  come  in,  that  Grod  was  there. 
I  do  not  doubt  that  this  is  perfectly  possible,  and  may 
be  now  at  any  time ;  and  I  would  to  Grod  it  were 
always !  But  this  is  a  wholly  distinct  thing  from 
a  revelation.  Grod  may  use  Christian  instruction 
of  a  powerful  character  from  the  written  word  as  a 
testimony  to  His  own  presence  among  His  children 
on  earth.  But  revelation  cannot,  ought  not,  to  be  now 
looked  for.    The  apostle  was  instructing  these  saints 


26  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

before  the  canon  of  Scripture  was  closed.  All  the 
truth  of  God  was  not  then  written ;  and  therefore  it 
seems  to  me  to  be  the  fact,  that,  according  to  the 
order  of  God,  there  might  have  been  a  positive  reve- 
lation then  given,  while  much  of  the  word  of  God 
remained  to  be  written.  "Whereas,  to  pretend  to 
revelation  now  would  be  clearly  an  impeachment  of 
the  perfeetness  of  Scripture,  and  I  have  no  doubt 
would  soon  prove  to  be  nothing  but  the  fraud  or 
folly  of  man,  and  a  snare  of  the  devil.  Whatever 
might  be  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  at  work 
now,  it  must  be  by  means  of  truth  already  revealed 
— truth  already  in  Scripture.  It  is  not  something 
added  to  that  which  God  has  given,  but  the  mighty 
use,  in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  of  what  is 
already  furnished  and  permanently  given  for  the 
Church's  help  in  passing  through  this  world.  There 
may  be  a  recovery  of  what  has  been  hid  by  unbelief 
from  the  saints;  but  it  is  there.  A  new  truth,  revealed 
now  for  the  first  time,  is  incompatible  with  the  Scrip- 
ture as  the  complete  book  of  God. 

If  we  have  certain  things,  even  in  this  chapter, 
that  clearly  refer  to  what  was  then  in  existence  and 
not  now,  the  very  fair  question  might  be  asked  by  a 
simple-minded  person  desirous  of  understanding  the 
word  of  God — "  Why  do  you  maintain  that  such  a 
chapter  as  this  is  meant  to  regulate  the  assembly 
now  ?  It  is  clear  that  you  have  not  these  tongues, 
and  that  there  cannot  be  any  revelation  of  a  new 
truth.  If  there  are  such  modifications,  why  do  you 
contend  for  this  chapter  as  God's  permanent  rule  for 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  27 

His  assembly?"  The  answer  is  quite  simple.  The 
Spirit  of  God  necessarily  regulated  what  was  there 
before  Him ;  but  then  the  great  aim  of  all  the  instruc- 
tion, is  not  miraculous  powers  nor  any  other  transient 
actings,  which  were  evidently  for  the  special  object 
of  testimony  in  the  early  days  of  Christianity.  None 
of  these  things  form  the  centre  of  these  chapters. 
What  does  ?  The  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
To  this  one  point  all  grave  consideration  and  sober 
arguing  of  the  subject  must  come. 

Have  we  that  one  and  the  same  Spirit  still  ?  Can 
we  count  upon  His  presence  ?  Do  we  believe  that 
He  deigns  even  now  to  act  in  the  assembly  ?  How 
many,  day  after  day,  say,  "  I  believe  in  the  Holy 
Ghost;"  but  do  they  prove  their  faith  by  their 
works?  I  would  ask  you,  and  desire  to  ask  every 
saint  of  God,  Do  you  believe  in  the  real  presence  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  divine  Person,  who  is  with  the 
Church,  who  is  in  the  saints,  who  is  there  expressly 
for  carrying  on  the  assembly  according  to  the  word 
of  the  Lord,  and  for  maintaining  the  Lordship  of 
Christ  there  ?  If  we  have  the  Holy  Ghost ;  if  He 
be  in  and  with  the  saints  still ;  if  this  be  a  certain 
truth,  and  not  dependent  for  proof  upon  a  particular 
part  of  Scripture  where  miracles  and  signs  are  spoken 
of,  but  quite  as  clearly  laid  down  where  these  have 
no  place  whatever;  if  He  be  positively  promised 
to  abide  with  us  for  ever,  then  I  demand,  How  does 
He  act  ?  Does  unbelief  dare  to  make  the  Spirit  no 
better  than  a  dumb  idol  ?  Allow  me  to  put  a  ques- 
tion or  two :    Has  the  Holy  Spirit  abandoned  the 


28  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

word  of  the  Lord  as  His  only  standard  for  our 
practice  as  well  as  faith  ?  Or  is  it  that  men  bring 
cunningly  devised  reasons  for  avoiding  subjection 
to  that  word?  But  is  it  possible  that  children  of 
Grod  can  content  themselves  with  any  reasons  for 
disobedience?  Alas!  it  is  no  want  of  charity  to 
speak  thus.  They  can  quote  continually,  "  Let  all 
things  be  done  unto  edifying ; "  and,  "  Let  all  things 
be  done  decently  and  in  order."  But  do  they  ever 
reflect  that  not  even  the  Corinthians  had  so  violated 
the  order  of  God's  assembly  by  their  unbecoming 
displays,  as  they  themselves  do  every  day,  by  a 
routine  of  their  own  (fixed  or  extempore),  which  does 
not  resemble  the  form,  any  more  than  it  embodies 
the  spirit,  of  the  divine  order?  There  is  the  very 
chapter  they  quote,  on  the  one  side ;  there  are,  on  the 
other,  the  plain,  positive  facts  of  their  religious  prac- 
tice habitually. 

You  have  the  Church  of  Grod  no  longer  on  the 
ground  of  one  assembly — no  longer  holding  to 
such  a  foundation-principle  as  liberty  for  the  Spirit 
therein  to  edify  by  whom  He  pleases.  You  have 
different  religious  associations  set  up,  often  peculiar 
to  different  countries,  and  in  no  respect  answering  to 
either  the  assembly  or  the  assemblies  in  the  word  of 
Grod.  If  a  man  belonged  to  the  Church  of  Grod  at 
Jerusalem,  he  belonged  to  the  Church  of  Grod  at 
Eome.  It  was  merely  a  question  of  locality.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  Church  of  Grod,  and  therefore, 
wherever  it  might  be,  he,  if  there,  belonged  to  the 
Church  in  that  place.     Scripture  does  not  recognize 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  29 

membership  of  a  Church,  but  of  the  Church.  If  the 
Church  of  God  was  iu  a  given  place,  the  Christian, 
unless  put  away,  finds  his  place  within  it.  You 
never  find,  I  repeat,  in  Scripture,  anything  about 
membership  of  a  Church  ;  it  is  always  of  the  Church. 
This  is  a  most  significant  difference,  as  indicating  the 
departure  of  Christendom  from  God's  word.  For  in 
our  days,  if  you  belong  to  this  Church,  you  do  not, 
for  that  very  reason,  belong  to  that  Church.  Instead 
of  your  membership  in  the  Church  of  Grod  being  the 
ground  why  you  are  a  member  of  it  everywhere,  on 
the  contrary,  so  great  is  the  change,  that  now  the 
fact  of  belonging  to  one  Church  is  the  best  possible 
proof  that  you  do  not.  belong  to  another.  If  you 
belong  to  the  Church  of  Scotland,  you  have  no  such 
connection  with  the  Church  of  England ;  if  you  are 
a  Baptist,  you  do  not  at  the  same  time  belong  to  the 
Wesleyan  Society,  or  to  any  other  of  the  Dissenting 
bodies.     Scripture  knows  nothing  of  the  kind. 

Thus  the  revolution  of  Christendom  is  complete. 
A  state  of  things  entirely  outside  the  word  of  Cod,  and 
contrary  to  the  word  of  Cod,  has  come  in.  Eeligious 
societies,  independent  of  one  another,  have  sprung 
up.  I  am  not  now  speaking  particularly  of  what  is 
commonly  called  the  Independent  or  Congregational 
system,  though  there  the  principle  is  carried  out  more 
antagonistically  than  in  any  other  to  the  unity  of  the 
assembly  of  God  as  Scripture  presents  it.  But  take 
any  or  every  one  of  them ;  they  are  all  more  or  less 
independent.  It  is  so,  even,  to  a  large  extent,  with 
the  national  Establishment.      On  the  contrary,  in 


30  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

the  times  of  those  who  laid  the  foundation  of  God's 
assembly,  he  who  belonged  to  the  Church  at  all,  of 
course  belonged  to  it  where  he  lived  ;  but  if  he  moved 
or  journeyed  to  another  place,  he  was  received  accord- 
ing to  his  place  in  the  Church  everywhere.  There 
might  be  in  some  cases  a  doubt  as  to  his  reality  ;  for 
subtlety  as  well  as  violence  assailed  the  early  Chris- 
tians. Hence  they  carried  letters  of  commendation, 
or  they  were  visited  :  that  is,  just  the  principle  of  what 
is  now  available  can  be  shown  in  Scripture.  Thus,  in 
the  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  when  Barnabas  heard  the 
news  of  his  remarkable  conversion,  he  did  not,  like 
other  disciples,  think  such  a  work  too  hard  for  the 
Lord ;  but,  being  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  he  is  quite  ready  to  believe  what  grace  could 
do,  and  goes  and  finds  Saul,  who  is  thus  recognized  of 
the  Church  in  Jerusalem.  So  now,  if  a  stranger  comes 
forward,  professing  to  be  a  member  of  God's  Church, 
persons  in  whom  all  can  confide  visit  him  ;  and  thus 
the  Church,  upon  their  representation,  conscientiously 
and  heartily  accepts  the  confessor  of  Christ. 

But  we  are  not  confined  to  any  one  rigid  canon 
whatever.  There  is  divine  light  in  the  word  of  God 
for  every  possible  exigency,  and  if  we  have  not  that 
light,  we  had  better  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  see 
whether  the  precious  fulness  of  Scripture  will  not  be 
rendered  without  doubt  applicable  to  the  difficulty, 
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  without  our  presuming  to 
add  anything  like  a  rule  to  meet  the  case.  It  is  not 
meant  that  there  may  never  be  perplexity,  and  that 
we  may  not  feel  our  weakness  and  lack  of  wisdom. 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  31 

Humility,  patience,  and  faith  will  ere  long  prove 
better  solvents  than  all  the  appliances  of  human  art. 
God  has  undertaken  to  provide  for  us  in  His  word ; 
and  spiritual  power  consists  in  the  bringing  that 
word,  by  the  Spirit,  to  bear  practically  upon  every 
case  that  comes  before  us. 

The  main  point  on  which  I  insist,  however,  is 
this — that,  according  to  Scripture,  he  who  becomes  a 
member  of  the  Church  of  Grod  at  all  is  a  member  of 
it  everywhere.  He  might  carry  letters  of  commend- 
ation to  the  assembly  where  he  went.  But  why? 
Because,  all  through,  the  world,  it  was  the  Church  of 
Grod.  Now,  I  ask  you,  Ought  we  to  accept,  as  God's 
assembly,  anything  systematically  different  from  the 
Scriptural  account  of  it?  Ought  we  to  allow 
another  and  contrary  principle  to  rule  its  public 
services  ?  If  we  do,  are  we  really,  in  this,  subject  to 
the  word  of  Grod  ?  You  may  tell  me  of  the  obstacles 
which  exist  now,  and  that  you  have  so  many  diffi- 
culties to  contend  with.  All  this  is  granted  :  only 
let  us  hold  fast  that  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  will  of 
God  is  paramount  to  all  other  considerations.  If  we 
find  ourselves  accrediting  that  which  opposes  Scrip- 
ture, our  business  is  to  cease  from  doing  evil,  and  to 
learn  to  do  well. 

It  is  not  our  duty — far  from  it — to  form  a  new 
Church,  but  to  cleave  to  that  which  is  the  oldest  of 
all,  and  the  only  Church  that  is  true — the  assembly 
of  God  as  it  is  exhibited  in  Scripture.  Why  do  you 
hesitate  ?  Are  you  not  satisfied  with  the  Church  of 
God  ?     Whose  Church,  what  Church  do  you  prefer  ? 


32  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

But  you  allege  that  times  and  circumstances  en- 
tirely differ  now;  and  you  ask,  with  a  sort  of  tri- 
umphant air,  whether  two  or  three  Christians  meeting 
here  and  there  can  be  God's  assembly  ?  Undoubt- 
edly, I  reply,  there  is  a  sorrowful  change ;  but  the 
true  question  is,  Does  God's  will  about  His  assembly 
change  ?  Which  is  right — to  accept  man's  change, 
or  to  go  back  to  God's  will,  even  though  there  be 
but  two  or  three  who  meet  together  in  submission 
to  His  word  ?  If  I  am  with  them  gathered  to  the 
Lord's  name,  owning  the  members  of  His  body, 
waiting  upon  God  to  work  by  His  word  and  Spirit, 
is  not  Jesus  in  our  midst?  And  what  so  great 
comfort  for  our  souls?  I  hope  to  prove,  another 
evening,  that  this  is  the  express  provision  of  the 
Lord  for  these  last  days ;  but  however  this  be,  all  I 
stand  to  now  is,  that  the  free  action  of  the  Spirit, 
among  the  gathered  members  of  Christ,  is  the  one 
principle  of  the  assembly  of  God  laid  down  in  His 
word.  There  can  be  no  other  which  He  sanctions. 
Either  I  am  acting  upon  it,  or  I  am  not.  If  I  am 
seeking  to  be  faithful  thus  to  the  Lord,  blessed  am  I, 
whatever  my  sorrow  for  the  state  of  the  Church.  If 
I  am  not,  at  any  rate,  let  me  confess  my  faithless- 
ness. The  word  of  God  leaves  no  doubt  what  His 
unchanging  mind  about  His  assembly  is.  The  Holy 
Ghost  is  come  for  ever  to  guide  His  assembly.  All 
that  is  wanted  is  a  spirit  of  repentance  and  of  faith. 
There  are  hindrances ;  there  are  ties ;  there  must  be 
a  high  price  paid  in  this  evil  world  for  obedience  to 
the  Lord  Jesus.     But  am  I  His  ?    Do  I  value  His 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  33 

love  ?  Is  He  more  precious  to  me  than  all  else  in 
this  world?  Is  His  yoke  a  burden,  is  His  will 
sweet  to  my  soul  ?  Then,  I  say,  there  is  but  one 
pathway.  It  is  vain  to  be  loud  in  our  profession  of 
readiness  to  go  with  the  Lord  to  prison  or  to  death. 
This  He  may  not  ask  of  us ;  but  He  does,  as  it  were, 
demand  of  every  Christian  whether  he  is  true  to  His 
own  glory  in  the  assembly  of  God.  It  is  not  a 
question  of  rival  institutions  pertaining  to  different 
countries,  or  to  different  leaders ;  neither  is  it  a  ques- 
tion of  a  special  school  of  doctrine,  or  of  a  peculiar 
plan  of  discipline  and  government.  Is  old  habit,  is 
tradition,  is  interest  in  this  life,  to  keep  me  back  from 
faithfulness  to  that  which  God  shows  to  be  His  will 
for  His  assembly  ? 

If  you  see  the  will  of  the  Lord,  do  not  hesitate 
another  day.  Do  not  wait  till  everything  is  clear. 
It  is  not  faith,  when  Grod  calls  one  out,  to  say,  First 
show  me  the  land.  Put  away  what  you  know  to  be 
wrong ;  never  go  on  in  what  is  without  doubt  con- 
trary to  the  word  of  God.  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be 
given."  Have  you  renounced  what  you  know  does  not 
agree  with,  but  opposes,  the  word  of  God  ?  Cleave 
to  nothing  but  the  word.  Let  me  ask,  for  example, 
what  you  did  last  Lord's-day.  Were  you  found,  as 
a  Christian,  where  you  could  honestly  say,  "  I  was 
in  my  place  in  the  assembly  of  God?"  Did  the 
various  members  of  the  body  come  together  trusting 
to  the  Holy  Ghost  to  guide  them,  with  an  open  door 
for  this  or  that  believer,  as  each  had  received  the  gift, 
to  minister  the  same  one  to  another,  as  good  stewards 

c 


34  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

of  (rod's  manifold  grace  ?  or  were  you  joining  with 
others  where  the  Scriptural  plan  would  have  been 
regarded  as  disorderly?  If  the  latter,  the  Lord 
grant  you  to  see  clearly  that  you  are  not  within  the 
scene  of  His  will,  and  of  His  glory  in  the  assembly ! 
I  say  not  that  you  are  strangers  to  the  grace  of  Christ, 
or  outside  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit — far  from  it. 
I  believe  He  blesses  not  only  in  Protestant  associa- 
tions, but  beyond  them  too.  Is  this  to  be  unchari- 
table ?  I  believe  that  the  Spirit  of  God  acts,  wherever 
He  sees  fit  graciously  to  use  the  name  of  Christ,  for 
the  good  of  believer  and  unbeliever.  I,  for  one, 
doubt  not  for  a  moment  God  has  used  His  word  for 
the  conversion  and  comfort  of  souls  among  Roman 
Catholics — ay,  and  Romish  priests,  monks,  and  nuns. 
It  may  have  been  in  a  scanty  measure,  as  assuredly 
the  opposition  to  the  truth  is  enormous,  and  the 
opening  seems  small  indeed ;  but  yet  has  it  been 
really  so  down  to  our  own  days,  and  still  more  largely 
and  clearly  in  the  past. 

But  enough  of  this.  The  question  is,  not  whether 
the  Spirit  of  (rod  may  not  cause  truth  to  take  effect 
in  this  denomination  or  that.  The  chief  thing  before 
our  souls  now  is,  Are  we  honouring  Christ  according 
to  the  word  of  God  ?  Are  we  subject  to  the  Lord  in 
the  assembly  ?  Are  we  carrying  out  His  will  as  far 
as  we  know  it  ?  We  may  fail  in  doing  so ;  surely 
we  all  do.  When  you  are  thus  come  together,  you 
may  find  some  restless,  some  that  do  not  altogether 
what  they  should;  you  may  hear  individuals  that 
had  better  be  silent,  and  you  may  see  sometimes 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  35 

those  silent  whom  it  would  be  blessed  to  hear.  It 
may  be  that  they  are  yielding  to  a  morbid  sense  of 
responsibility,  and  fear  of  criticism,  and  many  other 
things  that  hinder  their  utterance  of  what  is  in  their 
hearts.  All  this  may  readily  be.  Nobody  denies 
the  possibility  or  the  fact  of  failure.  But  how  does 
this  in  the  least  degree  weaken  the  truth  of  God,  or 
the  bounden  duty  of  His  children  ? 

Let  me  put  a  case  that  any  believer  may  under- 
stand. The  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  you,  if  you  are  a 
Christian ;  but  are  you  always  acting  in  the  Spirit  ? 
No.  Does  not  the  Spirit  always  abide  ?  To  be  sure 
He  does.  Tou  are  always  the  temple  of  God  ;  you 
never  can  be  anything  else,  if  you  are  members  of 
Christ ;  but  you  may,  for  all  that,  sometimes  grieve 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Your  obligation,  however,  never 
ceases.     It  is  just  so  with  the  Spirit  in  the  Church. 

Let  the  assembly  come  together.  "We  will  suppose 
they  are  converted,  and  have  received  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  really  do,  as  an  assembly,  look  to  Him  to 
guide.  I  use  that  expression  "  as  an  assembly," 
because  it  is  not  assumed  that  every  member  under- 
stands the  truth  about  the  Spirit  of  God.  Some  of 
them  may  be  very  ignorant.  It  is  more  or  less  a 
shame  for  them,  but  there  may  be  such  cases,  and,  in 
point  of  fact,  such  there  are.  Some  saints  have  been 
attracted  by  spiritual  instinct,  who  may  have  been 
trained  up  in  dissent  or  nationalism,  and  who  settle 
down  with  little  progress  in  intelligence.  These  are 
apt  to  bring  in  the  effects  of  the  routine  in  which 
they  have  been  brought  up  spiritually,  so  to  speak ; 
c  2 


36  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

and  I  need  not  say  that  their  experience  will  not 
help  them  to  be  always  submissive  to  the  guidance 
of  the  Spirit.  Nor  is  this  at  all  confined  to  these 
only;  for  we  know  what  weakness  may  be  found 
among  those  that  have  been  inured  to  the  truth  from 
their  infancy.  Their  being  where  they  are  costs  them 
but  little ;  they  have  not  known  any  deep  sense  of 
the  ruin  of  Christendom.  Their  souls  have  been 
exercised  feebly.  I  am  supposing  them  to  be  con- 
verted, but  coming  into  the  truth  of  the  Church's 
position  rather  through  parental  training  than  at  the 
loss  of  all ;  and  so  there  is  apt  to  be  a  taking  for 
granted,  without  any  divine  conviction,  that  things 
are  all  right.  Need  I  say  how  desirable  it  is  that 
there  should  be  real,  exercised,  spiritual  intelligence  as 
to  the  working  of  the  Holy  Grhost  in  God's  assembly  ? 
But  then,  allowing  these  drawbacks,  and  all  the 
rest  that  might  be  added,  the  great  fact  holds  good, 
that  as  certainly  as  the  Holy  Grhost  dwells  in 
every  Christian  man,  so  sure  it  is  that  He  dwells  in 
the  whole  assembly — in  the  Church  of  Grod.  What 
we  have  to  consider  is,  whether  individually,  or  as 
an  assembly,  we  submit  to  be  guided  by  Him  to  the 
glory  of  Christ.  Indeed  I  cannot  but  judge  it  to  be 
really  Antinomian  in  principle,  where  men  delibe- 
rately rest  in  this,  that  to  be  Christians  is  the  one 
great  matter — that  if  the  Lord  has  shown  us  His 
grace,  we  need  not  make  much  ado  about  His  will  or 
anything  else.  Is  it,  then,  come  to  this,  that  the 
great  body  of  Grod's  people  not  only  do  not  know, 
but  do  not  care    to  know,   His    will    about  His 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  37 

assembly  ?  Do  you  resent  this  charge  ?  Then  search 
and  see  what  is  your  desire  as  to  this.  Is  it  to  be 
subject  to  the  Lord  and  His  word  ?  Can  there  be  a 
more  direct  test  for  me  as  a  Christian,  or  a  more 
evident  way  of  proving  my  loyalty  to  my  Lord,  than 
in  this  very  thing  ?  If  I  belong  to  the  assembly  of 
(rod,  ought  I  not  to  renounce  everything  inconsistent 
with  the  Scriptural  account  and  regulations  of  that 
assembly  ? 

Further,  let  me  warn  you  that  have  taken  this 
position,  that  wrong  principles,  false  doctrines,  evil 
ways,  may  slip  in.  We  know  the  devices  of  Satan  ; 
but  what  some  of  us  may  have  said  before  they  were 
thus  proved,  this  we  may  repeat  with  increasing 
emphasis  now,  that  as  (rod's  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  so  is  He  the  Spirit  of  holiness  also.  When, 
therefore,  the  assembly  refuses  to  bow  to  God's 
word,  preferring  to  accept  evil  publicly,  rather 
than  judge  it  for  Christ's  sake,  what  is  to  be  done  in 
this  case  ?  First,  of  course,  full  testimony  is  to  be 
given,  and  warning,  private  and  public,  perhaps, 
and  patient  waiting  on  honest  slowness  and  fear,  in 
order  to  bring  all  right.  But  suppose  all  has  been 
rejected,  and  the  assembly  in  any  place,  deliberately 
prefers  its  own  ease  or  will  to  the  word  of  God, 
what  then?  The  duty  of  separation  is  even  more 
peremptory  than  from  the  ordinary  ecclesiastical 
institutions  of  Christendom ;  for  it  is  a  greater  sin  in 
the  sight  of  God  for  those  that  have  known  the  truth 
of  God,  and  seemed  to  be  acting  upon  it  in  faith,  to 
abandon  it  for  any  reason  whatever.     Ought  not 


38  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

these,  then,  to  be  parted  from  with  yet  more  gravity 
and  horror  in  the  sight  of  God,  than  one  would  turn 
from  the  meetings  of  those  who  have  never  known 
the  value  of  the  Lord's  name  for  the  assembly  of  His 
saints  ? 

At  the  same  time,  when  you  find  an  assembly 
— let  it  be  small,  or  let  it  be  great — come  together, 
owning  their  faith  in  the  Holy  Ghost's  presence,  we 
should  not  be  quick  in  laying  a  sin  to  their  charge. 
Surely  there  is  to  be  slowness  in  judging  an  assembly 
yet  more  than  an  individual.  Are  we  to  assume  that 
our  thoughts,  our  feelings,  are  necessarily  according 
to  God?  Hence  we  find  the  all-importance  of  waiting 
upon  the  Lord.  But  still  the  fact  remains,  that  if 
the  public  sin  be  certain  and  clear,  and  all  warnings 
be  rejected,  the  more  the  assembly  takes  the  position 
of  being  God's  assembly,  the  more  is  its  departure 
from  Him  to  be  lamented,  and  one's  back  is  to  be 
turned  upon  it,  because  it  is,  now  at  least,  a  false 
profession.  God  looks  for  truth  in  His  saints,  but 
He  looks  for  it  also  in  His  assembly.  It  is  the  place 
where  He  expects  the  manifestation  of  His  character 
before  men,  and  not  only  where  He  makes  good  the 
edification  of  His  saints.  Everywhere  He  holds  to 
the  glory  of  His  Son.  I  admit  all  the  difficulties 
from  the  rising  up  of  national  systems  after  the  great 
Eomish  apostacy,  from  the  spread  of  nonconformist 
bodies  subsequently,  and  from  more  recent  attempts 
of  all  kinds.  But  let  me  press  upon  all  who  hear 
me  that  we  do  not  contend  for  anything  of  ours, 
whether  inherited  from  our  fathers,  or  an  invention 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  39 

of  ourselves ;  we  do  not  contend  for  anything  because 
it  is  new,  nor  even  because  it  is  old — bad  it  tbe  green 
age  of  tbree  centuries,  or  tbe  hoary  bairs  of  fifteen 
bundred  years.  We  return  to  tbe  ground  wbicb  it  was 
our  sin — Christendom's  sin — to  have  left ;  we  return 
to  a  way  wbicb  we  know  to  be  absolutely  good  and 
true,  because  it  is  (rod's  way.  We  take  our  stand 
upon  tbe  only  divine  foundation  for  tbe  Church. 
We  have  no  confidence  in  ourselves,  but  are  sure  we 
are  right  and  safe  in  coram  ending  ourselves  to  God 
and  tbe  word  of  His  grace ;  and  therefore  we  may  be 
of  good  courage.  If  tbe  character  of  our  difficulties, 
dangers,  and  trials  proves  bow  we  need  tbe  Scripture, 
we  leam  also  bow  Scripture  appbes  ever  fresh  and 
mighty ;  and  tbus  our  hearts  are  encouraged  to 
cleave  to  God  more  and  more. 

I  bave  dwelt  so  long  upon  tbe  assembly,  that  I 
shall  not  be  able  to  say  much  as  to  ministry  to- 
night. But  I  may  be  brief,  more  particularly  as 
we  shall  bave  tbe  subject  of  Gifts  and  Offices  before 
us  another  time.  Let  me  just  make  a  few  plain 
observations  as  to  ministry  before  closing. 

We  bave  seen  that  the  Church  flows  from  Christ 
risen  and  glorified,  by  tbe  Holy  Ghost  sent  down 
from  Heaven  to  bind  together  and  form  the  assembly 
upon  earth.  This  is  the  only  assembly  that  God 
sanctions,  and  therefore  which  every  member  of  it 
ought  to  sanction,  until  the  Lord  takes  it  out  of  this 
world.  We  bave  tbe  words  and  workings  of  tbe 
Spirit  of  God  in  tbe  assembly  shown  us  in  Scripture 


40  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

already  referred  to.  I  come  now  to  some  general 
principles.  And  first  of  all,  just  as  the  Church  is  a 
divine  thing,  so  is  ministry.  It  flows  neither  from 
the  believer  nor  from  the  Church,  but  from  Christ, 
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit. 

Now  this  at  once  clears  the  way.  The  Lord  calls, 
not  the  Church  ;  the  Lord  sends,  not  the  saints ;  the 
Lord  controls,  not  the  assembly.  I  speak  now  of  the 
ministry  of  the  word.  There  are  certain  functionaries 
whom  the  Church  does  or  may  choose  :  for  instance, 
the  assembly  may  nominate  the  persons  it  thinks  fit 
to  take  care  of  the  funds,  and  to  distribute  of  its 
bounty.  The  Church  may  employ  its  servants, 
selecting  them  according  to  its  best  wisdom ;  and 
the  Lord  owns  this  choice.  So  it  was  done  of  old, 
as  we  read  in  Acts  vi.,  where  the  multitude  chose, 
and  the  Apostles  laid  their  hands  upon  those  chosen 
to  look  after  the  tables.  So  it  was  where  "the 
churches"  (in  2  Cor.  viii.)  chose  brethren  as  their 
messengers ;  and  so,  again,  where  the  Philippian 
Church  made  Epaphroditus  their  messenger  in  minis- 
tering to  the  wants  of  Paul.  (Phil,  ii.) 

But  we  never  find  this  kind  of  selection  where  the 
ministry  of  the  word  is  concerned.  Never !  On  the 
contrary,  the  Lord  Himself  once  looked  upon  His 
poor  disheartened,  scattered  people,  pitied  them,  and 
told  the  disciples  to  pray  that  the  Lord  of  the  harvest 
would  send  forth  labourers.  (Matt,  ix.)  The  very 
next  chapter  shows  that  He  was  the  Lord  of  the 
harvest,  who  accordingly  sends  them  Himself. 
Afterwards,  He  prepares  His  disciples  for  the  full 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  41 

character  of  the  Christian  ministry  when  He  should 
leave  them.  Thus,  in  Matt,  xxv.,  where  there  occurs 
the  parable  of  the  lord  departing  to  a  far  country, 
we  have  the  same  truth — the  Lord  giving  gifts  to 
His  servants.  Now  this  really  decides  the  matter. 
For  the  difference  between  that  which  the  word  of 
God  acknowledges,  and  that  which  is  seen  now-a- 
days,  lies  in  this,  that,  according  to  Scripture,  the 
ministry  of  the  word,  in  its  call  and  in  its  exercise, 
is  more  truly  divine  than  that  which  is  now  sub- 
stituted for  it  in  Christendom.  Hence,  also,  its 
proper  dignity  is  impaired,  specially  the  holy  inde- 
pendence of  man,  which  is  essential  to  its  due  exer- 
cise, and,  above  all,  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Himself. 
If  preachers  be  sent  by  men,  it  is  an  usurpation  of 
the  Lord's  prerogative,  and  the  gravest  detriment  to 
His  servants  who  submit  to  it. 

What  is  the  effect  of  ministry  exercised  according 
to  Scripture  ?  The  most  perfect  freedom  for  all  that 
is  given  of  Cod  for  the  blessing  of  souls.  Accord- 
ingly you  find  the  universal  doctrine  of  the  Epistles 
fully  confirms  that  which  the  history  shows  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.  But  I  must  refer  to  both 
as  briefly  as  may  be. 

In  1  Cor.  xii. — xiv.,  we  have  already  seen  that  it  is 
of  the  essence  of  the  Church,  as  Cod's  assembly, 
and  the  aim  of  the  Spirit's  presence  therein,  that  He 
should  have  full  liberty  to  use  whom  He  pleases  for 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  the  blessing  of  all.  The 
exhortation  in  1  Peter  iv.  10,  11,  and  the  caution 
in  James    iii.  1,  suppose   the   same  openness   and 


42  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

its  liability  to  abuse.  This  may  suffice  for  "  those 
within." 

As  to  "  those  without,"  the  will  of  the  Lord  is 
equally  clear.  Thus,  in  Acts  viii.  we  hear  of  perse- 
cution falling  upon  the  Church,  and  they  were  all 
scattered  (but  the  twelve),  and  went  everywhere 
preaching  the  word.  Now,  I  do  not  call  this  neces- 
sarily ministerial.  Of  course,  some  of  them  were 
ministers  of  the  word,  others  not;  but  all  went 
everywhere  evangelizing.  But  it  proves  that  the 
Lord  recognizes  any  and  every  Christian  man  in 
going  forth  and  announcing  the  glad  tidings.  (Com- 
pare Acts  xi.  19 — 21.) 

But  when  we  come  to  detail,  we  find  Philip,  in 
the  same  chap,  viii.,  preaching  freely.  "  But,"  some 
will  say,  "  he  was  chosen  of  the  Church."  He  was 
not  chosen  to  minister  the  word.  He  was  chosen, 
on  the  contrary,  to  leave  the  apostles,  unembarrassed 
by  serving  the  tables,  to  the  ministry  of  the  word. 
It  was  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  the 
apostles  from  the  secular  work,  that  the  seven  men 
were  looked  out  by  the  multitude,  and  duly  appointed 
over  this  lower  task ;  the  call  of  the  Church  was  for 
this  only.  It  was  the  Lord  that  called  Philip  to  preach 
the  Grospel ;  and  the  Lord  blessed  the  word,  which 
extended  to  and  beyond  Samaria.  (Compare  Acts 
xxi.  8  for  both.) 

In  Acts  ix.,  we  see  a  man  on  the  highway  to 
Damascus  with  a  commission  from  the  high  priest  to 
persecute  the  Jewish  Christians.  That  was  the  only 
commission  Paul  received  from  man — an  authority, 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  43 

not  to  preach  the  Gospel,  but  to  extinguish  it,  if  it 
were  possible.  But  the  Lord,  in  sovereign  grace, 
not  only  converted  Saul  of  Tarsus,  but  sent  him 
out,  direct  from  Himself,  a  preacher,  and  an  apostle, 
and  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  verity. 
Paul  thus  becomes  the  standing  type  of  Christian 
ministry.  Apart  from  miraculous  facts,  he  exempli- 
fied livingly  the  words,  "  we  believe,  and  therefore 
speak."  (2  Cor.  iv.) 

We  find  the  Lord,  after  this,  introducing  others 
into  the  work,  more  particularly  Apollos,  who  was 
"  an  eloquent  man,  and  mighty  in  the  Scriptures," 
but  so  very  ignorant  at  first,  that  he  knew  nothing 
beyond  the  baptism  of  John  (that  is,  the  testimony 
which  was  rendered  to  Christ  when  He  was  living 
upon  the  earth).  But  if  he  was  thus  in  the  dark  as 
to  the  Church  and  the  full  truth  of  Christianity,  he 
was  a  converted  man.  Of  course,  there  were  souls 
converted  before  the  coming  of  Christ.  It  is  mere 
ignorance  that  sees  any  difficulty  in  such  a  statement. 
Apollos  had  received  by  the  Spirit  the  early  testimony 
to  the  Lord,  but  he  did  not  know  the  work  of  Christ. 
This  he  is  taught  by  a  good  man  and  his  wife,  who 
helped  him  in  the  fuller  understanding  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, and  he  comes  out  mightier  than  ever  in  the 
truth,  but  there  is  no  hint  about  a  human  inauguration 
before  he  preaches.  Yet  the  apostle  Paul  writes  with 
all  respect  of  Apollos,  putting  this  unordained  man 
between  himself  and  Peter  (1  Cor.  iii.)  Again,  he 
tells  them,  in  the  last  chapter  of  this  epistle,  that  he 
had  asked  Apollos  to  come,  but  "  his  will  was  not  at 


44  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

all  to  come  at  this  time."  Does  not  this  indicate  a 
very  different  state  of  things  from  what  men  dream 
of  apostolic  rule,  as  well  as  from  what  exists  now  ? 
What  it  does  truly  illustrate  is  the  way  the  Lord 
maintained  His  place.  An  inspired  apostle  gives 
his  counsel  to  Apollos,  who  does  not  conform.  This 
Paul  himself  records  without  censure;  and,  in  fact, 
Scripture  does  not  say  which  was  right :  it  may  very 
probably  have  been  the  great  apostle,  but  on  this 
point  we  are  left  entirely  in  the  dark.  In  any  case, 
the  record  brings  out  the  weighty  truth  that  the 
Lord  abides  the  absolute  Master  and  Director  of  His 
servants.  Man  likes  to  regulate ;  but  the  Lord,  to 
whom  we  are  surely  bound  above  all,  exercises  the 
hearts  of  His  servants,  and  gives  them  in  this  word 
a  guiding  principle  for  all  time.  Is  it  true  for  your 
soul  and  for  mine  ?  Are  we  practically  servants  of 
the  Lord — of  the  Lord  only  ?  or  are  we  serving  a 
denomination  as  its  ministers?  If  we  are  only 
nationalist  or  dissenting  ministers,  I  have  nothing 
to  say ;  but  if  we  are  really  ministers  of  Christ,  let 
us  beware.  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters : "  if 
we  have  been  striving  to  serve  Christ  and  the  sect 
whose  officials  we  are,  which  is  to  be  held  to  ?  which 
to  be  given  up  ? 

Thus,  along  with  the  assembly  of  Grod,  there  is 
the  ministry  of  the  word,  committed  sovereignly  to 
some  of  its  members,  not  to  all,  yet  assuredly  for  the 
good  of  all.  Let  the  assembly  respect  the  servants 
in  their  place,  and  let  the  servants  respect  the  assem- 
bly in  its  place.     None  ever  confound  the  two  things 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  45 

without  the  most  disastrous  consequences:  neither 
must  be  sacrificed.  It  is  the  place  of  a  servant,  no 
doubt,  to  preach  or  teach  in  subjection  to  Christ ;  it  is 
the  place  of  a  servant,  likewise,  to  counsel,  guide, 
govern,  according  to  his  gift  from  the  Lord.  But 
whatever  may  be  the  servant's  mind,  judgment,  or 
counsel,  nothing  dissolves  the  direct  responsibility 
of  the  assembly  to  Christ.  The  same  Jesus  is  Lord 
of  the  servant,  but  He  is  also  owned  as  the  Lord 
by  the  assembly  of  God. 

Take  the  instance,  again,  which  is  shown  in  Acts 
xiii.  Barnabas  and  Saul  go  forth  on  a  missionary 
circuit,  directed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  taking 
Mark  with  them.  But  Mark  turns  out  an  indifferent 
servant,  and  speedily  returns  to  his  home.  They 
are  going  out  again  (Acts  xv.),  but  Paul  insists  upon 
going  without  Mark.  Barnabas,  who  was  related  to 
Mark,  did  not  like  him  set  aside,  and  contends  with 
Paul  about  it — good  man  as  he  was — and  this  so 
sharply,  that  it  leads  to  a  severance  of  these  two 
devoted  and  tenderly  attached  servants  of  Christ. 
Then  Paul  chooses  Silas,  and  they  were  commended 
by  the  brethren  to  the  grace  of  God.  The  Church, 
or  the  labourers,  were,  no  doubt,  convinced  that  Paul 
was  in  the  right.  Of  Barnabas,  nothing  of  the  kind 
is  said ;  the  subject,  as  far  as  he  is  concerned,  drops. 
Paul  enters  on  a  large  and  enlarging  sphere,  and 
Silas  goes  with  him,  supplying,  as  it  were,  the  place 
of  Barnabas.  Now,  there  we  find  not  only  an  indi- 
vidual servant  at  work,  but  the  joint  action  of  two 
or  more  in  the  service  of  the  Lord.     Barnabas  might 


46  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

be  as  wrong  in  taking  Mark,  as  Paul  was  right  in 
choosing  Silas ;  but  the  principle  is  clear.  Spiritual 
judgment  is  necessary  in  selecting  a  fellow-labourer. 
Forced  association  with  one  we  do  not  believe  com- 
petent or  desirable,  is  clearly  not  according  to  the 
Lord's  mind. 

Thus,  in  His  service,  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
association,  but  no  bondage  about  it.  Barnabas  was 
free  to  preach  the  word  as  much  as  ever.  There 
was  no  lack  of  saints,  of  course,  to  welcome  Bar- 
nabas, and  no  want  of  sinners  to  be  preached  to. 
But  Paul  would  not  have  Mark  forced  upon  him, 
and  chooses  another ;  and  this  is  an  important 
example  for  us.  How  completely  does  Scripture 
provide  both  for  co-operation  and  for  refusing  it ! 
The  Lord  Jesus  keeps  His  due  place,  not  only  in 
relation  to  the  assembly,  laying  down  how  it  is  to 
be  ordered,  but  also  in  relation  to  ministry,  showing 
how  the  work  is  to  be  carried  out  on  earth.  The 
word  of  Grod  meets  every  need. 

But  there  is  another  thing  that  is  wanted  for  all 
of  us.  What  is  this  ?  Simple  faith  in  the  Lord,  in 
His  grace,  in  His  word.  Where  this  is  not,  souls 
are  apt  to  be  cast  down  by  difficulties.  Then,  when 
they  see  things  looking  other  than  what  attracted 
them  once,  they  begin  to  doubt  everything.  How 
different  if  our  mind  is  made  up  for  having  to  do 
with  the  Lord !  Let  us  look  well  to  it,  that  we  are 
subject  to  Him.  Of  course,  I  am  not  now  denying 
moral  subjection  to  "  chief  men  "  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord ;   this  may  be  a  part  of  subjection  to  Him ; 


THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY.  47 

but  what  we  need  to  have  settled  is,  that,  at  all  times, 
and  under  all  circumstances,  we  must  please  the 
Lord.  He  will  be  with  us ;  our  circumstances  may 
look  critical  and  be  trying  enough;  but  we  shall 
find  infinite  blessing  to  our  souls — indeed,  it  is  in 
times  of  trouble  we  prove  the  solidity  of  the  blessing. 
Be  assured  that,  as  the  Lord  went  through  the  cross 
to  His  heavenly  glory,  so  we  shall  find  His  cross 
stamped  upon  every  service ;  but  then,  it  is  the 
Lord,  and  it  is  His  cross.  Let  our  hearts,  therefore, 
be  of  good  cheer. 

The  two  lines  of  truth  here  sketched — the  assembly 
of  Grod,  and  the  ministry  of  Christ — you  will  find 
laid  down  in  the  word  of  Grod.  Both  flow  from 
Christ,  instead  of  being  mere  voluntary  associations : 
as  to  both  we  lie  under  a  responsibility  which  cannot 
be  evaded.  The  Church  is  bound  to  receive  Christ's 
ministers,  instead  of  having  the  right  to  choose.* 
From  Christ  the  power  comes  ;  to  Christ  the  servant 
is  immediately  responsible.  If  a  man  is  called  to 
serve,  let  him' rejoice  in,  but  bow  to,   the  blessed 

*  The  Congregational  Lecture  on  "  the  Ecclesiastical  Polity  of  the 
New  Testament,"  by  Dr.  S.  Davidson,  may  be  compared  with  what 
we  have  seen  in  Scripture.  "  Let  us  now  take  a  Church  and  trace 
its  various  proceedings.  A  number  of  believers  agree  to  associate 
together.  In  a  united  capacity  they  resolve  to  confess  Christ,  to 
observe  His  precepts,  and  to  follow  His  will.  They  choose  pastors 
whom  they  judge  to  possess  the  qualifications  described  in  the  New 
Testament.  In  this  way  the  believer  chosen  by  them  becomes  an 
official  person  as  soon  as  he  accepts  their  invitation"  (p.  269).  "  The 
compact  entered  into  between  the  ruler  and  the  ruled  may  be  dis- 
solved by  one  or  both  of  the  parties.  The  union  formed  between 
pastor  and  people  may  be  severed"  (p.  271).      "A  minister  is  either 


48  THE    ASSEMBLY,    AND    MINISTRY. 

truth.,  that  lie  is  to  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
The  consequence  of  carrying  it  out  will  be,  that 
the  world  will  drop  off;  it  may  be  even  that 
many  of  his  Christian  friends  will  look  cold.  The 
ministry  of  Christ  was  never  intended  to  work  in 
the  system  of  the  world,  any  more  than  the  as- 
sembly of  God;  both  were  meant  to  exalt  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  to  be  an  exercise  of  faith  for  His 
saints  and  servants.  It  must  be  so  still.  More  than 
that,  it  was  intended  that  in  the  Church  and  the 
world  we  should  feel  the  difficulties  and  sorrows,  as 
well  as  joys,  of  faith.  I  do  not  doubt  the  triumph 
in  Christ ;  but  we  can  count  upon  trial  and  tribula- 
tion surely  in  this  world.  .  We  may  find  differences 
as  to  the  world.  Sometimes,  too,  in  the  Church  of 
God  there  may  be  fluctuations.  Every  one  who 
has  served  Christ  knows  something  of  this.  But  as 
to  Him  to  whom  the  Church  belongs,  and  whom  we 
serve,  He  remains  "the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever."  The  question  is,  Are  we  prepared  to 
foUow  Him  ? 

the  minister  of  one  Church,  viz.,  that  by  which  he  has  been  chosen,  or 
else  he  is  not  a  minister  at  all.  When  he  ceases  to  be  pastor  of  a 
Church,  he  ceases  to  be  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,  till  he  be  elected  by 

another He  is  not  made  a  minister  by  the  act  of  ordination,  but  by 

the  people's  call,  and  his  acceptance  of  it,  by  virtue  of  which  a  solemn 
engagement  is  entered  into ;  and  when  the  engagement  terminates, 
he  ceases  to  be  a  minister  (!) "  (pp.  252,  253).  No  principle  seems  to 
me  more  flatly  opposed  to  God's  Word  than  religious  radicalism. 


WORSHIP,  THE  BREAKING  OF 
BREAD,  AND  PRAYER. 

John  iv.  10—24. 


LECTURE   IV. 


The  first  and  weightiest  part  of  the  subject  now 
before  us  is  worship.  It  most  of  all  concerns  us, 
because  it  most  nearly  touches  God  himself;  and 
this,  I  am  convinced,  is  the  truest  criterion,  as  well 
as  the  safest  and  most  salutary  for  our  souls.  No 
doubt  the  breaking  of  bread  may  be  included  in 
worship,  but  it  calls  for  a  separate  notice,  as  being 
of  a  complex  nature,  and  having  a  distinct  aspect 
toward  the  saints  themselves;  whereas  worship,  as 
such,  is  essentially  God- ward.  Again,  it  seemed  due 
to  its  importance  to  give  it  a  place  of  its  own,  as 
furnishing  most  impressively,  and  in  an  act  which 
engages  all  hearts,  that  which  brings  before  our 
souls  the   deepest   and  most   solemn   revelation   of 


2  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

divine  holiness  and  grace  in  the  Lord's  death,  in 
presence  of  which  all  find  their  level,  all  recognize 
what  they  were  withont  His  precious  blood,  what 
they  are  now  in  virtue  of  it,  and,  above  all,  what  He 
is  who  so  died  in  atonement  for  them,  that  they 
might  remember  Him — yea,  for  ever — in  thankful 
and  adoring  peace. 

The  Scripture  read  to-night  shows  not  only  that 
worship  forms  a  blessed,  lofty,  and  most  fruitful 
part  of  Christian  life,  but  that  the  Lord  Himself 
puts  it  in  contrast  with  that  which  God  enjoined  in 
times  that  are  past.  As,  on  previous  occasions,  a 
consideration  of  God's  ways  of  old  helped  us  to  see 
more  distinctly  the  fresh  revelations  of  God  in  the 
New  Testament,  so  we  shall  find  in  the  matter  of 
worship. 

First  of  all,  let  me  premise  that  there  is  a  certain 
state  of  soul  that  is  needed  for  worship.  God  looks 
for  the  worship  of  His  children,  and  it  is. a  duty  in 
which  all  of  them  have  a  direct  and  immediate 
interest;  yet  there  is  a  basis  necessary,  both  on 
God's  part  and  on  theirs,  in  order  that  there  should 
be  real,  proper  Christian  worship.  So  it  was  with 
regard  to  the  one  body,*  the  assembly  of  God,  and 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  there  be  one  domain 
more  than  another  where  the  allowance  of  man's  will 
is  both  a  sin  and  a  shame,  it  is  in  intruding  into  the 
worship  of  God.  Yet,  is  there  anything  more  fre- 
quently done,  and  with  less  conscience  ?  Is  there  an 
act  where  man  more  exalts  himself,  and  does  greater 
despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace?     Let  none  suppose 


OF    BREAD,    AND    FRAYER.  3 

that  this  is  speaking  with  undue  severity.  Can  one 
speak  too  strongly  of  an  interference  which  deludes 
the  world,  denies  the  Church,  and  destroys  the,  moral 
glory  of  Christ  ?  On  a  false  foundation,  or  rather 
without  foundation,  man  all  the  while  is  but  actively 
dishonouring  God,  and  this  in  the  face  of  the  brightest 
manifestation  He  has  made,  or  can  make,  of  Himself ; 
for  it  is  in  His  Son.  If,  in  truth,  God  has  so  spoken 
and  acted,  then  we  have  Grod  fully  revealed ;  and  we 
must  have  one  superior  to  the  Son  of  Cod  in  order  to 
find  a  brighter  and  fuller  revelation  than  what  we 
have  in  Christ. 

This,  then,  is  both  the  source  of  all  our  hopes  and 
blessedness,  and  the  basis  on  which  Christian  worship 
proceeds ;  nevertheless,  though  it  is  absolutely  essen- 
tial to  Christian  worship  that  there  should  be  a  perfect 
revelation  of  Grod  in  Christ,  this,  infinite  as  it  is,  does 
not  suffice.  There  is  a  need  on  man's  part  which 
must  be  met  according  to  divine  glory.  Cod  has 
not  failed  to  reveal  Himself  fully;  He  has  left 
nothing  undone ;  He  has  done  nothing  that  is  not 
absolutely  perfect ;  and  all  this  so  that  there  need  be 
no  doubt  or  question  about  it. 

There  was,  doubtless,  a  gradual  unfolding  of  Cod's 
mind,  and  will,  and  glory :  indeed,  I  think  we  might 
say  that  He  could  not  have  brought  out  all  His  mind 
until  He  gave  His  Son.  But  now  that  the  Son  of 
God  is  come,  we  can,  as  believers,  say  without  pre- 
sumption— "  He  has  given  us  an  understanding,  that 
we  may  know  Him  that  is  true."  In  fact,  we 
should  be  deliberately  slighting,  or  guiltily  disbe- 
a  2 


4  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

lieving  what  Grod  has  given  in  order  that  He  should 
be  known,  if  we  did  not  say  boldly  "  We  know." 
Is  it  nqt  a  great  thing,  in  a  dark  world  like  this,  to 
have  Grod  preparing,  even  for  His  babes,  such  language 
as  "we  know?  "  Yes,  and  He  would  have  us  prove 
the  truth  of  these  words,  "  we  know,"  not  only  as  to 
ourselves  but  Himself.  It  is  much  to  have  a  divine 
book  in  which  we  can,  as  led  of  the  Spirit,  look  back 
on  the  past,  forward  unto  the  future,  down  upon  the 
maze  of  the  present,  and  say  as  to  all,  "  we  know." 
It  is  infinitely  more  and  better  that  we  can  humbly 
and  truly  say,  "  we  know  Him  that  is  true,  and  we 
are  in  Him  that  is  true,  even  in  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ."  (1  John  v.) 

It  is  not  a  question  of  how  far  there  may  be 
intelligence  developed  in  the  child  of  Grod.  There  is 
such  a  thing  as  growth  in  knowledge  ;  but  along 
with  it  we  must  also  stand  up  for  the  great  blessing 
and  fundamental  truth,  that  every  soul  Grod  has 
brought  to  Himself  has  an  unction  from  the  Holy 
One,  and  knows  all  things.  Now,  the  possession  of 
this  divine  capacity  is  far  beyond  any  measure  of 
difference  there  may  be  in  practical  development. 
Of  course,  there  are  such  differences,  and  there  is 
thus  room  for  the  exercise  of  a  spiritual  mind,  and 
the  Spirit  of  Grod,  no  doubt,  acts  through  the  truth 
upon  us,  that  we  may  make  progress.  But  then  we 
may  rest  confident,  as  we  think  of  the  children  of 
Grod,  that,  wherever  they  are,  under  the  most  unto- 
ward circumstances,  Grod  has  given  them  a  new 
nature,  and  this  a  nature  capable,  by  the  Spirit,  of 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  5 

understanding,  and  appreciating,  and  enjoying  Him- 
self. All  the  time  here  below  is,  or  ought  to  be,  just 
the  season  for  growth.  It  is  the  school  where  we  are 
to  learn  truth  in  practice  ;  but  then  it  is  the  applica- 
tion and  deepening  in  our  souls  of  that  which  we  have 
already  in  the  grace  of  God.  "  I  have  not  written 
unto  you,"  says  the  apostle,  "  because  ye  know  not 
the  truth,  but  because  ye  know  it,  and  that  no  lie  is 
of  the  truth. "  (1  John  ii.)  This  is  the  portion  of 
every  child  of  God.  % 

But  this  very  privilege  indicates  the  great  essen- 
tial on  man's  side  in  order  to  be  a  worshipper. 
Man,  as  such,  unless  born  of  God,  is  incapable 
of  worshipping  God — no  more  able  to  do  so  than 
a  horse  is  capable  of  understanding  science  or  phi- 
losophy. I  deny,  entirely  and  in  principle,  that 
there  is  any  capacity  in  man,  as  he  is  naturally, 
to  worship  God.  He  needs  to  be  a  new  creature  in 
Christ ;  he  needs  to  possess  a  new  nature  that  is  of 
God,  in  order  to  be  able  to  understand  or  to  worship 
God.  Not  that  the  simple  fact  of  eternal  life,  which 
every  soul  receives  in  believing  on  the  Son  of  God, 
alone  qualifies  for  worship ;  but  then  God  does  not 
give  it  alone.  He  has  provided  other  means  of  the 
greatest  possible  moment,  and  He  has  vouchsafed 
them  not  merely  to  some,  but  to  all  His  children. 
In  many  cases,  however,  lamentable  to  say,  the 
appearance  and  the  enjoyment  of  this  great  grace 
may  be  hindered.  It  may  be  hardly  possible  to 
discern  either  the  divine  capacity  or  the  power  of 
worship.     But  we  are  entitled  always  to  reckon  on 


6  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

the  Lord,  the  unfailing  truth  of  His  word,  and  the 
fulness  of  His  grace. 

If  God  has  given  a  new  life  to  His  children,  and 
reconciled  them  to  Himself  by  Him  who  has  borne 
their  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  wherefore 
has  this  great  work  been  done  ?  No  doubt  for  His 
own  glory,  and  out  of  His  own  love;  but  it  is  a 
part  of  that  glory,  and  an  answer  to  His  love,  that 
He  calls  upon  His  children  to  praise  as  well  as  serve 
Him  now.  And  we  have  before  us  the  consideration 
of  this  very  subject  —  Christian  worship,  which  de- 
mands the  gift  of  the  Pentecostal  Spirit  quite  as 
much  as  either  the  assembly  or  ministry  can  do — a 
part  of  the  homage  of  the  children  of  God,  and  a 
return  of  heart  which  God  claims  from  all  that  are 
His. 

The  first  great  requisite,  then,  for  man,  in  order 
to  worship  as  a  Christian,  is  that  he  be  born  of  God, 
as  the  object  of  His  grace  in  Christ,  and  receive  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  dwell  in  him.  The  Lord  teaches  the 
principle  of  it  in  the  answer  He  gives  to  the  Samaritan 
woman — "  If  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and  who 
it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to  drink,  thou 
wouldst  have  asked  of  Him,  and  He  would  have 
given  thee  living  water."  There  we  have  the  kernel, 
as  it  were,  of  worship — "  If  thou  knewest  the  gift  of 
God."  It  is  not  the  law,  were  it  of  God  Himself, 
though  even  that  she  knew  not  as  one  that  was  under 
it;  for  the  Samaritans  were  a  mongrel  people,  Gentiles 
really,  though  partially  Jewish  in  profession  and  form. 
But  even  if  the  law  of  God  had  been  known  in  all 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  7 

its  fulness,  unimpaired,  and  uncorrupted  by  man,  it 
certainly  would  not  have  fitted  for  Christian  worship. 
But  it  is,  "if  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God" — His 
free-giving ;  if  she  knew  God  as  a  giver — that  He  is 
acting  out  of  His  free  bounty  and  love.  This  is  the 
first  truth.  But  in  the  next  place,  "  If  thou  knewest 
.  ...  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to  drink, 
thou  wouldest  have  asked  of  Him,  and  He  would 
given  thee  living  water." 

All  the  time  God  sanctioned  the  law  as  a  system, 
He  dwelt  in  thick  darkness;  that  is,  He  did  not 
reveal,  but  hide  Himself,  as  it  were.  But  when  the 
only-begotten  Son  declared  the  Father,  God  no 
longer  occupied  the  position  of  a  claimant  on  man, 
which  was  necessarily  the  form  in  which  the  law 
presented  His  character.  Of  course,  this  character 
was  right,  and  just,  and  good,  like  the  commandment 
itself;  and  man  ought  to  have  bowed  to  Him,  and 
answered  His  demand.  But  man  was  a  sinner,  and 
the  effect  of  pressing  the  claim  was  to  bring  out 
more  plainly  the  sins  of  man.  Had  the  law  been 
the  image  of  God,  as  ignorant  and  perverse  theolo- 
gians falsely  teach,  man  must  have  been  hopelessly 
left  and  lost.  But  this  was  far  from  the  truth.  The 
law,  though  of  Grod,  is  neither  God  nor  a  reflection 
of  God,  but  only  the  moral  measure  of  what  sinful 
man  owes  to  God.  God  is  light ;  God  is  love ;  and 
if  man  is  in  the  depth  of  need,  He  gives  freely,  fully, 
like  Himself.  Indeed,  it  is  what  becomes  Him,  and 
what  He  delights  in.  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give 
than  to   receive."      It   were   strange   if  God   were 


8 


defrauded  of  that  which  is  the  more  blessed  of  the 
two.  According  to  the  law,  He  should  have  been  a 
receiver,  had  not  man  broken  down ;  in  the  Gospel 
He  is  unequivocally  a  giver,  and  what  is  more,  a  giver 
of  His  very  best  to  those  whose  only  desert  is  ever- 
lasting destruction. 

But  this  is  only  possible  through  the  glory  and 
the  humiliation  of  the  Son  of  God,  stooping  down 
and  suffering  to  the  uttermost  for  sinners.  How 
truly  and  beautifully,  then,  the  Lord  says,  "  If  thou 
knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that  saith 
unto  thee,  Give  me  to  drink,  thou  wouldest  have 
asked  of  Him,  and  He  would  have  given  thee  living 
water :"  in  other  words,  had  she  known  God's  grace 
and  the  glory  of  Him  who  freely  talked  with  her,  she 
would  have  sought  and  found  all  she  wanted.  little 
did  she  suspect  who  the  lowly  One  was  whom  she 
supposed  to  be  but  a  Jew,  though  she  did  wonder 
that  a  Jew  could  be  so  tender,  and  so  bend  down  to 
a  Samaritan  woman.  Little  did  she  think  that  it 
was  the  Lord  God  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Only- 
begotten  in  the  bosom  of  the  Eather;  had  she 
known  but  a  little  of  this,  she  would  have  asked 
and  He  would  have  given  her  living  water.  It  is 
the  Holy  Ghost  that  is  meant  by  the  "living  water." 
Thus,  in  a  single  verse,  we  have  the  whole  Trinity, 
as  it  were,  concerned.  God's  own  grace  is  the  first 
thing,  the  source;  then  we  have  the  glory  of  the 
Person  of  the  Son,  and  His  presence  in  humiliation 
among  men  on  the  earth  ;  finally,  the  Son,  according 
to  His  proper  glory,  gives  to  needy,  thirsty  souls  the 


OF   BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  9 

living  water — the  Holy  Ghost.  Is  it  necessary  to 
say  that  none  but  a  person  supremely  divine  could 
impart  such  a  blessing  ? 

Here,  then,  you  have  testified  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  necessary  basis  of  Christian  worship.  First  of 
all,  Grod  revealed  as  He  is  in  the  Grospel  as  contrasted 
with  the  law — Grod  in  His  grace ;  secondly,  the  Son 
coming  down  in  perfect  goodness,  and  willing  to  be 
man's  debtor  in  the  least  things  that  He  might  bless 
him  in  the  greatest,  by  a  love  which  can  win  the 
most  careless  and  obdurate  ;  and  thirdly,  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Grhost.  What  must  Christian  worship  be, 
according  to  its  true  character  and  object  in  the  mind 
of  Grod,  if  all  these  things  are  necessary  in  order  that 
it  should  exist !  It  does,  in  very  deed,  suppose,  on 
Grod's  part,  a  full  revelation  of  what  He  is  in  His 
own  nature,  and  in  His  grace,  to  man.  It  does 
assume  that  the  Son  has  come  amongst  men  in  love 
to  make  good  that  revelation,  in  the  thorough  putting 
away  of  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  It  also 
supposes  that  the  heart,  awakened  to  its  real  wants, 
has  asked  and  received  of  the  Lord  living  water,  the 
Holy  Grhost,  not  only  as  the  agent  of  life  and  renewal, 
but  as  a  well  within  of  unfailing  refreshment,  spring- 
ing up  into  everlasting  life. 

Accordingly,  a  little  lower  down  in  the  chapter 
we  have  more  developed  instruction  on  the  subject, 
although  we  have  had  the  foundation  of  it  in  verse 
10.  The  woman,  when  her  conscience  was  touched, 
and  she  learned  that  she  stood  in  the  presence  of  a 


10  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

prophet,  though  not  yet  recognizing  in  Him  the 
Messiah,  put  her  religious  difficulties  before  Him 
for  solution,  quite  sure  that  He  brought  the  truth 
of  God  —  "I  perceive  that  thou  art  a  prophet." 
Eemark,  in  passing,  that  the  essential  idea  of  a 
prophet,  both  in  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament 
sense,  is  one  that  brings  the  conscience  directly  into 
the  presence  of  God,  so  as  to  have  His  light  shed 
upon  the  soul.  There  were  many  prophets  who 
predicted  scarcely  anything,  but  they  were  not  the 
less  prophets.  Finding  herself,  then,  in  the  presence 
of  one  who  was  able  to  announce  the  truth  of  God, 
she  wants  to  have  the  questions  of  her  soul  answered. 
She  turned  to  Him  about  that  which,  at  all  times, 
and  everywhere,  has  and  must  have  unrivalled  in- 
terest. The  world  itself,  blind  and  dead,  will  fight 
for  nothing  faster  than  its  religion.  There  were 
differences  then,  as  there  are  now.  "  Our  fathers,' ' 
she  said,  "  worshipped  in  this  mountain ;  and  ye  say 
that  in  Jerusalem  is  the  place  where  men  ought  to 
worship.''  The  Lord  solemnly  tells  her  :  "Woman, 
believe  me,  the  hour  cometh  when  ye  shall  neither 
in  this  mountain  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem  worship  the 
Father."  He  gives  a  rebuke,  too  :  "  Ye  worship  ye 
know  not  what.  "We  know  what  we  worship,  for 
salvation  is  of  the  Jews."  It  is  clear  that  what- 
ever hopes  of  salvation  were  held  out  to  the  Jew, 
they  were  founded  on  their  belief  in  Christ.  But 
while  He  vindicates  the  position  (not  the  condition) 
of  the  Jews,  He  proclaims  the  dawn  of  a  brighter 
day :  "  The  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  true 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  11 

worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and 
in  truth,  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship 
Him."  He  could  speak  thus  plainly  and  strongly, 
because  He  was  Himself  the  Son  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father,  and  was  entitled,  in  virtue  of  the  glory 
of  His  Person,  to  bring  in  worship  suited  to  His 
own  intimate  knowledge  and  perfect  revelation  of 
the  Father. 

Thereon  at  once  follows  the  full  and  distinctive 
character  of  Christian  worship.  God  is  made  known 
as  a  Father  calling  and  adopting  children;  nay, 
more  than  this,  He  is  seeking  children.  In  this  is 
the  fulness  of  divine  love  going  out  from  heaven 
and  for  heaven.  In  Israel  men  had  to  seek  Jehovah, 
and  this  with  carefully  prescribed  rites  and  rigid 
ceremonies :  thus  only  could  even  the  chosen  people 
in  their  worship  come  and  appear  before  God.  Not- 
withstanding the  nicest  care,  not  one  could  approach 
into  His  presence — nay,  not  even  the  high  priest 
himself;  and  if  it  had  been  possible  for  him  to 
draw  and  stay  near,  it  was  not  to  God  revealed  as 
a  Father.  God  was  no  more  Father  to  Aaron,  or 
Phinehas,  or  Zadok,  than  He  was  to  the  least 
member  of  the  most  obscure  tribe  in  Israel.  There 
was  at  that  time  no  such  manifestation  of  God. 
But  now  the  hour  was  coming,  and  in  principle 
come,  when  the  Father  was  seeking  worshippers. 
The  Jewish  system  had  been  tried  and  found  want- 
ing, and  was  now  doomed.  Before  God  the  worldly 
sanctuary  was  already  fallen,  and  Christ  was  the 
true  temple.     The  Son  of  God  was  come,  and  this 


12  "WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

cotdd  not  but  change  all  things — not  only  teach,  but 
change  all.  No  wonder,  then,  that  there  was,  in 
and  through  His  presence,  a  new  and  full  display  of 
God,  a  declaration  of  the  Father's  name.  Here 
Christ  makes  known  the  new  thing  in  this  point  of 
view;  how  earthly  worship  must  vanish,  not  merely 
at  the  mountain  of  Gerizim,  but  even  in  Jerusalem ; 
that  it  was  a  question  henceforth  of  worshipping  the 
Father,  and  this  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;  for,  wondrous 
to  say,  the  Father  was  seeking  such  to  worship  Him ! 
What  a  truth !  God  the  Father  going  out  in  His 
own  uncaused,  creative  love  in  quest  of  worshippers  ! 
Of  course,  He  was  accomplishing  this  task  by  His 
Son,  and  in  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Still, 
this  was  the  principle,  in  direct  contrast  with  nature 
and  Judaism — the  Father  seeking  worshippers.  Not 
only  was  it  an  entirely  new  character  of  worship, 
suited  to  and  demanding  the  new  revelation  of  Grod 
Himself,  but  it  necessarily  and  completely  extin- 
guished the  old  lamps  of  the  sanctuary  hitherto 
acknowledged  in  Jewry.  Not  only  was  the  spurious 
worship  of  Samaria  more  than  ever  condemned,  but 
the  brightness  of  heaven,  now  shining  freely,  eclipsed 
the  feeble  rays  which  in  Israel  were  meant  at  least 
to  make  the  darkness  visible,  and  to  keep  up  a  testi- 
mony to  better  light  that  was  coming.  What  had 
been  temporarily  owned  and  used  of  Grod  was  now 
becoming  a  nullity  and  a  nuisance ;  and  God,  as  we 
might  expect,  brought  in  the  vast  change  most 
righteously.  Up  to  this  time,  man  was  on  his  trial. 
The  Jew,  as  the  sample  of  chosen,  favoured  man, 


13 


was  being  proved,  and  what  was  the  issue  of  it? 
The  cross  and  shame  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  They 
rejected  and  slew  their  own  Messiah,  little  knowing, 
too,  that  He  was  Jehovah,  God  over  all,  blessed  for 
ever.  Justly,  therefore,' and  after  long  patience,  the 
Jews  were  put  aside.  Such  was  the  moral  develop- 
ment of  the  ways  of  Gk)d.  There  was  nothing 
arbitrary,  as  every  one  who  believes  what  God  de- 
clares in  His  word  as  to  Israel's  rejection  of  the 
Messiah  must  at  once  see  and  feel.  In  the  life  and 
ministry  of  Christ  was  a  manifestation  of  such  grace 
and  long-suffering  as  had  never  been  witnessed  or 
even  conceived  on  the  earth.  But  now  the  end  was 
come  before  God.  The  Jews,  by  their  conduct,  were 
cutting  the  last  ties  which  a  people  in  the  flesh  could 
have  with  God.  In  rejecting  their  Messiah  they 
rejected  themselves.  But  when  the  cross  was  a  fact, 
and  redemption  accomplished,  when  Jesus  was  risen 
from  the  dead,  the  grace  and  truth  which  had  come 
by  Him  shone  out  in  His  work  on  the  cross,  and  the 
plenteous  redemption,  not  promised  now,  but  accom- 
plished, was  made  known  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Accordingly,  those  who  believed  were  in  a  capacity 
to  worship  the  Father.  It  is  not  merely  that  they  had 
faith  in  the  Messiah,  for  this  they  had  when  He  was 
here.  But  now  that  they  had  in  Him  redemption 
through  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;  now  that 
Christ  made  God  Himself  known  as  His  Father  and 
their  Father,  His  God  and  their  God  (and  this  in  the 
power  and  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down 
from  heaven),  they  could  draw  near  into  the  holiest, 


14  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

and  truly  worship  the  true  God;  they  could  say, 
not  only  by,  but  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  Abba, 
Father." 

Not  merely  were  spiritual  life  and  redemption  need- 
ful, but  the  Holy  Ghost  also ;  and  accordingly  here 
the  Lord  adds  that  "  Grod  is  a  Spirit :  and  they 
that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and 
in  truth."  Mark  the  difference  of  the  language. 
When  He  speaks  of  His  Father  seeking  worshippers, 
it  is  pure  grace  flowing  freely  out ;  it  is  He  who  is 
seeking.  It  is  not  merely  that  He  accepts  the 
worship  of  His  people,  but  He  seeks  worshippers. 
Yet  let  us  remember  that  our  Father  is  Grod.  It  is 
a  thing  easily  forgotten,  strange  to  say;  but  this 
is  mere  fleshliness,  and  not  from  our  privilege  in 
infinite  mercy  of  nearness  to  Him,  which  ought  not 
in  the  least  degree  to  dull,  but  to  increase  and 
strengthen  our  sense  of  His  majesty.  "  Grod  is  a 
Spirit,"  He  says ;  "  and  they  that  worship  Him 
must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  There  is 
a  certain  moral  necessity  here,  which  cannot  be  dis- 
pensed with.  The  truth  is,  Christ  creates,  the  law 
never  does.  The  law  kills ;  what  else  can  it  do,  or 
ought  it  to  do,  for  sinful  creatures  ?  It  would  be  a 
bad  law  if  it  did  let  us  off.  If  I  deserve  to  die  as  a 
guilty  man  responsible  to  God,  then,  I  say,  the  law  is 
just,  holy,  and  good  in  condemning  me.  It  is  the 
province  of  the  Saviour  alone  to  give  me  life,  and 
not  this  merely,  but  to  give  me  life  by  His  death 
and  resurrection,  without  sin,  fruit  or  root,  that  I 
may  stand  in  Him  possessed  of  a  new  nature,  wholly 


15 


delivered  by  grace  from  the  misery,  guilt,  power,  and 
judgment  of  the  old  man. 

This  is  the  place  of  every  Christian.  These  are 
the  simple  but  most  blessed  elements  of  his  life  and 
standing  before  God ;  but  then,  as  they  are  insepa- 
rable from  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  is  He 
absolutely  needed  that  we  may  worship  our  God  and 
Father ;  and  for  this  purpose  and  others  He  is  given. 
Thus  we  see  what  the  living  water  means.  "  The 
water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of 
water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  It  is  the 
Holy  Ghost  given  by  Christ  to  be  in  the  believer ; 
without  Him  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  the 
power  of  worship.  But  He  is  given,  and  the  hour  of 
true  Christian  worship  is  come  in  the  strictest  sense. 

And  you  that  are  here  assembled  to-night,  are 
you  prepared  to  acknowledge,  for  any  consideration 
whatever,  worship  which  is  not  of  this  character? 
You,  especially,  who  are  young  in  years,  and  per- 
haps, also,  little  established  in  the  truth  of  God, 
hearken.  You  may  be  tempted,  not  only  through 
natural  hankering  after  the  world  and  its  worship, 
but  you  have  relatives,  connexions,  friends,  who 
think  it  hard  you  do  not  join  them.  In  what  ?  In 
Christian  worship  ?  Join  them  in  it  by  all  means. 
Whenever,  wherever  you  find  worship  in  spirit  and 
in  truth,  fear  not  to  join ;  seek  it,  yes,  earnestly  seek 
it.  Eather  would  I  ask,  Are  you  disposed  to  slight 
such  worship  for  that  which  does  all  it  can  to  return 
to  the  mountain  of  Samaria,  if  it  cannot  reach  Jeru- 
salem; for  a  religious  service  that  is  both  untrue 


16  WORSHIF,    THE    BREAKING 

and  formal;  and  an  order  that  mingles  some  genuine 
worshippers  in  a  crowd  of  false  ?  How  many  there 
are  now-a-days  who  in  word  boast  of  their  heavenly 
liturgy,  in  reality  hurry  through  it  with  such  evident 
heedlessness  as  to  show  that  the  sermon  is  all  they 
care  to  hear !  One  might  fancy  they  were  men  who 
knew  nothing,  desired  nothing,  but  to  hear  the  way 
to  be  saved,  instead  of  being  (rod's  children,  called 
and  capacitated  to  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and 
in  truth.  But  this  is  the  misery  of  being  in  a 
position  which  is  bound  up  with  what  they  value  in 
the  flesh  and  in  the  world;  where  worshipping  the 
Father  according  to  His  wor^.  never  was  nor  can  be 
known. 

I  admit  that  even  this  is  better  than  belonging  to 
another  class  of  religionists,  nominally  in  the  same 
sect,  who,  being  ignorant  of  Christ's  redemption, 
bear  with  an  evangelical  discourse  for  the  sake  of 
services,  the  darkness  of  which  is  to  them  delightful, 
because  it  answers  to  their  own  condition.  Fleshly 
worship  suits  a  fleshly  state. 

My  charge  is  not  about  the  slipping  in  of  a  hypo- 
crite amongst  the  true — these,  no  doubt,  may  creep 
in  anywhere.  The  main  point  insisted  on  is,  the 
error  and  sin  of  embracing  the  world  in  divine 
worship  through  a  false  principle,  than  which  there 
is  nothing  in  the  present  day  more  common,  and  in 
some  eyes  more  desirable.  Clearly  this  is  not  Chris- 
tian worship ;  but  still  it  is  so  styled ;  it  is  accepted 
and  justified  as  such ;  and  the  refusal  of  it  is  branded 
popularly  as  the  fruit  of  a  harsh,  unloving,  censorious 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  17 

spirit,  instead  of  being  seen  to  be,  as  it  is,  simple- 
hearted  desire  to  carry  ont  the  will  of  the  Lord. 
Worship  there  cannot  be,  unless  the  ground  of  grace 
is  taken:  there  must  be  life  in  the  Spirit,  nothing 
less  than  divine  life  and  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Grhost  working  in  the  worshipper. 

Again,  it  ought  not  to  be  very  difficult  to  discern 
where  there  is  Christian  worship.  One  can  easily 
say  where  it  is  not.  How  can  it  be  where  there  is 
no  recognition  of  the  assembly  of  the  faithful  in 
separation  from  the  world  ?  where  human  formularies 
largely  displace  the  divine  word  ?  where  the  Holy 
Grhost  is  not  welcomed*  to  work  in  the  order  laid 
down  in  Scripture?  where  anybody  may  be  in  mem- 
bership, and  the  evidently  unconverted  can  join  in, 
or  lead,  the  most  serious  services  ?  The  invariable 
effect  is,  that  as  you  cannot  raise  the  world  to  the 
height  of  faith,  the  believers  who  mingle  all  together 
indiscriminately  must  descend  to  the  world's  level. 
Hence,  fine  buildings,  imposing  ceremonies,  exciting 
music,  poetic  sentiment,  are  apt  to  come  in  by  de- 
grees, where  Christian  worship  is  unknown  or  for- 
gotten. Hence,  too,  the  need  of  legal  order,  for  it 
seems  bold  to  trust  the  grace  of  Grod. 

You  may  have  Christian  worshippers  in  such  a 
state  of  things ;  for  I  have  no  desire  to  exaggerate ; 
but  Christian  worship  there  cannot  be.  Do  you 
doubt  this  ?  Perhaps  the  doubt  is  because  you  have 
never  known  wha^  worship  really  is.  So  much  is 
this  the  case  at  present — the  thoughts  of  Christians 
are  so  vague,  unformed,  and  dark — that  to  many  the 

B 


18  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

very  meaning  of  worship  is  lost.  How  many  call  a 
building  where  they  meet  to  hear  preaching  a  place 
of  worship ;  and  when  they  go  to  hear,  they  think 
and  say  they  are  going  to  worship  !  Does  not  all 
this  show  that  the  very  idea  of  worship  is  unknown  ? 
Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at.  The  truth  is,  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  preaching  of  Christ  in  these  days, 
much  calculated  to  arouse  and  also  to  win  souls ; 
but  where  is  there  a  full  setting  forth  of  the  Gospel 
of  (rod's  grace  ?  That  Christ  is  preached  at  all,  is  a 
matter  for  which  we  have  to  thank  (rod.  Souls  are 
converted,  and  learn,  as  far  as  the  usual  orthodox 
testimony  goes,  what  is  most  true  of  their  sins 
and  their  danger ;  but  we  want  the  Grospel  of  God 
fully  proclaimed — the  Grospel  as  we  see  it  set  forth 
in  the  epistles — the  glad  news  not  only  that  the 
work  of  Christ  has  put  sin  away,  but  that  the 
believer  stands  in  a  new  life  and  relationship  with 
God,  of  which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  as  the  seal. 
Where  this  is  known,  worship  is  the  simple,  necessary 
fruit ;  the  heart,  thus  set  free  by  grace,  goes  out  to 
Grod  in  thanksgiving  and  praise. 

So,  in  the  chapter  we  began  with,  the  believer 
enjoys  not  only  a  new  life  communicated,  but  a  well 
of  water  within  him,  which  springs  up  into  everlast- 
ing life.  Thus,  by  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit  given 
to  us,  we  possess,  as  a  conscious  thing,  perfect,  un- 
broken peace,  and  we  cannot  but  breathe  the  joy  of 
our  ransomed  souls  to  the  praise  o^our  Saviour  God. 
As  a  fact,  this  may  not  be  found  among  the  children 
of  God,  save  few  comparatively;  because  in  general, 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  19 

where  there  is  a  perception  of  Christ,  they  put  the 
law  in  the  place  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  thus  fall 
into  the  uncertainty  which  in  variably,  where  there 
is  conscience,  flows  from  the  law  thus  misused, 
instead  of  enjoying  the  light,  and  power,  and  peace 
in  Christ  and  His  redemption,  which  is  the  proper 
fruit  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  testimony  to  Christ  and  of 
His  indwelling  in  the  believer.  Here  only  can  you 
have  Christian  worship.  It  is  founded  upon  the  full 
revelation  of  grace  in  Christ  dead,  risen,  and  ascended; 
and  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  Cod  that  this 
is  enjoyed  by  the  believer.  But  not  this  only :  for 
God  is  a  Spirit,  and  the  consequence  is,  that  Christian 
worship  repudiates  formality.  "  God  is  a  Spirit:  and 
they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit 
and  in  truth"  There  we  have  the  nature  of  Grod 
revealed,  and  thence  is  deduced  the  moral  need  of 
worshipping  Him  in  spirit  and  truth,  not  according 
to  earthly  form  or  human  will. 

This,  then,  is  the  source,  groundwork,  and  cha- 
racter of  Christian  worship.  But  we  have  one  element 
more  when  we  pursue  the  further  instructions  of  the 
New  Testament,  In  1  Cor.  xiv.  we  find  it  connected 
with  the  assembly.  "We  learn  there  on  what  prin- 
ciple, and  by  whom,  worship  is  now  paid  to  God. 
This  is  an  important  addition  to  our  knowledge  of 
God's  will.  No  one  contends  for  a  moment  that  the 
Gospel  should  not  be  preached,  or  that  believers 
should  not  be  instructed  in  the  truth.  These  are 
duties  confessedly  according  to  Scripture.  There  we 
have  everything  provided  for,  that  can  be  needed  for 
b  2 


20  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

the  good  of  the  Church,  and  for  the  well-being  of  souls  ; 
we  have  both  the  principle  and  the  fact  of  all  Chris- 
tian service  most  clearly  laid  down  in  the  word  of 
God.  Among  the  rest,  there  is  no  lack  of  testimony 
to  the  manner  according  to  which  Christian  worship 
should  be  conducted.  We  have  seen  that  none  can 
render  acceptable  worship  to  God  but  Christians : 
from  it  the  world  is  plainly  shut  out,  according  to 
the  teaching  of  Scripture.  It  is  not  a  question  of 
closing  the  door,  or  of  excluding  persons  from  the 
place  where  the  faithful  assemble.  It  is  clear  from 
Scripture  that  unbelievers  might  be  present  where 
the  assembly  of  Grod  may  be  gathered ;  but  they  are 
incapacitated  from  rendering  proper  and  acceptable 
worship  unto  Grod,  because  they  have  neither  the 
new  nature,  nor  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the  only 
power  of  worship  ;  they  neither  know  redemption, 
which  is  the  basis  of  worship,  nor  do  they  know  the 
Grod  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  who,  with  the 
Son,  is  the  object  of  worship.  Thus,  in  every  point 
of  view,  the  world  is  necessarily  without  the  pale  of 
Christian  worship,  and  the  bringing  the  world  in,  is 
a  large  part  of  the  sin  and  ruin  of  Christendom. 

Again,  we  gather  from  1  Cor.  xiv.  the  place  which 
the  giving  of  thanks  has  in  the  worship  of  Grod ;  and 
this  connected,  not  with  any  one  individual  only,  or 
a  separate  class,  but  with  the  order  and  operation 
of  God  in  the  assembly.  Hence  we  read  (ver.  15), 
"  What  is  it  then  ?  I  will  pray  with  the  spirit,  and 
I  will  pray  with  the  understanding  also  :  I  will  sing 
with  the  spirit,  and  I  will  sing  with  the  understand- 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  21 

ing  also."  Important  as  singing  is,  its  end  is  not, 
of  course,  the  sweet  sound  :  the  essential  thing,  as  we 
are  told,  is  "  singing  with  the  spirit  and  understand- 
ing also."  What  a  proof  that  the  Lord  is  looking 
for  the  intelligent  service  of  His  people !  So,  in 
ver.  16,  we  read — "  Else  when  thou  shalt  bless  with 
the  spirit,  how  shall  he  that  occupieth  the  room  of 
the  unlearned  say  Amen  at  thy  giving  of  thanks, 
seeing  he  understandeth  not  what  thou  say  est?" 
If  in  Christian  worship  there  were  the  utterance  of  an 
unknown  tongue  in  the  giving  of  thanks,  or  in  bless- 
ing God,  it  would  traverse  the  rules  of  edifying  the 
assembly,  because  it  would  leave  out  those  that  could 
not  intelligently  join  their  "  Amen."  The  passage 
is  cited  also  to  show  that  thaiiksgivino:  and  blessing, 
like  singing,  and  other  constituents  of  Christian 
worship  known  to  us  familiarly,  were  found  from  the 
first  in  the  Christian  assembly. 

But  there  is  just  the  difficulty.  Look  right  or 
left — look  where  you  will,  where  can  you  find  the 
Christian  assembly?  Where  is  there  the  gathering 
together  of  the  children  of  Grod,  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  engaged  in  thanksgiving  and  bless- 
ing, praising  and  singing,  as  we  read  of  here  ?  Yet 
the  assembly  of  Grod,  meeting  as  such,  is  essential  to 
Christian  worship.  There  might  be  the  best  of  men 
chosen  to  conduct  the  service,  and  the  order  of  praise 
and  prayer  might  be  as  faultless  as  existing  liturgies 
are  open  to  severe  criticism  ;  but  what  then  ?  Would 
it  be  the  worship  of  the  family  of  Grod  ?  If  not,  how 
could  it  be  of  really  Christian  character  ?     Grod  looks 


22  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

for  the  worship  of  His  children  in  the  Spirit.  Do 
you  say  that,  after  all,  it  is  only  the  slight  difference 
of  several  taking  part,  instead  of  one?  But  grave 
as  that  might  be,  such  a  difference  is  not  the  essen- 
tial thing,  but  this — that  there  be  perfect  open- 
ness for  the  Spirit's  action  by  whom  He  is  pleased 
to  speak.  It  is  not,  then,  a  question  of  one  man, 
or  half-a-dozen.  On  some  occasions  the  Holy  Grhost 
might  use  one  or  two,  on  others  more  than  six  in 
various  ways.  What  Scripture  demands  is,  that 
there  be  faith  in  the  Spirit's  presence,  proved  by 
leaving  Him  His  due  right  to  employ  as  may  please 
Him.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  mere  question  of  one,  or 
few,  or  many  mouthpieces  to  give  thanks,  or  bless,  or 
take  part  in  acts  of  Christian  worship.  The  real  and 
essential  feature  is,  that  the  Holy  Grhost,  being 
present,  should  be  counted  on,  and  His  employment 
of  this  Christian  or  that  as  He  will.  In  an  assembly 
where  there  were  many  spiritual  men,  it  would  have 
a  strange  appearance  if  but  one  or  two  took  an  active 
part  in  the  worship  of  the  Lord.  Still,  whether  few  or 
many  speak  at  any  given  time,  the  only  Scriptural 
mode  by  which  acceptable  worship  is  rendered  is 
where  the  whole  assembly  unites  in  the  liberty  of  the 
Spirit,  with  heart  and  mind,  in  the  offering  of  their 
praises  and  thanksgivings  to  Grod  through  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  The  Holy  Grhost,  acting  in  the  assem- 
bly by  its  members,  may  think  fit  to  employ  one  or 
twelve  to  speak  the  praises  suitable  to  His  mind, 
and  according  to  the  condition  of  the  assembly. 
And  what  can  be  sweeter  to  all,  whether  or  not  they 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  23 

be  thus  employed  as  the  audible  channels  of  wor- 
ship, than  to  have  the  consciousness  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  very  deed  so  deigns  to  guide  in  one  and 
all  ?  The  one  point  of  value  is,  that  He  should  be 
free  to  direct  all  for  the  glory  of  Christ. 

There  is  another  remark  of  a  practical  kind  to 
be  made  as  to  worship.  We  must  guard  against 
bringing  into  the  assembly  our  own  thoughts  of  the 
worship  to  be  offered  unto  God.  An  individual  may 
give  out  a  hymn  to  be  sung  in  which  he  delights,  and 
which  may  be  not  only  beautiful  but  true  and  spiritual 
in  itself;  but  it  may  be  a  mistake  in  him  to  give  it  out 
— a  wholly  unsuitable  hymn  for  the  occasion  on  which 
he  desires  it  to  be  sung.  Again,  there  may  be  some 
outside  the  assembly,  known  or  unknown,  who,  out 
of  curiosity,  are  come  to  see  what  the  worship  is  like : 
now  are  you,  fearing  that  they  might  wonder  at  the 
silence  from  time  to  time,  to  read  a  chapter,  or  give 
out  some  sweet  hymn  ?  Need  I  say  that  such  a 
step  is  indefensible,  and  beneath  men  who  believe  in 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Some  may  think 
there  is  liberty  to  do  this  or  the  like ;  but  who  put 
such  thoughts  into  the  mind?  Do  you  think  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  occupied  with  what  those  without 
may  say  or  think  of  those  within,  or  anything  of  the 
kind  ?  Is  He  not,  on  the  contrary,  filled  with  His 
own  thoughts  of  Christ,  and  communicating  them  to 
us?  The  becoming  thing,  therefore,  for  us  to  do 
under  such  circumstances  is  to  look  from  ourselves, 
and  those  within  and  without,  to  God,  that  He,  work- 
ing by  the  Spirit,  may  give  us  communion  with  the 


24  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

present  thoughts  of  the  Spirit  of  God  about  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

"When  such  is  the  case,  how  simple  is  the  flow  of 
thanksgiving  for  His  special  mercies  to  us  and  all 
saints !  how  fragrant  the  sense  God  gives  us  of  His 
delight  in  Christ !  what  praise  of  His  grace !  what 
anticipations  of  glory,  and  of  Christ  Himself  there ! 
All  these,  and  more,  are  but  ingredients ;  and  they 
will  variously  predominate,  as  the  Lord  sees  fit. 
Even  a  lower  character  of  worship,  if  it  be  but  suited 
to  a  given  state,  is,  in  my  judgment,  a  far  more 
pleasing  thing  to  God  than  any  strain  ever  so  high, 
which  has  not  the  real  present  energy  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  connected  with  it. 

Further,  as  to  criticism :  I  cannot  think  the 
assembly  of  God  is  the  right  place  for  any  man  to 
stand  up  and  show  his  superior  wisdom  in  ;  on  the 
contrary,  therein,  above  all  occasions,  is  the  place  for 
the  greatest  to  show  his  littleness  before  God.  There 
may  be  seasons  and  circumstances  where  a  judgment 
of  what  is  given  out  may  not  be  amiss,  but  a  duty  ; 
but  the  assembly  of  God  is  not  the  place  for  such  a 
course.  May  I  not  take  the  liberty  of  applying  to 
this  what  the  apostle  lays  down  as  to  another  inno- 
vation :  "If  any  man  seem  to  be  contentious,  we 
have  no  such  custom,  neither  the  assemblies  of  God?" 
How,  where,  could  any  one  gather  such  a  practice 
from  the  word  of  God?  Nor  do  I  confine  myself 
here,  or  in  these  remarks  generally,  to  a  bare  text, 
but  I  am  speaking  of  the  whole  tenor,  and  texture, 
and  object  of  all  that  is  given  us  in  the  Scripture. 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  25 

Accordingly,  as  it  is  unauthorised,  so  the  result  can- 
not but  be  pernicious.  What  can  the  effect  of  criti- 
cism in  the  assembly  of  God  be,  but  the  sowing  of 
discord  and  distraction  where  unity  and  concord 
should  prevail?  And  yet  it  may  be  a  thing  too 
often  done;  against  it  I  would  warn  my  hearers 
earnestly.  All  are  liable  to  make  mistakes,  and  all 
deserve  to  be  corrected  occasionally ;  but,  as  a  general 
rule,  comment  upon  another  is  altogether  out  of 
place  in  the  Christian  assembly.  There  is  a  meet 
time  and  place  for  every  real  duty;  and  it  never 
can  be  right  to  rectify  one  wrong  by  another,  how- 
ever godly  the  intention. 

Next,  as  to  the  breaking  of  bread,  a  few  Scriptures 
will  suffice.  The  Lord's  Supper,  not  baptism,  was 
revealed  of  the  Lord,  we  all  know,  to  the  apostle 
Paul,  as  it  is  brought  out  in  the  same  epistle  (1  Cor. 
xi.)  from  which  much  has  been  already  quoted.  It 
is  a  holy  institution,  intimately  linked  with,  and  the 
distinct  outward  expression  of,  the  unity  of  Christ's 
body,  which  it  was  St.  Paul's  work  especially  to 
develop.  We  have  the  Lord,  accordingly,  there 
revealing  it  afresh  to  the  apostle  Paul.  He  had  not 
sent  Paul  to  baptize,  as  he  says,  but  to  preach  the 
Gospel.  There  is  not  the  least  doubt  that  he  did  bap- 
tize, nor  that  it  was  perfectly  right  in  him  to  baptize. 
But  baptism,  so  expressly  charged  on  the  eleven, 
after  the  Lord's  resurrection,  is  not  only  a  single 
initiatory  observance — "  one  baptism," — but  it  is  for 
each   individual   the  confession   of  the   foundation- 


26  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

truth  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  The  subject 
of  it  stands  forth  as  a  believer  in  Him  who  died  and 
rose ;  he  is  no  longer,  therefore,  a  Jew,  or  a  heathen, 
but  a  confessor  of  Christ.  The  Lord's  Supper,  on 
the  other  hand,  belongs  to  the  assembly,  and  forms 
an  affecting  and  important  object  in  the  worship  of 
the  saints  of  God.  It  is,  primarily  and  strictly,  the 
standing  sign  of  our  only  foundation ;  it  is  the  witness 
of  His  love  unto  death,  and  His  work,  by  virtue  of 
which  such  as  we  can  worship.  No  wonder,  there- 
fore, we  have  the  apostle  Paul  showing  the  very 
solemn  and  blessed  place  which  the  Lord's  Supper 
claims  in  the  revelations  of  the  Lord  to  him.  "  I 
have  received  of  the  Lord,  that  which  also  I  delivered 
unto  you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  He  was  betrayed,  took  bread  :  and  when  He 
had  given  thanks,  He  brake  it,  and  said,  Take,  eat : 
this  is  my  body,  which  is  broken  for  you :  this  do  in 
remembrance  of  me.  After  the  same  manner,  also, 
He  took  the  cup,  when  He  had  supped,  saying, 
This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood:  this 
do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of  me. 
For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this 
cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come." 
It  is  evident,  on  the  face  of  the  statement,  what  a 
large  and  deep  place  the  Lord's  death  has  in  His 
Supper.  No  joy,  no  brightness  of  the  favour  of  God 
in  heaven,  no  consequent  communion,  nor  hopes  of 
everlasting  blessedness  with  Him,  can  be  allowed  for 
a  moment  to  distract  from,  or  overshadow,  the  death 
of  the  Lord.     But  the  reverse  is  the  truth ;  for  the 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  27 

more  the  Lord's  death  has  its  own  central  value 
before  the  Christian,  all  these  things  shine  out  not 
only  more  brightly  but  also  more  sweetly  and  affect- 
ingly  to  the  heart.  And  so  the  same  man  who  was 
God's  blessed  instrument  for  developing  the  full 
extent  of  the  Christian's  privileges,  is  the  very  one 
who  gathers  us  round  our  Lord's  death  as  that 
which  pre-eminently  attracts  and  fills  every  heart  that 
loves  His  name. 

From  Acts  xx.  7,  it  is  plain  that  the  saints  should 
break  bread  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  not  of  the 
month  or  quarter.  But  it  is  the  resurrection-day,  not 
the  day  of  His  death,  as  if  we  were  summoned  to  be 
there  in  mourning  as  for  the  dead.  But  He  is  risen, 
and  therefore,  with  grateful,  solemn  joy,  we  take  the 
Supper  on  the  day  that  speaks  of  His  rising  power. 
I  cannot  but  believe  that  the  Holy  Ghost  records 
the  day  for  our  instruction,  as  well  as  the  object  that 
called  together  the  believers  primarily.  No  doubt 
the  apostle,  passing  through  after  a  short  stay,  dis- 
coursed to  those  assembled;  but  they  came  together 
on  that  day  to  break  bread.  Have  we  consented  to 
other  thoughts  and  arrangements  ?  Or  do  we  act  as 
if  we  believed  the  Holy  Spirit  knows  and  shows  us 
the  best  and  truest,  the  holiest  and  happiest  way  of 
pleasing  God  and  honouring  Christ  ?  The  death  of 
the  Lord  keeps  constantly  before  the  soul  our  utter 
need  as  once  guilty  sinners,  proved  by  the  cross ;  the 
complete  blotting  out  of  all  our  sins  by  His  blood ; 
the  glorifying  of  God  up  to,  and  above  all  in,  death 
itself ;  the  manifestation  of  absolute  grace,  and  withal 


28  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

the  righteousness  of  God  in  justifying  us ;  the  per- 
fect glory  of  the  Saviour — all  these  things,  and 
infinitely  more,  are  brought  and  kept  before  us  in 
those  simple  but  wondrous  words  —  "  the  Lord's 
death !  " 

To  take  the  Supper  in  remembrance  of  the  Lord, 
and  thus  show  forth  His  death,  is  what  gathers  us 
together  as  our  prime  desire.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
about  the  meaning  of  the  word  of  God  which  records 
this  for  our  comfort  and  edifying;  yet  how  could 
one  infer  that  such  was  His  will  if  one  looked  at  the 
practice  of  Christians  ?  Compare  what  they  are 
doing  Lord's-day  after  Lord's-day,  with  the  obvious 
lessons  of  Scripture,  and  intention  of  the  Lord  in  so 
revealing  His  mind  to  us  ;  and  say  whether,  for  the 
most  part,  this  simple,  touching  memorial  has  not 
been  slighted  by  real  saints,  and  whether  its  character 
has  not  been  changed  universally  in  Christendom. 
I  speak  not  of  points  of  form,  but  of  its  principle — of 
such  an  interference  with  its  mode  of  celebration  as 
leaves  hardly  a  single  shred  according  to  the  Lord's 
institution. 

Beware  of  thinking  anything  can  be  of  equal 
moment  with  duly  showing  forth  the  Lord's  death. 
The  Supper  of  the  Lord  claims  an  unequivocal  pro- 
minence in  the  worship  of  the  saints.  Not  that  one 
thinks  of  the  mere  fact  of  celebrating  it,  as  to  time, 
in  the  middle  of  the  meeting.  Indeed,  it  is  remark- 
able how  the  Spirit  of  God  avoids  laying  down  laws 
about  the  Supper  (and  the  same  is  true  of  Christianity 
in  general) — a  circumstance  which  the  unfaithful  may 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  29 

abuse,  but  which  gives  infinitely  greater  scope  to  the 
spirit  of  Christian  affection  and  obedience.  This, 
however,  we  may  safely  say,  that  it  is  not  a  question 
of  the  point  of  time  when  the  act  of  breaking  the  bread 
occurs.  The  all-important  thing  is,  that  the  Lord's 
Supper  should  be  the  governing  thought  when  the 
saints  are  gathered  for  this  purpose  on  the  Lord's 
day;  that  neither  the  prayers  of  many,  nor  the 
teaching  of  any,  should  put  that  great  object  in 
the  shade.  In  ministry,  however  spiritual,  man  has 
his  place ;  in  the  Supper,  if  rightly  celebrated,  the 
abased  Lord  alone  is  exalted.  There  might  be 
occasions  where  the  evident  guidance  of  the  Spirit 
brings  it  early  before  us,  or  postpones  it  late  in  the 
meeting,  and  thus  any  technical  rule  binding  it  to 
the  beginning,  or  middle,  or  end,  would  be  human 
encroachment  on  Him  who  alone  is  competent  on 
each  occasion  and  always  to  decide. 

This  openness  may  seem  strange  to  such  as  are 
habituated  to  rigid  forms,  even  where  there  are  no 
written  formularies;  but  that  apparent  strangeness 
is  chiefly  due  to  their  habitual  lack  of  acquaintance 
with  the  real  presence  and  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Grhost  in  the  assembly.  Where,  however,  the  door 
is  open  to  the  action  of  the  Spirit  according  to  Scrip- 
ture, and  where  a  just  sense  of  what  is  in  hand  per- 
vades the  assembly,  the  Spirit  of  Grod,  somehow  or 
another,  according  to  the  truth  of  things  in  His 
sight,  knows  how  to  adjust  the  right  moment  as 
well  as  all  else,  and  to  give  us  the  comfort  of  His 


30  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

guidance,  if  the  Lord  be  but  the  confidence  of  our 
souls. 

Again,  it  may  be  that  you  sometimes  go  to  the 
Lord's  table  and  return  disappointed,  because  there 
has  been  no  exposition  of  the  word,  or  no  exhortation. 
Is  it  possible  that  you  have  gone  to  remember  and 
show  forth  the  death  of  Christ,  and  yet  have  come 
back  with  feelings  of  dissatisfaction  ?  How  can  this 
be  ?  Is  it  not  the  morbid  influence  of  the  present 
state  of  Christendom  ?  No  doubt  there  is  that  in 
the  natural  heart  which  suits  and  likes  what  is  now 
the  vogue ;  and  the  excitement  of  Egypt's  food  is 
readily  craved,  where  the  heavenly  manna  is  loathed 
as  light  food.  Unquestionably  we  have  that  within 
which  helps  what  is  found  outside ;  still  it  is  humbling 
and  afflicting  to  my  own  mind  that  a  discourse  should 
seem  indispensable  to  garnish  the  breaking  of  bread, 
and  that  there  should  be  a  thought  of  want  in  the 
meeting  where  the  Lord's  death  has  been  before  the 
heart;  when  one  has  met  around  the  Lord  in  His 
own  name  with  those  that  love  Him?  Do  you 
suppose  that  there  is  any  service  more  acceptable  to 
God  Himself  than  the  simple  remembrance  of  Christ 
in  His  own  Supper  ? 

But,  however  that  may  be  estimated,  all  this  has 
been  often  and  plainly  forgotten,  and  the  Supper  of 
the  Lord  has  not  only  been  made,  in  many  instances, 
a  much  rarer  thing  than  Scripture  warrants,  but  its 
proper  character  has  been  tampered  with,  and  the 
great  landmarks  that  the  Lord  laid  down  have  been 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  31 

utterly  disregarded,  so  that  the  celebration  is  become 
anything  men  please  to  call  it,  except  the  Lord's 
Supper.  Say  that  it  is  a  sacrament,  if  you  will; 
but  one  may  perhaps  doubt  that,  if  so,  it  is  the  Lord's 
Supper.  The  Corinthians  used  to  take-  a  common 
meal  together  on  the  Lord's-day ;  for  in  those  days 
Christians  strongly  felt  the  social  character  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  one  may  regret  that  it  has  been  ever 
since  so  much  lost  sight  of.  After  the  meal,  they 
celebrated  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  devil,  however, 
contrived  to  bring  shame  and  confusion  among  them 
at  Corinth  by  licence  at  this  feast :  some  of  them  got 
intoxicated.  No  doubt  it  was  a  dreadful  dishonour 
on  the  Lord's  name  ;  but  it  ill  becomes  those  to  speak 
harshly  who  are  apt  to  utter  the  loudest  reproaches. 
We  must  remember  that,  in  those  days,  they  had  just 
been  brought  out  of  heathenism ;  and  it  used  to  be  a 
part  of  the  worship  of  false  gods  to  get  drunk  in  their 
honour.  The  Gentiles  did  not  feel  the  immorality 
of  it  in  the  way  that  everybody  knows  now.  It  was 
thought  no  improper  thing  then  to  be  thus  excited, 
and  worse,  in  their  religious  rites,  and,  indeed,  at  othei 
times.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  in  this  infant 
assembly  at  Corinth  it  was  not  counted  such  an 
enormity,  as  we  know  it  to  be,  that  Christians  should 
so  far  forget  the  Lord  at  the  agape.  What  aggravated 
the  sin  was  the  mixing  up  the  Lord's  Supper  then 
and  there,  it  seems,  with  the  love-feast.  Such  conduct 
was  destructive  of  the  character  of  His  Supper.  To 
eat  and  drink  thus  was  to  eat  judgment  (1  Cor.  xi.  29). 
What  had  been  begun  in  the  Spirit  ended  in  the  flesh. 


32  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

I  refer  to  tliis  merely  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that, 
by  bringing  carnal  feasting  into  such  a  holy  assem- 
blage, we  lose  or  destroy  its  true  nature  and  aim. 

Thus,  without  confining  oneself  to  the  notice  of 
any  particular  body,  the  practice  of  appointing  par- 
ticular officials,  whose  sole  right  and  title*  it  is  to 

*  Let  me  give  a  few  extracts  from  the  famous  work  of  an  able  and 
moderate  man,  John  Calvin  : — "  It  is  here,  also,  pertinent  to  observe, 
that  it  is  improper  for  private  individuals  to  take  upon  themselves 
the  administration  of  baptism  ;  for  it,  as  well  as  the  dispensation  of 
the  Supper,  is  part  of  the  ministerial  office.  For  Christ  did  not  give 
command  to  any  men  or  women  whatever  to  baptize,  but  to  those 
whom  He  had  appointed  apostles.  And  when,  in  the  administration 
of  the  Supper,  He  ordered  His  disciples  to  do  what  they  had  seen 
Him  do  (He  having  done  the  part  of  a  legitimate  dispenser),  He 
doubtless  meant  that  in  this  they  should  imitate  His  example.  The 
practice  which  has  been  in  use  for  many  ages,  and  almo.-t  from  the 
very  commencement  of  the  Church,  for  laics  to  baptize,  in  danger  of 
death,  when  a  minister  could  not  be  present  in  time,  cannot,  it  appears 
to  me,  be  defended  on  sufficient  grounds  "  (Inst.  IV.,  xv.  20).  "For 
the  words  of  Christ  are  plain  :  'Go  ye,  therefore,  and  teach  all 
nations,  baptizing  them.'  (Matt,  xxviii.  19.)  Since  He  appointed 
the  same  persons  to  be  preachers  of  the  Gospel  and  dispensers  of 
baptism  in  the  Church,  '  No  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself 
(Heb.  v.  4)  according  to  the  apostle,  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as 
was  Aaron,'  any  one  who  baptizes  without  a  lawful  call  usurps 
another's  office"  (Ibid.  22).  Then,  in  chap.  xvii.  43  of  the  same 
book  IV.,  after  alluding  to  some  ancient  ceremonies  in  order  to  dis- 
miss them,  he  proceeds  to  say  the  Supper  "  might  be  administered 
most  becomingly,  if  dispensed  to  the  Church  very  frequently,  at  least 
once  a  week.  The  commencement  should  be  with  public  prayer ; 
next,  a  sermon  should  be  delivered ;  then  the  minister,  having  placed 
bread  and  wine  on  the  table,  should  read  the  institution  of  the  Sup- 
per, then  explain  the  promise  therein  left  us,  and  at  the  same  time 
keep  back  from  communion  [excommunicaret]  all  those  who  are 
debarred  by  the  Lord's  prohibition.  He  should,  after  that,  pray  that 
the  Lord,  according  to  the  kindness  in  which  He  bestowed  this  sacred 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  33 

administer  the  bread  and  wine  to  each  communicant, 
is  clean  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  Scripture,  and 
flies  in  the  face  of  the  evident  intention  of  God, 
quite  as  much  as  the  distressing  conduct  of  the 
Corinthians  themselves.  For  what  is  the  Lord's 
Supper?  Is  it  not  the  family  feast?  When  you 
derange  the  Father's  order  among  the  members  of 
His  family,  or  when  you  bring  in  those  that  are  not 
of  His  family,  its  character  is  gone,  it  is  the  family 
feast  no  more.  Let  us,  then,  assume  the  least  un- 
favourable supposition  of  a  Christian  company,  and 
of  none  but  Christians.  Yet  supposing  that  the 
administration,  as  men  call  it,  of  the  Supper  of  the 
Lord  is  committed  to  a  real  minister  of  Christ,  or  to 

food  on  us,  would  also  instruct  and  form  us  to  receive  it  with  faith 
and  gratitude  of  mind,  and  would  make  us  worthy  of  the  feast  by 
His  mercy,  since  we  are  not  so  of  ourselves.  Here  either  psalms 
should  be  sung,  or  something  read,  while  the  faithful,  in  due  order, 
communicate  at  the  sacred  banquet,  the  ministers  breaking  the  bread 
and  conveying  it  to  the  people.  The  Supper  being  ended,  an  exhorta- 
tion should  be  given  to  sincere  faith  and  confession  of  faith,  to 
charity  and  manners  worthy  of  Christians.  Lastly,  thanks  should  be 
offered,  and  praise  of  God  sung.  This  done,  the  Church  should  be 
dismissed  in  peace."  How  man  loves  to  meddle  and  legislate !  Now, 
it  is  instructive  to  observe  that  the  fullest  regulation  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  in  Scripture  occurs  in  1  Corinthians,  that  is,  in  an  epistle 
written  to  an  assembly  where  as  yet  elders  were  not.  Such  I  believe 
to  have  been  the  case ;  but  even  if  elders  did  exist  there,  the  fact 
remains  that  absolute  silence  is  kept  respecting  them,  where  modern 
thought  would  have  called  them  in  at  once  to  meet  the  disorder  by  a 
proper  administration  of  the  Sacrament.  This  never  occurs  to  the 
apostle.  The  whole  assembly  are  admonished  on  moral  grounds. 
Such  is  the  divine  remedy,  not  an  appeal  to  the  elders  if  they  existed, 
nor  a  direction  to  have  them  appointed  in  order  to  correct  the  abuse, 
if  there  were  none. 


34  WORSHIP,   THE    BREAKING 

all  who  are  His  ministers,  as  the  exclusive  prerogative 
of  such  as  minister  only — I  put  the  most  favourable 
form  which  can  be  conceived  for  the  popular  notion — 
under  any  and  all  circumstances,  it  is  a  human  in- 
vention, not  only  without  the  authority  of  Christ, 
but  decidedly  contrary  to  the  doctrine  and  facts 
recorded  in  Scripture.  I  admit  ministry  most  fully; 
but  the  Lord's  Supper  has  no  connexion  with  it. 
Make  it  a  necessary  function  of  those  that  rule  to 
administer  the  bread  and  wine,  and  it  bears  not  even 
an  outward  resemblance  to  the  Lord's  Supper.  It 
becomes  a  sacrament,  not  His  Supper  ;  a  manifest  in- 
novation, a  decided  and  complete  departure  from  what 
the  Lord  has  laid  down  in  His  word.  The  very 
idea  of  a  person  standing  apart,  and  claiming  to 
administer  it  as  a  right,  alters  and  ruins  the  Supper 
of  the  Lord.  That  Supper,  according  to  Scripture, 
leaves  no  room  for  the  display  of  human  importance 
in  the  pretensions  of  a  clergy ;  least  of  all  when  the 
apostles  were  on  earth.  Blessed  and  honoured  of 
God  as  these  were  at  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  they  were  there  in  His  presence  as  souls 
that  were  saved  from  sin  and  its  judgment  by  the 
Lord's  death.  In  the  regulation  of  the  Churches,  in 
the  choice  of  elders,  in  the  appointment  of  deacons, 
they  had  their  own  proper  place  of  apostolic  dignity. 
The  word  of  God  clearly  and  fully  proves  that  the 
administration  of  the  Supper  by  an  official  is  a 
figment  and  tradition  of  men,  wholly  wanting  the 
support  of  Scripture. 

But  there  is  another  point  that  often  troubles  souls, 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  35 

and  might  possibly  harass,  even  where  the  "bread  is 
broken  in  a  holy,  simple,  Scriptural  manner — the 
danger  of  eating  unworthily,  and  so  of  incurring 
"damnation."  Let  me  meet  this  at  once  by  the 
assurance  that,  though  one  has  to  watch  against  a 
careless  or  otherwise  unworthy  participation,  there 
is  no  thought  of  damnation,  which  would  indeed 
upset  for  the  believer  all  the  comfort  of  the  Gospel 
and  the  general  drift  of  God's  word.  But  some 
may  say,  "Do  not  the  Scriptures  assert  as  much  ?" 
I  admit  the  English  version  does,  but  not  the  word 
of  God ;  and  we  must  not  confound  them.  We 
have  every  reason  to  thank  God  for  the  English 
Bible,  which,  as  far  as  I  am  acquainted  with  the 
subject,  I  believe  to  be  as  good  a  version,  if  not  better 
than  any  other  current  in  the  world ;  but  for  all  this, 
it  is  only  a  version,  and  therefore  a  work  in  which 
the  weakness  of  man  appears,  and  in  which  are  found 
here  and  there  defects  which  human  infirmity  has 
not  been  able  to  avoid.  One  of  these  errors  is  on 
this  very  subject  (in  1  Cor.  xi.  29).  The  apostle  is 
showing  how  essential  it  is  that  we  go  to  the  Lord's 
table,  which  invites  us  freely  as  every  week  opens, 
our  hearts  filled  with  grateful  remembrance  of 
Christ's  self-sacrificing  love,  who  died  in  atonement 
that  we  through  Him  might  be  saved.  What  is  the 
result  of  a  light,  heedless  state  at  the  Lord's  Supper  ? 
If  we  take  the  bread  and  wine  at  that  holy  feast,  as 
we  eat  the  common  food  God  provides  in  our  own 
houses,  not  discerning  the  Lord's  body — in  other 
words,  if  we  eat  and  drink  unworthily,  it  is  not  the 
c  2 


36  WORSHIP,    THE    BREAKING 

Lord's  Supper  we  are  eating,  but  rather  judgment  to 
ourselves.  The  Lord's  hand  will  be  on  such,  as  the 
apostle  shows  by  the  case  of  the  disorderly  Corinth- 
ians ;  but  even  in  that  aggravated  instance,  it  was 
expressly  temporal  judgment,  that  they  should  not  be 
damned,  or  "condemned  with  the  world."  On  the 
other  hand,  there  is  no  excuse  for  absenting  yourself 
from  the  Lord's  table.  There  is  no  escape  from  the 
hand  of  the  Lord,  save  by  humbling  ourselves  and 
vindicating  Him  by  self-judgment,  and  then  coming. 
The  Lord's  Supper  is  no  more  a  sweet  privilege  than 
a  solemn  duty  for  all  His  own,  save  those  under  dis- 
cipline ;  and  when  we  think  of  the  love  He  has  shown 
us  in  the  boundless  sacrifice  He  has  made  for  us — 
the  deliverance  wholly  undeserved  He  has  wrought 
for  us  in  His  own  deep  abasement  and  suffering  under 
Grod's  wrath  on  the  cross,  together  with  all  the 
gracious  encouragement  He  has  therein  brought  be- 
fore us  for  our  comfort,  admonition,  and  support 
in  our  conflict  through  the  world,  we  cannot  but 
regard  the  thankful  commemoration  of  the  Lord's 
death  as  a  paramount  obligation  which,  under  no 
circumstances,  ought  to  be  neglected. 

Another  person's  fault  should  not  keep  me  away : 
if  it  rightly  acts  so  on  one,  it  ought  to  hinder  all.  Is 
the  Lord,  then,  to  be  as  it  were  forgotten  because 
somebody  deserves  censure  ?  Let  the  faulty  individual 
be  reproved  or  otherwise  dealt  with  according  to 
♦Scripture ;  but  my  place  is  to  "  do  this  in  remem- 
brance of  Christ."  Again,  sense  of  my  own  faulti- 
ness  should  not  keep  me  back.    "  Let  a  man  examine 


OF    BREAD,    AND    PRAYER.  37 

himself,  and  so-  let  him  eat" — not  stay  away.  He 
who  abstains  from  the  Lord's  Supper  virtually  says 
he  is  none  of  His. 

This  will  suffice  as  to  the  breaking  of  bread,  barely 
as  the  subject  has  been  touched.  A  few  words 
remain  to  be  added  in  regard  to  prayer.  There 
is  very  often  a  great  mistake  made  as  to  this. 
We  hear  sometimes  about  the  "  gift  of  prayer ;" 
but  where  do  you  find  it  ?  Show  me  a  passage  of 
Scripture  which  speaks  of  a  "gift  of  prayer"  in 
the  sense  in  which  people  commonly  use  the  term  ? 
What  is  the  effect  ?  It  largely  hinders  conscien- 
tious, modest,  simple  souls,  who  otherwise  would 
join  heartily  in  public  prayer.  But  they  cannot  give 
themselves  credit  for  possessing  the  "  gift  of  prayer." 
They  are  frightened  by  what  is  a  mere  bugbear — by 
what  is  really,  if  they  but  knew  it,  a  blunder.  The 
consequence  of  this  for  them  is,  that  they  hang 
back,  and  are  silent,  when  the  meeting  would  be 
greatly  benefitted  by  their  help.  Are  there  not  some 
now  present  who  know  well  that  they  have  had  many 
a  time  a  desire  to  pray,  and  thus  express  the  wants 
of  Grod's  assembly  to  Himself,  but  who  have  been 
deterred  because  they  feared  their  lack  of  a  "  gift  of 
prayer,"  and  that  they  might  not  be  able  to  pray 
long  enough,  or  in  a  way  acceptable  to  some  whom 
they  have  heard  insisting  on  the  "  gift  of  prayer  ?" 
Is  it  not  a  fact  ?  I  entreat  you,  beloved  friends,  to 
listen  to  them  no  more,  nor  heed  your  own  thoughts 
and  feelings. 


38  WORSHIP,    ETC. 

Examine  the  word  of  God  for  yourselves,  and 
you  will  find  that  the  apostle  lays  down  (1  Tim.  ii.), 
and  even  peremptorily,  his  desire  that  the  men 
pray  everywhere.  Let  them,  then,  commit  them- 
selves to  the  Lord  without  doubt,  and  at  the  same 
time  remember,  that  Scripture,  at  any  rate,  never 
even  hints  about  a  "gift  of  prayer."  This  brings 
us  to  another  point  connected  with  the  one  I  have 
just  endeavoured  to  explain.  It  is  in  my  opinion  a 
mischievous  notion  that  those  who  possess  a  minis- 
terial gift  should  be  regarded  as  the  only  proper 
persons  to  let  their  voices  be  heard  in  the  assembly 
of  God. 


GIFTS  AM)  LOCAL  CHARGES. 

Eph.  iv.  7—11. 
LECTURE  V. 


I  should  feel  to-night  that  my  subject  was  dry 
indeed,  and  promising  little  profit  to  souls,  if  we  had 
only  to  look  at  gifts  and  offices  in  themselves.  It  is 
thus  that  the  subject  is  often  regarded,  and  is  apt  to 
become,  therefore,  not  only  a  barren,  speculative 
question  for  some  souls,  but  also  a  snare  to  others — 
barren  to  such  as,  looking  upon  it  from  outside, 
think  that  they  at  least  have  nothing  to  do  with  gifts 
and  offices ;  and  a  snare,  perhaps,  as  often,  to  those 
who  conclude  that  they  themselves  are  especially,  if 
not  exclusively,  concerned  in  them.  The  truth  is, 
these  spiritual  functions  closely  and  materially  affect 
both  Christ  and  the  Church  of  Grod.  Attached  to 
Christ  as  their  source,  they  (at  any  rate  gifts)  flow 
down  from  the  same  reservoir  of  rich  grace  on  high, 


2  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

whence  all  the  main  characteristic  blessings  of  the 
Church  proceed.  They  proceed  from  Him  in  heavenly 
places,  and  therein  is  the  true  answer  to  much  the 
greater  part  of  the  aversion  some  feel  to  the  subject, 
as  if  ministerial  gifts  were  only  a  means  of  giving 
importance  to  their  possessors.  It  would  be  hard  to 
think  that  such  a  turn  can  be  anything  but  a  gross 
perversion  of  what  comes  from  Christ  or  heaven.  In 
truth,  they  are  of  the  deepest  moment  in  God's  eyes, 
as  He  deigns  to  use  them  for  the  glory  of  His  Son ; 
and,  surely,  the  consideration  of  the  light  that  Scrip- 
ture affords  should  be  precious  to  those  whose  joy  as 
well  as  responsibility  it  is  to  profit  by  them ;  and  not 
least  to  those  who  have  personally  and  most  jealously 
to  watch  how  the  gift  of  Christ's  grace  is  used,  lest  it 
should  be  diverted  from  the  object  for  which  the 
Lord  gave  it,  to  some  selfish  or  worldly  account.  It 
is  evident,  I  think,  that  simply  to  state  the  source  is, 
in  the  principle  of  it,  to  cut  off  all  excuse  for  the 
earthly  aggrandisement,  in  various  forms,  which,  the 
Lord's  gifts  are  too  commonly  made  to  serve. 

But  then  there  is  another  remark  to  be  made. 
Not  only  do  these  gifts  of  Christ  spring  from  Him  in 
heaven,  and  therefore  must,  if  anything  can,  refuse 
to  mingle  with  the  vanity  of  the  world  and  the  pride 
of  man  (I  speak,  of  course,  of  the  gift  itself,  and  not 
of  the  flesh's  perversion  of  it) ;  but,  besides,  there  is 
another  feature  of  these  gifts,  which  is  of  immense 
interest  to  us  as  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  They 
are  essentially  bound  up  with  Christianity,  not  on  the 
contemplative  side,  but  in  what  is  equally  needful, 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  6 

its  active,  aggressive  character.  Again,  whether  you 
look  at  the  source  or  the  character,  all  is  founded  on 
an  eternal  redemption  that  is  already  accomplished 
The  more  these  considerations  are  weighed,  the  more 
their  importance  will  appear ;  the  more,  also,  it  seems 
to  me,  the  subject  of  the  gifts  of  Christ  will  be  seen 
to  be  entirely  above  that  earthly  and  barren  domain 
to  which  theology  at  least  would  consign  it. 

Further,  is  there  not  a  wrong  done  to  God  and 
His  saints,  wherever  that  which  the  Lord  deigned  to 
make  known  to  us  in  His  word — that  which  con- 
stitutes, rightly  applied,  so  essential  a  part  of  the 
blessing  of  the  Church  —  is  viewed  as  a  mere 
secondary  matter  that  can  be  taken  up  or  laid  aside 
at  will  ?  In  point  of  fact,  such  indifference  to  His 
truth  is  deep  dishonour  done  to  Him,  and  a  corre- 
sponding loss  invariably  to  the  souls  of  the  saints 
who  thus  slight  His  will.  It  must  be  evident,  if  it 
were  only  from  the  scripture  just  read,  that  the 
Holy  Grhost  does  not  in  any  way  banish  the  subject 
of  gifts  into  some  dark  corner — if  such  there  can  be 
in  the  Scriptures — whence  we  may,  if  we  please, 
draw  it  forth  from  time  to  time,  and  regard  it  as  a 
matter  of  small  consequence.  In  the  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians,  where  the  Holy  Grhost  has  shown  both 
heights  and  depths  of  blessing  in  Christ  and  in  the 
Church — in  the  very  centre  where  He  shows  us,  too, 
the  Lord  Himself,  in  His  own  glory,  at  the  right 
hand  of  Grod — it  is  there,  beyond  almost  any  other 
part  of  the  New  Testament,  that  we  find  the  Spirit 
a  2 


4  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

launching  out  into  an  account  of  the  gifts  of  the 
Lord  to  the  Church. 

But,  observe,  I  say  the  "  gifts  of  the  Lord" 
because  so  it  is  that  they  are  regarded  here,  rather 
than  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  Indeed,  it  would  be  difficult 
to  find  such  an  expression  in  Scripture.  There  is  a 
passage  which  seems  to  say  as  much  in  Heb.  ii. ;  but 
it  is  properly  "  the  distributions  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
You  will  find,  also,  in  1  Cor.  xii.,  that  wisdom, 
knowledge,  and  the  rest  are  said  to  be  given,  by 
"  the  same  Spirit"  But  still,  in  these  things,  the 
Holy  Ghost,  properly  speaking,  is  not  regarded  as 
the  giver,  save  mediately.  The  Lord  is  the  real  and 
proper  giver ;  the  Spirit  of  God  is  rather  the  inter- 
mediate means  of  conveying  the  gift,  distributing  or 
making  it  good,  —  the  energy  by  which  the  Lord 
acts.  And  I  conceive  it  to  be  of  moment,  practically, 
that  we  should  see  that  the  gifts  which  are  used  to 
call  out  and  build  up  the  Church,  and  which  are  the 
only  true  basis  of  ministry,  take  their  rise  from 
Christ  Himself. 

Ministry,  then,  may  be  defined  to  be  the  exercise 
of  gift,  and  therefore  it  is  evident  that  these  gifts  of 
grace  are  bound  up  with  it  in  the  most  intimate 
manner.  There  can  be  no  ministry  of  the  word, 
properly  speaking,  without  gift,  by  the  Spirit,  from 
Christ. 

But  let  us  look  for  a  moment  at  the  development 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  to  the  truth  that  these 
gifts  flow  from  Christ.     "  Unto  every  one  of  us  is 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  0 

given  grace  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of 
Christ."  It  is  not  a  bare  question  of  qualities  pos- 
sessed ;  still  less  is  it  merely  a  matter  of  attainment, 
let  it  be  ever  so  well  meant  to  give  honour  to  the 
Holy  Ghost.  It  is  a  new  thing  given,  the  positive 
consequence  of  grace  ;  it  is  the  fruit  of  the'  free 
favour  of  the  Lord,  who  in  these  things  acts  accord- 
ing to  His  own  sovereign  will  and  for  the  glory  of 
God. 

"  And  imto  every  one"  (or  each)  "  of  us  is  given 
grace  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ. 
"Wherefore  He  saith  [taking  up  Psalm  lxviii.] 
'When  He  ascended  up  on  high,  He  led  captivity 
captive,  and  gave  gifts  unto  men.' '  Although  the 
Lord  Jesus  was  in  His  person,  one  need  hardly  say, 
competent  at  all  times,  still  He  was  pleased,  in  the 
order  of  the  ways  of  God,  to  wait  for  the  great  work 
to  be  done — and  done,  too,  not  merely  as  regarded 
man  in  divine  mercy  towards  him ;  but  there  was  the 
enemy  to  be  dealt  with ;  there  was  the  power  to  be 
broken  that  had  led  captive  the  children  of  God. 
Hence  the  spiritual  enemies  were  first  disposed  of, 
and  the  Lord  is  accordingly  represented  here  as 
ascending  up  to  heaven  on  the  defeat,  the  total 
defeat  before  God,  of  all  the  once  mighty  unseen 
power  of  evil.  Upon  this  foundation  ministry  is 
built.  The  Lord  Jesus  goes  up  into  heaven.  He 
has  Himself  confronted  and  defeated  the  powers  of 
darkness.  He  has  led  captivity  captive ;  and  thereon 
"  He  gave  gifts  to  men."  How  completely  the  door 
for  man's  energy  and  ambition  is  closed  !    How  care- 


6  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

fully  God — alone  able  to  teach  us  on  this  subject, 
and  in  His  revealed  word  having,  in  fact,  given  us 
the  perfect  truth — shows  us  the  Lord  Jesus,  from  first 
to  last,  the  one  means  of  good  to  us,  and  glory  to 
Grod  the  Father  by  the  Holy  Grhost !  Do  you  view 
Him  only  as  Saviour  and  Lord  ?  The  truth  is,  there 
'is  not  a  single  seed  of  the  Church's  blessing,  there  is 
not  a  means  of  acting  upon  the  souls  of  ourselves  or 
of  others,  that  is  not,  every  whit  of  it,  connected 
with  Christ.  Where  we  have  not  apprehended  this 
vital,  all-embracing  connexion  with  Him,  and  where 
that  which  assumes  to  be  ministry,  for  instance,  does 
not  flow  from  Him  only,  it  is  clear  there  is  a  some- 
thing not  to  be  held  fast,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  be 
got  rid  of;  an  object  not  to  be  fought  for  as  if  it 
were  a  prize,  but  to  be  suspected  as  contraband, 
brought  into  the  light  of  Grod,  and  judged  in  His 
presence.  For  whose  ministry  is  it,  if  it  be  not  of 
the  Lord  Christ  ?  and  for  what  are  we  contending, 
if  it  be  not  for  the  gifts  of  Christ  ? 

The  Lord,  then,  is  ascended  on  high,  and  from  that 
height  of  bliss  and  glory  He  has  given  gifts  to  men, 
and  the  Spirit  of  Grod  carefully  turns  aside  for  a  little, 
and  puts  us  in  the  very  presence  of  the  mighty  work 
on  the  ground  of  which  Christ  took  His  seat  there. 
"  Now  that  He  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that  He  also 
descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth?" 
What  grace  in  Him !  What  infinite  love  to  us,  that 
He  might  bless  us — eternally  bless  us !  He  had, 
with  the  Father  and  the  Spirit,  a  divine,  co-equal 
right  to  that  place  of  supreme  majesty.    They  alone 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  7 

were  competent  to  fill  it.  But  He  descended  first 
into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth.  He  had  the 
highest  place  above,  if  I  may  say  so,  naturally,  in- 
trinsically. It  belonged  to  Him  as  the  Son  of  God, 
who  counted  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  Grod ;  but 
He  deigned  to  be  made  flesh ;  and,  as  a  part  of  the 
counsels  of  God,  it  was  needful  that  He  should  be 
man.  Without  the  incarnation,  there  could  have 
been  no  retrieving  of  the  universal  ruin  of  man,  and 
of  the  dishonour  of  God  through  sin ;  there  could  have 
been  neither  defeat  of  Satan,  nor  an  adequate  and 
righteous  deliverance  for  man.  But  now  He  descends 
first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth.  He  takes 
upon  Him  the  sorrow,  the  shame,  the  sin.  To  have 
condescended  to  become  man,  and  to  live  as  He 
lived  rejected  and  abased  on  earth,  would  have  been 
much ;  but  what  is  this  to  the  cross  ?  He  went 
down  to  the  very  uttermost,  and  in  consequence  of 
this  humiliation,  He  is  now,  as  man,  exalted  to  the 
highest.  In  His  death  He  retrieved  all  that  was 
ruined — indeed,  I  may  say,  infinitely  more.  He 
"  restored  that  which  He  took  not  away ; "  He 
brought  a  new  and  better  glory  to  God  than  had 
ever  been  thought  or  even  prophesied  of  in  any 
respect ;  for  I  fear  not  to  say  that,  as  all  types  and 
shadows  are  but  the  feeble  heralds  of  His  glory,  so, 
too,  there  is,  there  could  be,  no  prediction  rising  up 
to  the  height  of  blessing  that  was  found  in  Christ, 
nor  fathoming  the  depth  of  His  moral  glory  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Himself  was  needed  to  come  forth — 
Himself  needed  that  the  full  worth  of  His  sufferings 


8  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

and  cross  might  be  known.  Before  that,  there  could 
be  no  sufficient  expression  of  His  glory.  It  was  out 
of  this  descent  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  that 
He  went  up — out  of  this  thorough  coming  down  by 
Him  who  was  as  truly  Grod  as  man,  in  the  very 
nature  which  before  had  borne  such  fruits  of  shame 
and  disgrace  to  Grod. 

But  what  a  change !  Humanity  is  a  nature  in  which 
the  blessed  God  could  delight,  as  He  looked  upon  it 
in  the  Lord  Jesus.  Now,  too,  He  ascends ;  and 
this,  not  as  He  came  down ;  for,  descending  simply 
as  the  Son  of  Grod  to  become  the  Son  of  Man,  He 
goes  up,  not  the  Son  of  Gk>d  only,  but  also  the  Son  of 
Man.  Indeed,  it  is  especially  in  this  very  character 
of  man  that  we  find  Him  seated  in  heaven  now. 
"  He  ascended  up,"  as  it  is  said,  "  far  above  all 
heavens,  that  He  might  fill  all  things."  On  this 
magnificent  ground,  whether  one  looks  at  the  humi- 
liation on  the  one  hand,  or  at  the  exaltation  on  the 
other — on  this  twofold  ground  of  a  height  of  gloxy, 
consequent  on  a  depth  of  abasement,  beyond  all 
thought,  is  founded  that  ministry  which  is  according 
to  Grod,  being  the  simple  exercise  of  the  gift  of  Christ. 
And  yet,  could  it  be  credited,  if  one  did  not  know  it, 
that  there  are  men,  and  Christians,  too,  who  can  look 
upon  such  a  scene  unmoved,  if  not  moved  only  to 
spite,  and  sneer,  and  reproach  ?  But  it  must  be  so. 
To  work  thus,  belongs  to  Him  whom  the  world  knew 
not.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  it  recognizes  not 
the  gifts  of  His  grace.  Whatever  can  be  made  to 
merge  into  the  world's  greatness,  whatever  can  be 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  9 

altered  to  suit  the  age's  taste,  the  world  can  admire. 
Even  Christianity  and  the  name  of  Christ — per- 
verted, no  doubt,  and  regarded  only  in  some  partial 
way — may  be  adopted.  Why,  even  the  heathen  were 
willing  to  do  it.  There  was  an  emperor,  as  probably 
many  of  you  know,  who  would  have  been  glad  to 
put  Jesus  Christ  as  a  god  in  the  Pantheon.  And  so 
it  is  now.  Has  not  Christendom  something  akin  for 
its  success?  It  has  taken  up  piecemeal  this  insti- 
tution and  that;  it  has  made  them  the  means  of 
adorning  the  scene  into  which  God  "  drove  out  the 
man,"  exiled  by  Him  because  of  sin. 

But  we  who  believe  are  assuredly  entitled  to  look 
above  this  world,  and  there  to  see,  higher  than  all 
heavens,  our  Lord  and  Master.  And  what  is  He 
doing  there  ?  What  is  His  present  occupation, 
according  to  that  which  the  Spirit  of  God  tells  us 
here  ?  He  is  giving  gifts  unto  men.  Let  us  bless 
Him  for  it !  He  (Himself  a  man,  for  so  it  is  that 
He  has  taken  this  place)  is  giving  gifts  unto  men. 
From  on  high  He  looks  round  about  upon  this 
world,  and  His  grace  makes  man  to  be  the  vessel  of 
these  precious  gifts,  which  savour  not  only  of  the 
Person  who  is  there,  and  of  the  work  He  has  done, 
but  also  of  the  glory  from  which  He  gives  them. 
They  are  heavenly  gifts.  They  will  not,  if  He  be 
consulted,  conform  to  the  world's  thought  or  measure ; 
nor  were  they  ever  intended  to  serve  the  world,  but 
the  Lord  Jesus,  though  surely,  for  His  sake,  serving 
any  and  everybody. 

Let  us  take  care,  then,  that  we  truly  are  subject 


10  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

to  Him  in  whom  we  believe.  And  let  us  beware 
of  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  lest  we  treat  a  word  of 
His  lightly.  Let  us  remember,  it  is  easy,  pretending 
to  honour  His  word,  to  let  it  slip  away  from  us, 
counting  it  something  of  the  past- — no  doubt  to  look 
back  on  it  with  reverential  awe,  but  still  as  a  thing 
gone  by.  Is  this  the  living  word  of  a  Grod  that  lives 
for  ever  and  ever  ?  Are  you  going  to  treat  the  Head 
of  the  Church  as  if  He  were  dead  ?  Nay,  He  never 
was  dead  as  the  Church's  Head.  Never !  He  only 
took  that  Headship  as  One  alive  again  from  the 
grave,  and  so  giving  life ;  He  only  took  it  as  not 
only  raised  from  the  dead,  but  gone  up  to  heaven : 
and  yet  men  act  as  if  the  Head  of  the  Church  were  a 
dead  and  not  a  living  Lord  !  And  if  He  is  thus 
living,  what  is  it  for  ?  Is  it  merely  as  High  Priest, 
according  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  to  bring 
His  people  through  the  wilderness  ?  There  is  some 
tendency  in  Christians  to  overlook  the  priesthood  of 
Christ;  but  there  is  a  far  greater  danger  of  their 
forgetting  Christ  as  the  living  Head,  who  still  stands 
at  the  fountain-head  of  blessing,  ever  in  faithful  love 
giving  His  gifts  to  man.  No  doubt,  it  is  all  summed 
up  as  if  it  were  a  given  thing  here — "  He  gave;" 
and  there  is  a  very  interesting  reason  for  such  a  way 
of  presenting  His  gifts,  for  the  Lord  surely  would 
not  Himself  put  the  gifts  of  His  grace  in  such  a 
form  as  to  interfere  with  the  Church's  constant  hope 
of  His  own  return.  On  the  contrary,  He  would  fix 
the  Church  in  the  attitude  of  expecting  Himself  from 
heaven.     Accordingly,  not  even  the  supply  of  minis- 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  11 

terial  gift  is  so  put  as  to  defer  the  fulfilment  of  the 
"  blessed  hope  "  from  age  to  age.  On  high  is  the 
Head  of  the  Church,  and  as  Head  it  is  part  of  His 
work  to  vouchsafe  all  needed  gifts  for  men. 

Here,  then,  is  the  whole  scene  of  His  grace  summed 
up  in  one — the  Lord  gave  gifts  to  men ;  "  and  He 
gave  some  apostles,  and  some  prophets,  and  some 
evangelists,  and  some  pastors  and  teachers."  We 
have  not  a  catalogue  of  all  the  gifts.  It  is  not  at  all 
in  the  manner  of  Scripture  or  of  the  Lord  to  furnish 
a  mere  formal  list ;  for  the  truth  is  not  written  in 
the  word  of  Grod  so  as  to  satisfy  human  curiosity,  or 
form  a  system  of  divinity.  What  is  done,  is  infinitely 
Jpetter.  He  has  given  us  exactly  what  suited  His 
wisdom  in  each  particular  part  of  Scripture.  Hence, 
if  we  compare,  for  instance,  what  we  have  here  with 
the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  we  shall  find 
striking  differences.  There  are  some  gifts  found 
here,  not  there ;  and  some  found  there  which  are 
not  here.  Now,  this  is  not  a  thing  of  chance,  nor  a 
matter  in  which  the  apostle  used  merely  his  own 
judgment,  and  decided  things  after  his  own  mind. 
Nobody  denies  that  his  heart  and  mind  were  deeply 
exercised.  Grod  forbid!  But  we  may  bless  Grod 
that  there  was  an  infinitely  wise  mind  directing  all 
things,  and  that  there  was  a  judgment  which  knew 
the  end  from  the  beginning.  We  shall  find,  accord- 
ingly, that  the  apostle  mentions  these  gifts  according 
to  that  divine  intelligence.  Indeed,  the  reason  of  it, 
to  some  extent,  may  appear  as  we  proceed. 

First  of   all,  the  gifts    (<%ara)    here   enumerated 


12  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

are  in  view  of  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  which  is 
the  great  primary  object,  branching  out  into  the 
work  of  the  ministry,  and  the  edifying  the  body  of 
Christ,  as  connected  with  it.  Now,  there,  at  once, 
may  be  discerned  the  key,  or  divine  reason  for  pre- 
senting here  certain  gifts  and  not  others.  Here  we 
have  nothing,  for  instance,  abont  speaking  in  a  tongue ; 
neither  have  we  any  mention  of  miracles.  Why 
so  ?  What  have  they  to  do  with  the  perfecting  the 
saints  ?  The  reason  seems  to  me  clear  and  adequate. 
Those  gifts  for  signs  were  of  all  consequence  in  their 
place ;  but  how  could  a  tongue  or  a  miracle  perfect  a 
saint  ?  We  see,  in  the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corin- 
thians, that,  instead  of  perfecting,  they  on  the  con- 
trary became  a  very  great  snare  for  the  saints.  No 
doubt  the  Corinthians  were  carnal,  and  therefore  they 
were  like  children  amused  with  a  new  toy — with  that 
which  was,  indeed,  an  engine  of  power.  And  we 
know  how  great  a  danger  this  is,  just  in  proportion 
to  our  unspirituality.  We  have  the  very  solemn 
lesson  that  even  the  greatest  powers  and  most 
astounding  manifestations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
man  cannot  give  spirituality,  and  do  not  minister 
to  the  edification  of  the  saints  necessarily  in  any 
way;  but,  if  there  be  a  carnal  mind,  they  become  a 
positive  means  of  the  soul  exalting,  itself,  turning 
away  from  the  Lord,  losing  its  balance,  and  bringing 
discredit  upon  that  which  bears  the  name  of  Christ 
on  the  earth.  In  this  Epistle,  however,  Grod  is  occu- 
pied with  His  counsels  of  grace  in  Christ  for  the 
Church,  beginning  primarily  with  the  saints  as  such. 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  13 

He  always  takes  up  the  question  of  individuals  before 
He  deals  with  the  Church.  And  how  blessed  and 
wise  is  this !  He  does  not  begin  with  the  body  of 
Christ,  and  then  end  with  the  perfection  of  the  saints. 
This  would  be,  very  likely,  our  thought,  but  it  is 
very  far  from  His.  He  first  puts  forward  the  per- 
fecting of  the  saints,  and  then  shows  us  the  work  of 
the  ministry,  and  the  edifying  the  body  of  Christ. 
Thus,  the  true  explanation  of  the  passage  is,  that  it 
is  the  development  of  Christ's  love  to  the  Church. 
His  eye  is  fixed  upon  the  blessing  of  souls.  It  is 
Christ  not  only  gathering  in,  but  building  up — causing 
them  to  grow  up  to  Him  in  all  things.  Accordingly, 
He  gives  the  gifts  which  are  of  grace  suited  to  this 
end.  "  He  gave  some  apostles  and  some  prophets." 
These  are  the  two  gifts  which  the  second  chapter 
of  this  epistle  shows  to  be  at  the  foundation,  we  may 
say,  of  this  new  building,  the  Church  of  Grod.  Thus, 
in  the  20th  verse,  we  read,  "  They  were  built  upon 
the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus 
Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  corner  stone."  Evan- 
gelists, evidently,  are  not  the  foundation;  neither 
are  pastors  and  teachers;  but  prophets,  as  well  as 
apostles,  are.  And  we  can  easily  understand  this. 
We  can  see  that,  as  God  was  introducing  into  the 
world  a  wholly  new  system  when  He  set  His  Son 
at  His  own  right  hand — a  new  work  of  Grod  in  the 
Church,  so  there  was  a  new  word  which  had  to 
accompany  this  work,  whereby  He  would  act  upon 
the  saints  so  as  to  give  them  to  grow  up  to  the 
perfecting  of  His  will  and   the  glory  of  His  Son 


14  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

in  this  unprecedented  thing,  the  Church  of  God. 
Accordingly,  then,  we  have  the  foundation  laid,  and 
not  Christ  alone.  Of  course  He  is,  in  the  greatest 
and  highest  sense,  the  foundation — "  Upon  this  rock 
I  will  build  the  Church :"  the  confession  of  His  own 
name,  His  own  glory  as  the  Son  of  the  living  God, 
is  this  unquestionably.  But  still,  as  the  means  not 
only  of  revealing  the  mind  of  God  touching  the 
Church,  but  also  particularly  of  -laying  down  with 
authority  the  landmarks  of  His  husbandry  in  the 
earth — the  Church  of  God,  the  apostles  and  prophets 
were  thus  used.  The  former  were  more  particularly 
distinguished  by  an  authority  in  action,  the  prophets 
by  giving  out,  according  to  God,  His  mind  and  will 
about  this  great  mystery. 

It  is  hardly  worth  while  to  disprove  the  notion  that 
the  prophets  here  refer  to  the  Old  Testament.  The 
phrase  "  apostles  and  prophets  "  is  strictly  limited  to 
those  that  followed  Christ.  Had  there  been  the 
inverse  order — -prophets  and  apostles,  there  might 
have  been  some  shadow  of  reason  for  this  idea ;  but 
the  Spirit  of  God,  in  His  wisdom,  has  taken  care  to 
exclude  the  thought.  The  work  spoken  of  is  alto- 
gether new.  The  apostles  and  prophets  seem  to  be 
expressly  introduced  in  this  order.  But  in  the  third 
chapter  a  decisive  reason  is  furnished  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  It  is  written  in  the  5th  verse  that  the 
mystery  of  Christ,  "  which  in  other  ages  was  not 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of  men,  is  noiv  revealed 
unto  His  holy  apostles  and  prophets  by  the  Spirit ; " 
so  that  we  have  there,  with  the  most  perfect  clearness, 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  15 

not  only  the  same  order  still  preserved,  but  the  posi- 
tive expression  "  now  revealed."  The  prophets  of  the 
Old  Testament,  therefore,  are  necessarily  excluded. 
These  prophets  are  of  the  New  Testament  as  well  as 
the  apostles. 

But  more  than  this,  let  me  make  the  remark, 
before  going  farther,  that  this  character  of  ministry 
was  altogether  new.  When  our  Lord  was  upon 
earth,  no  doubt  there  was  more  or  less  preparative 
action  for  it.  He  sent  out,  first,  twelve  apostles ; 
then  He  sent  out  seventy,  to  carry  a  final  message 
to  His  people.  All  this  was  a  thing  never  found  in 
any  age  previously.  It  was  wholly  unprecedented 
upon  the  earth — an  activity  of  love  that  went  out 
with  a  blessing  to  others.  God  Himself  had  not 
done  it ;  for  the  solemn  word  by  a  prophet,  and  the 
secret  action  of  His  grace  before,  are  too  distinct  to 
be  confounded  with  it.  Who  had  ever  seen  or  heard 
such  a  thing  as  a  Man  on  earth  gathering  men  to 
Himself  first,  and  sending  out  from  Himself  after- 
wards a  message  of  love,  the  glad  tidings,  not  yet,  of 
course,  in  the  fulness  which  was  afterwards  imparted 
when  the  great  work  of  redemption  was  done,  but  at 
any  rate  the  blessed  news  of  the  King  on  God's  part 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  the  earth  ?  This  is  what 
the  Lord  did  on  earth :  He  sent  out  disciples  or 
apostles  with  the  message  of  the  kingdom.  And  no 
doubt  it  was  in  man's  eyes  strange,  and  to  faith  a 
blessed  thing,  suitable  only  to  Him  who  had  divine 
grace  as  well  as  divine  authority,  worthy  of,  and 
reserved  for,  the  Lord  Jesus  here  below.     But  it  is 


16  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

remarkable  that,  in  Eph.  iv.,  all  the  earthly  part  of 
our  Lord's  action  is  left  completely  out,  and  the  gifts 
here  spoken  of  are,  beyond  controversy,  dated  from, 
and  shown  to  hinge  on,  the  ascension  of  the  Lord. 

Do  I  mean  to  deny  that  the  apostles  were  in- 
cluded— the  twelve,  or,  strictly  speaking,  the  eleven 
along  with  the  one  supplied  to  fill  up  the  place  of  him 
that  was  cut  off  ?  In  no  wise ;  but  nevertheless 
their  earthly  call  and  mission  are  quite  passed  by. 
We  can  all  understand  that  the  Lord  as  Messiah 
might  prepare  a  mission  suited  to  Israel,  as  I  have 
no  doubt  that  "  the  twelve  "  had  this  distinctly  as  its 
reference ;  for  the  twelve  apostles  naturally  answer 
to  the  twelve  tribes.  The  sitting  on  twelve  thrones, 
spoken  of  in  connexion  with  them  also  in  Matt,  xx., 
clearly  confirms  the  thought.  What  hinders  these 
same  men  afterwards  from  becoming  the  vessels  of  a 
heavenly  gift  ?  Thus  we  can  recognize  in  the  earlier 
apostles  a  sort  of  double  relationship.  There  was 
a  link  with  Israel,  which  was  conferred  by  the  Lord 
when  He  was  upon  earth  in  the  midst  of  His  people, 
dealing  with  them ;  but  a  new  place  became  theirs 
when  the  Lord  ascended  on  high. 

But,  besides,  the  Lord  took  care  to  break  in  upon 
this  Israelitish  form  and  order,  and  the  apostleship 
of  St.  Paul  becomes  an  event  of  cardinal  importance 
in  the  development  of  the  ways  of  God,  because 
therein  all  thought  of  Jerusalem,  all  reference  to  the 
tribes  of  Israel,  is  dropped,  and  that  takes  its  place, 
which  is  clearly  extraordinary  in  all  its  circum- 
stances, and  heavenly  in  source  and  character.    More 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  17 

particularly  this  was  plain,  that  the  Lord  made 
manifest  what  was  really  true  with  regard  to  the 
others,  that  they  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  received 
that  gift  of  apostleship  which  was  suited  to  the 
heavenly  work  which  they  were  afterwards  to  have, 
in  addition  to  their  previous  earthly  call  and  work. 
Apart  from  and  towering  over  the  twelve,  stood  the 
apostle  Paul,  bringing  out  into  the  utmost  promi- 
nence the  principle  that  his  apostolic  mission  was  a 
heavenly  thing,  entirely  and  exclusively  such  as  far 
as  he  was  concerned.  Therefore  he  was  the  fitted 
person  to  say,  as  it  was  of  course  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
that  he  did  say,  "  Though  we  have  known  Christ 
after  the  flesh,  yet  now  henceforth  know  we  Him  no 
more."  The  glory  of  the  Messiah  on  the  earth  fades 
away  and  is  eclipsed  by  a  deeper  and  brighter  glory, 
the  heavenly  glory  of  Him  who  is  now  at  the 
right  hand  of  God.  It  is  the  same  Christ,  the  same 
blessed  One,  without  doubt,  but  it  is  not  the  same 
glory ;  and  more  than  this,  it  is  a  better  and  more 
enduring  glory.  It  is  the  glory  that  is  suited  to 
the  new  work  of  God  in  His  Church,  because  it  is 
the  glory  of  its  Head.  "  Now  is  the  Son  of  man 
glorified,  and  God  is  glorified  in  Him.  If  God  be 
glorified  in  Him,  God  shall  also  glorify  Him  in 
Himself,  and  shall  straightway  glorify  Him." 

Thus,  the  Church  being  a  heavenly  body,  and  Christ 
Himself,  its  Head,  being  in  the  actual  and  fullest 
sense  a  heavenly  Person,  ministry  takes  a  heavenly 
shape :  and  these  gifts  which  flow  from  Him  are  its 
first  expression.     Hence,  then,  we  have  the  clear  inti- 


18  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

mation  from  the  Scripture  before  us  that  these  gifts 
from  Christ  on  high  are  heavenly  in  their  character 
and  source. 

Another  thing  also  may  be  noticed  by  the  way. 
If  we  take  the  bestowal  of  these  gifts  as  dating  from 
the  ascension  of  Christ,  where  is  there  room  left  for 
the  hand  of  man  ?  Where  can  you  insert  that  pre- 
liminary ceremonial  on  which  tradition  lays  so  much 
stress  ?  Who  ordained  the  apostles  for  their  heavenly 
work  ?  Who  laid  hands  upon  them,  as  authori- 
tatively installing  them  in  that  high  office  ?  You 
will  say  that,  unquestionably,  the  Lord  called  them 
when  He  was  here  "  in  the  days  of  His  flesh."  He 
did  call  them  for  their  mission  to  Israel ;  and  when 
risen,  but  still  on  earth,  He  charged  them  to  disciple 
the  nations  (Matt,  x.,  xxviii.).  Btft  what  hands  of 
man  did  He  employ  in  setting  them  apart  to  their 
proper  heavenly  work?  Will  any  believer  breathe 
the  thought  that  this  was  an  imperfection  in  their 
case  ?  Did  the  new  work  of  God,  based  on  a  dead 
and  risen  and  ascended  Saviour,  and  carried  on  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven,  want  any- 
thing for  its  due  commencement?  If  there  is  no 
appearance,  then,  of  that  rite  of  laying  on  of  hands, 
which  some  count  not  merely  desirable,  but  essential 
for  all  that  minister,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest 
grade,  how  comes  this  strange  omission  ?  Who  will 
venture  to  impeach  the  regimen  of  Christ  ?  Will 
any  zealots  for  "  holy  orders,"  as  men  speak,  affirm 
or  insinuate  that  the  Lord  did  not  know  better  than 
they   what    became   His   own    glory  in   His   chief 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  19 

ministers  ?  Let  them  beware  of  their  theories  and 
their  practice,  if  either  lead  them  to  become  "judges 
of  evil  thoughts." 

In  truth,  the  Lord  took  care,  now  that  it  was  a 
question  of  a  new  and  heavenly  testimony,  not  abso- 
lutely to  abolish  that  ancient  sign  of  blessing,  but  to 
break  in  upon,  and  leave  no  excuse  for,  the  earthly 
order  so  easily  abused  by  man.  Hence,  as  if  for  the 
purpose  of  manifesting  yet  more  distinctly  the  vast 
change  which  was  come,  in  the  case  of  him  who 
styles  himself  emphatically  "  minister  of  the  Church" 
(Col.  i.),  there  is  no  derivation  from  the  twelve 
apostles  that  were  before  him.  On  the  contrary, 
from  His  own  place  in  heavenly  glory,  the  Lord 
calls  one  who  was  not  going  up  to  Jerusalem,  but 
rather  from  it ;  one  who  had  no  connexion  with  the 
apostles — nay,  so  much  their  enemy,  that  most  stood 
in  doubt  of  him,  after  he  was  arrested  by  sovereign 
grace  in  the  midst  of  his  determined,  systematic 
hatred  of  Christianity,  and  persecution  of  all  who 
bore  the  name  of  Jesus.  What  a  proof  that  not 
only  the  conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  of  the 
pure  and  rich  mercy  of  God,  but  that  his  apostolate 
sprang  from  the  same  source,  and  bore  the  same 
stamp,  as  the  salvation  which  reached  him  !  Thence- 
forward he  becomes  the  characteristic  symbol,  as  he 
was  the  most  distinct  and  abundant  testimony,  of 
the  grace  that  is  now  not  saving  only,  but  choosing 
vessels  and  fitting  them  as  instruments  for  the  active 
blessing  of  mankind,  and  especially  of  the  Church  of 
God.  It  was  the  Lord  Jesus,  at  the  right  hand  of 
b  2 


20  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

God,  calling  and  sending  an  apostle  to  the  Church,  a 
chosen  vessel  unto  Himself,  to  bear  His  name  before 
the  Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel; 
but  first  taken  out  from  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  and 
then  sent  to  them  (Acts  xxvi.  17). 

The  same  principle  embraced  the  other  apostles, 
no  doubt;  because  they,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
were  made  gifts  of  grace,  in  the  highest  degree,  to 
the  Church,  from  the  now  ascended  Lord,  its  Head. 
But  there  is  fresh  and  brighter  light  in  the  case  of 
Paul,  who  was  not  more  truly  "  as  one  born  out  of 
due  time,"  compared  with  all  those  that  went  before, 
than  he  furnishes,  in  the  strongest  colours,  the  un- 
mistakeable  intimation  of  the  mind  and  will  of  the 
Lord 'as  to  the  future. 

But,  then,  it  will  be  objected  that,  after  all,  there 
was  a  miracle  in  Paul's  conversion  and  call,  which 
takes  the  case  out  of  just  application  to  ordinary 
ministry.  A  miracle  most  striking  and  significant 
there  was,  when  the  Lord  in  glory  revealed  Himself 
as  the  Jesus  he  was  persecuting  in  the  members  of 
His  body — notwithstanding  it  rested  mainly  on  the 
apostle's  testimony;  and  there  were  not  wanting, 
even  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  among  his  own 
converts,  it  would  seem,  those  who  questioned  the 
apostleship  of  Paul.  His  call  far  from  Jerusalem ; 
his  isolation  from  the  other  apostles ;  the  very  ful- 
ness of  grace  manifested  toward  him ;  the  emphatic 
heavenly  stamp  imprinted  on  his  conversion  and 
testimony,  all  tended  to  make  the  case  peculiar,  and 
irregular,  and  unaccountable,  wherever  the  old  earthly 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  21 

order  so  prevailed  as  to  cast  suspicion  on  any  display 
of  the  Lord's  ways  beyond  or  different  from  the  past. 
Personally  a  stranger  to  the  Lord  during  His  mani- 
festation here  below,  there  was  no  question  of  his 
candidateship,  like  a  Joseph  or  a  Matthias,  on  the 
ground  of  his  having  companied  with  the  twelve 
from  the  baptism  of  John  till  the  ascension.  There 
was  no  decision  by  lot  in  his  instance,  nor  any  formal 
numbering  with  the  twelve.  He  was  a  witness  of 
Christ's  resurrection  no  less  than  the  rest,  yet  it  was 
from  no  sight  of  Him  after  His  passion  upon  earth. 
He  had  seen  the  Lord,  but  it  was  in  heaven.  His 
was  the  Gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  no  less  than  of 
God's  grace.  Thus  carefully  was  the  great  apostle 
made  the  witness  of  non-succession,  and  of  a  ministry 
direct  from  the  Lord,  independently  of  man !  No 
doubt  the  highest  expression  of  that  ministry  was  in 
Paul,  who  thenceforward  becomes  the  most  illustrious 
exemplar  of  its  source  and  character. 

Allow  me,  also,  to  put  another  question.  Who 
ordained  the  prophets  of  the  New  Testament  ?  when, 
and  how,  and  by  whom  were  they  appointed  ?  who 
ever  heard  of  hands  being  laid  upon  their  heads  ? 
Search  the  New  Testament  through,  if  you  wish  the 
best  proof  that  the  notion  is  unfounded.  Let  me 
come  to  the  point  at  once,  and  affirm  further,  that 
neither  prophets  nor  any  other  of  these  classes  were 
installed  of  man  after  that  fashion.  Here  we  have 
apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  pastors,  and  teachers ; 
can  you  show  me  a  single  instance  among  these 
classes  where  the  individual  was  called  by  human 


22  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

authority  ?  Is  it  denied,  then,  that  there  was  such 
a  form  of  blessing  as  the  laying  on  of  hands  in  the 
New  Testament?  For  my  part,  I  accept  the  fact, 
not  only  in  its  apostolic  application  to  the  sick  and 
to  those  who  had  not  yet  received  the  Spirit,  but  also 
in  its  connexion  with  our  subject.  The  question  is, 
its  scriptural  use.  Let  me  ask,  When  were  hands 
ever  laid  on  any  save  to  confer  a  gift  by  the  power 
of  the  Spirit,  or  to  commend  those  already  gifted  to 
Grod's  grace  in  a  special  work,  or  formally  to  assign 
men  to  the  charge  of  secular  work  ?  It  is  clear,  for 
example,  that  Philip,  along  with  his  six  companions, 
had  hands  laid  upon  him ;  but  was  it  for  his  work  as 
preaching  the  Grospel  ?  On  the  contrary,  he  was  one 
of  the  seven  men  chosen  "  to  serve  the  tables,' '  in 
order  that  the  apostles  might  not  be  distracted  from 
prayer  and  the  ministry  of  the  word.  "  The  seven  " 
thereon  were  ordained  to  be  employed  in  the  external 
service  of  the  Church.  Apart  from  this,  the  Lord  was 
pleased  to  send  him  forth  in  the  proclamation  of  the 
word  here  and  there ;  as  an  evangelist  naturally 
would  be  a  wanderer,  not  according  to  the  meaning 
of  the  word  so  much  as  the  exigencies  of  the  work. 

Hence,  when  the  persecution  about  Stephen  broke 
out  and  scattered  those  in  Jerusalem,  Philip  had  a  new 
task  which  had  nothing  to  do  with  his  local  duties  as 
one  of  the  seven.  His  diaconal  service  would  station 
him  at  Jerusalem,  to  take  care  of  the  poor,  for  this 
was  the  purpose  for  which  he  was  ordained ;  whereas, 
his  preaching  Christ  flowed  from  a  gift  of  that  cha- 
racter, not  from  ordination.     In  fact,  as  far  as  the 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  23 

New  Testament  speaks  —  and  it  speaks  fully  and 
precisely — no  one  teas  ever  ordained  by  man  to  preach 
the  Gospel.  Hands  were  laid  by  the  apostles  upon 
Philip,  like  the  rest,  after  he  was  chosen  by  the 
multitude,  and  thus  he  was  appointed  to  take  charge 
of  the  tables;  for  the  Scripture,  perhaps  because  of 
a  certain  peculiar  state  of  things  at  Jerusalem,  does 
not  positively  give  the  title  of  "  deacon "  in  this 
case,  though  one  does  not  deny  its  general  justice, 
for  there  was  something  akin  in  their  duties. 

It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  whether  we  look 
at  an  apostle,  or  a  prophet,  or  an  evangelist,  or  a 
pastor  and  teacher,  or  either  of  these  last,  there 
was  no  such  ministry  instituted  for  the  Church, 
which  itself  existed  not,  until  after  our  Lord's  ascen- 
sion ;  and  in  none  of  these  cases  was  there  the  laying 
on  of  hands  as  the  initiatory  sign  or  inauguration  of 
these  ministers.  All  admit  the  imposition  of  hands 
in  certain  cases,  ordinary  or  exceptional.  The  exagge- 
ration of  clericalism  should  not  hinder  the  Christian 
from  being  perfectly  fair  in  dealing  with  this  and 
every  other  question.  There  is  nothing  that  will 
dispose  of  prevalent  traditions  so  readily  and  con- 
clusively as  searching  and  submitting  to  Scripture. 
There  is  full  and  clear  instruction  there,  the  effect  of 
which  is  to  confute  all  that  tends  to  exalt  man  and 
lower  Christ,  whatever  support  men  may  try  to 
extract  from  the  word  of  Grod  for  selfish  ends.  It  is 
outside  the  light  of  inspiration  that  all  these  errors 
live ;  once  let  that  in,  and  it  will  soon  be  seen  that 
the  Holy  Grhost  is   not  providing  for  the  worldly 


24  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

honour  of  man  on  earth,  but  for  glorifying  Christ  in 
heaven. 

What,  then,  is  the  genuine  meaning  and  scope  of 
Acts  xiii.  ?  It  has  long  been  the  well-known  stock 
passage  which  theological  controversialists  are  wont 
to  cite  for  ordination  in  general.  Some  insist  on  it  as 
warranting  their  "three  orders"  of  bishops,  priests, 
and  deacons ;  others  allege  it  as  decisive  for  parity 
of  ministers,  whether  Presbyterian  or  Congregational. 
The  Episcopalian  points  with  triumph  to  Barnabas 
and  Paul  in  the  first  rank ;  to  Simeon,  Lucius,  and 
Manaen  in  the  second;  and  to  Mark  in  the  third 
(as,  after  the  dispute  with  Barnabas,  to  Paul,  Silas, 
and  Timothy  respectively).* 

*  So  Archbishop  Potter,  in  the  well-known  text-book,  "  A  Dis- 
course on  Church  Government  (pp.  73,  74),"  if  one  may,  without  un- 
kindness,  specify  a  single  defaulter  out  of  the  crowd.  Yet  the  Arch- 
bishop evidently  gave  up  the  passage  as  bearing  on  ordination.  "  It 
cannot  be  proved  that  Paul  and  Barnaba>  were  ordained  at  this  time  to 
be  ministers.  If  they  were  ordained  to  any  uffice  or  ministry,  it  must 
be  that  of  apostles,  not  only  because  they  are  presently  after  this 
called  apostles,  before  they  received  any  farther  ordination,  but  also 
because  they  were  prophets  before  that  time,  as  shown  in  onu  of  the 
preceding  chapters  [chap.  iii.J.  But  this  is  very  unlikely,  because 
this  rite  of  imposing  hands,  whereby  other  ministers  were  ordained 
[an  assumption  of  the  archbishop's  without  and  against  Scripture], 
was  never  used  in  making  apostles  It  was  a  distinguishing  part  of 
their  character  that  they  were  immediately  called  and  ordained  by 
Christ  Himself,  who  gave  them  [nay,  but  '  the  disciples  '  and  not 
apostles  only,  John  xx.]  the  Holy  Ghost  by  breathing  on  them  ;  but 
neither  He  nor  any  other  is  ever  said  to  lay  hands  on  them.  When 
a  place  became  vacant  in  the  apostolic  college  by  the  apostacy  of  Judas, 
the  apostles,  with  the  rest  of  the  disciples,  chose  two  candidates,  but 
left  to  God  to  appoint  whether  of  them  He  pleased,  to  take  part  of  the 
ministry  and  apostleship,  from  which  Judas  fell.    Neither  was  St.  Paul 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  25 

Only  examine  the  passage,  and  the  more  closely 
you  do  so,  the  better  will  you  be  enabled  to  judge 

inferior  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles  in  this  mark  of  honour ;  for  he  often 
asserts  himself  to  be  an  apostle  not  of  men,  nor  by  mau,  but  imme- 
diately, and  without  the  intervention  of  men,  to  have  been  appjinted 
by  Jesus  Christ,  in  opposition  to  those  who  denied  him  to  be  an 
apostle,  as  was  shown  in  one  of  the  former  chapters.  But  then  it  will 
be  asked  for  what  end  Paul  and  Barnabas  received  imposition  of  hands  ? 
To  which  it  may  be  answered,  that  this  rite  was  commonly  used,  both 
by  the  Jews  and  primitive  Christians,  in  benedictions.  Jacob  put 
his  hands  on  the  heads  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  when  he  blessed 
them ;  and,  to  mention  only  one  instance  more,  little  children  were 
brought  to  Christ,  that  He  should  put  His  hands  on  them  and  bless 
them.  Accordingly,  it  is  probable  this  imposition  of  hands  on  Paul 
and  Barnabas  was  a  solemn  benediction  on  their  ministry  of  preaching 
the  Gospel  in  a  particular  circuit  to  which  they  were  sent  by  the 
Holy  Spirit's  direction.  Hence  it  is  called,  in  the  next  chapter,  a 
recommendation  to  the  grace  of  God  for  the  work  of  ministering  the 
Gospel  to  certain  cities,  which  they  are  there  said  to  have  fulfilled. 
So  that  this  rite  was  not  their  ordination  to  the  apostolic  office,  because 
the  end  for  which  it  was  given  is  here  said  to  be  fulfilled,  whereas 
their  apostolic  office  lasted  as  long  as  their  lives.  And  therefore,  Paul 
and  Barnabas  seem  only  now  to  have  had  a  particular  mission  to 
preach  the  Gospel  in  a  certain  limited  district,  in  the  same  manner  as 
Peter  and  John  were  sent  by  the  college  of  apostles  to  Samaria,  to 
confirm  the  new  converts  and  settle  the  Church  there." — Crosthivaite' s 
(or  the  Seventh)  Edition,  pp.  201,  202. 

This  is  substantially  true  d  s  nd,  far  preferable  to  Calvin's 
remarks  (Inst.  IV.,  iii.  14)  :  "  Why  this  separation  and  laying  on  of 
hands,  after  the  Holy  Spirit  had  attested  their  election,  unless  that 
ecclesiastical  discipline  might  be  preserved  in  appointing  ministers  by 
men  ?  God  could  not  give  a  more  illustrious  proof  of  His  approbation 
of  this  order,  than  by  causing  Paul  to  be  set  apart  by  the  Church, 
after  He  had  previously  declared  that  He  had  appointed  him  to  be 
the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  The  same  thing  we  may  see  in  the 
election  [?]  of  Matthias.  As  the  apostolic  office  was  of  such  impor- 
tance that  they  did  not  venture  to  appoint  any  one  to  it  of  their  own 
judgment,  they  bring  forward  two,  on  one  of  whom  the  lot  might  fall, 


26  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

how  little  it  countenances,  how  strongly  it  condemns, 
every  scheme  of  ordination  which  men  attempt  to 
base  npon  it. 

In  the  Church  that  was  at  Antioch  there  were,  it 
is  said,  "  certain  prophets  and  teachers,  as  Barnabas, 
and  Simeon  that  was  called  Niger,  and  Lucius  of 
Cyrene,  and  Manaen,  who  had  been  brought  up  with 
Herod  the  tetrarch  and  Saul."  That  is,  we  have 
these  five  prophets  and  teachers,  while  engaged  in 
serving  the  Lord  with  fasting,  made  the  object  of 
an  important  communication  from  the  Holy  Ghost 
respecting  two  of  their  number.  "  Separate  me  Bar- 
nabas and  Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have  called 
them."  Barnabas  had  been  for  years  actively  engaged 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord ;  and  so  had  been  Saul  of 
Tarsus  ever  since  his  conversion.  Not  only  was  he 
set  apart  in  the  providence  of  God  before  his  birth, 
as  he  speaks  of  it  in  Chap.  I.  of  Galatians,  but  he 
was  called  by  the  grace  of  God  from  the  time  when 
he  was  struck  down  on  the  way  to  Damascus.  But 
the  Spirit  of  Grod  now  separates  him  to  a  special 
mission.  It  is  clear  that  this  is  not  an  announce- 
ment of  the  ministerial  call  of  either  Barnabas  or 
Saul :  Scripture  is  arrayed  against  Scripture  by  all 
who  say  so.     The  previous  part  of  the  Acts  proves 

that  thus  the  election  might  have  a  sure  testimony  from  heaven,  and 
at  the  same  time  the  policy  of  the  Church  might  not  be  disregarded." 
The  truth  is,  as  to  the  case  of  Matthias,  it  was  before  the  mission  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  there  was  no  question  of  the  Church's  policy  or 
election  either;  but  by  the  lot  the  choice  between  the  two  was  cast, 
in  the  Jewish  form  (Prov.  xvi.  33),  into  the  sole  disposal  of  the 
Lord. 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  27 

that  Barnabas  was  long  blessed  in  the  ministry  of 
the  word  within  and  without,  and  that  Saul  especially 
was  bold  and  mighty  in  the  work.  The  latter,  in- 
deed, from  the  first,  brought  out  the  Sonship  of 
Christ  in  a  way  which  we  have  no  reason  to  believe 
any  other  had  done  up  to  that  time,  as  we  learn 
from  that  very  chapter  which  gives  us  his  conversion. 
The  notion,  therefore,  that  ordination  was  the  ques- 
tion in  Acts  xiii.  is  most  manifestly  false. 

But  how  comes  it  that  the  theologians  fail  to 
notice  that  their  determination  to  see  ordination 
here  destroys  their  respective  systems,  as  well  as 
contradicts  other  Scriptures  ?  Who  was  it  ordained 
Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  to  what  ?  They  are  called 
apostles  in  the  very  next  chapter  (xiv.  4)  ;  and 
hence,  evidently,  the  notion  of  ordaining  Paul  and 
Barnabas  is  quite  unfounded,  unless  those  whom 
Grod  has  set  second  and  third  in  the  Church  can 
ordain  the  first  (1  Cor.  xii.  28).  Again,  the  truth 
is,  there  is  not  the  smallest  reason  to  call  Mark  a 
deacon  at  that  time.  He  accompanied  them  as  their 
"  minister,"  probably  to  get  lodgings,  to  invite 
people  to  come  and  hear  the  word,  and  in  general 
to  serve  them  on  their  missionary  tour ;  but,  as  for 
his  being  their  chaplain,  it  is  mere  illusion.  John 
Mark  preaching  to  Paul  and  Barnabas  !  The  truth 
is,  that  he  then  turned  out  an  indifferent  help  in  the 
work,  because  he  soon  tired  and  went  home  to  his 
friends.     However,  this  only  by  the  way. 

But  it  is  transparent,  that  those  who  turn  the 
account  into  the  ordination  of  Paul  and  Barnabas, 


28  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

involve  the  consequence  that  it  is  actually  the  inferior 
class  conferring  the  highest  ministerial  rank  upon 
them  !  If  they  were  not  apostles  before,  they  have 
nothing  to  allege  in  support  of  the  dignity  but  the 
sandy  foundation  that  the  act  of  laying  on  of  hands 
upon  them  at  Antioch  conferred  the  apostolate  !  In 
this  case  it  was  an  equal,  if  not  a  lower  grade,  giving 
a  higher  rank  to  those  above  themselves.  Thus,  it 
is  evident  that  the  notion  is  altogether  unfounded. 

Is  it  insinuated,  then,  that  there  was  no  meaning 
or  value  in  this  laying  on  of  hands  ?  That  would 
be,  indeed,  to  treat  the  word  of  (rod  unwarrantably. 
It  was  a  solemn  and  precious  act  of  fellowship  with 
these  honoured  servants  of  Christ.  It  was  an  act 
not  only  valid  then,  but  valid  now.  But  there  was 
no  pretence  of  conferring  anything  whatever.  The 
real  drift  of  the  transaction  is  expressed  in  chap, 
xiv.  26.  It  is  said,  that  they  "sailed  to  Antioch, 
from  whence  they  had  been  recommended  to  the 
grace  of  God  for  the  work  which  they  fulfilled." 
Such  was  the  aim  of  the  laying  on  of  hands  by  their 
companions  in  labour  at  Antioch ;  for  it  may  not 
have  been  the  brethren  generally,  but  only  those 
engaged  in  the  work,  and  I  wish  to  make  every  con- 
cession that  is  fair  to  those  who  desire  to  draw  the 
utmost  from  the  passage.  But  the  meaning  of  the 
act  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  sign  of  blessing, 
or  of  fellowship  with  those  going  forth  on  their  new 
missionary  errand.  It  was  probably  repeated  :  see 
Acts  xv.  40. 

The  laying  on  of  hands  was  of  the  most  ancient 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  29 


y 


date  in  the  Old  Testament.  Thus,  Grenesis  gives  it 
in  the  case  of  a  father  or  grandfather  laying  his 
hands  on  the  children ;  and  so,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, we  have  the  frequent  use  of  it  where  there 
was  no  pretence  of  conferring  any  ministerial  cha- 
racter. It  was  a  sign  of  recommendation  to  Grod 
by  one  who  was  conscious  of  being  so  near  to  God 
that  he  could  count  upon  His  blessing.  The  Lord 
takes  up  little  children,  lays  His  hands  upon  them, 
and  blesses  them ;  and  so  with  the  sick,  too,  when 
healing  some.  It  was  not  at  all  a  question  %of  eccle- 
siastical order  in  these  instances.  No  doubt  there 
were  cases  where  hands  were  laid  on  for  the  pur- 
pose of  inaugurating  an  office. 

It  is  often  thought  that  the  same  rite  was  used 
in  instituting  elders,  as  in  Acts  xiv.  22,  23,  where 
the  apostles  Barnabas  and  Paul  were  "confirming 
the  souls  of  the  disciples,  and  exhorting  them  to 
continue  in  the  faith,  and  that  we  must,  through 
much  tribulation,  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Groda 
And  when  they  had  ordained  them  elders  in  every 
Church,  and  had  prayed  with  fasting,  they  com- 
mended them  to  the  Lord,  on  whom  they  believed." 
But  this  is  an  assumption.  It  is  not  exactly  said 
here,  or  anywhere  else,  that  hands  were  laid  upon 
the  presbyters.  This  silence,  if  the  fact  were  so,  is 
remarkable.  It  may  have  been  probably  the  case ; 
but  Scripture  takes  care  never  to  say  it.  We  have 
the  statement  that  hands  were  laid  upon  deacons. 
We  know  that  an  elder  was  a  much  more  important 
personage  in  the  Church  than   a  deacon.      People 


30  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

may  reason  and  speculate  ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that 
the  Spirit  of  Grod,  seeing  the  superstition  that  was 
attached  to  the  form  of  laying  on  of  hands,  took  care 
never  to  connect  the  two  things  together  in  a  positive 
manner.  The  passage  which  some  conceive  does  so, 
is  in  the  first  Epistle  to  Timothy  (v.  22),  where  Paul 
tells  him  to  "  lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man."  But 
the  object  of  this  is  too  vague  for  a  sure  conclusion, 
the  connexion  being  by  no  means  certain.  There  is 
no  allusion  to  elders  expressly  after  verses  17 — 19. 
Thus  iiL  the  21st  verse  we  read,  "  I  charge  thee 
before  Grod  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  elect 
angels,  that  thou  observe  these  things,  without  pre- 
ferring one  before  another,  doing  nothing  by  par- 
tiality." How  can  one  suppose  elders  in  particular 
referred  to  there  ?  I  see  a  general  description  of  his 
work  in  verses  20 — 21,  after  which  comes  the  exhor- 
tation on  which  so  much  has  been  built — "  Lay 
hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  neither  be  partaker  of 
other  men's  sins."  It  is  possible  that  there  may  be 
included  in  this  an  allusion  to  the  danger  of  haste 
and  carelessness  in  accrediting  an  elder,  but  the 
language  is  so  comprehensive  as  to  take  in,  it  seems 
to  me,  every  case  which  might  call  for  the  imposition 
of  hands. 

But  supposing  that  it  did  certainly  refer  to  elders 
and  that  hands  were  laid  on  these  functionaries  as 
well  as  on  deacons,  the  important  and  undeniable 
fact  in  Scripture  is,  that  elders  were  never  ordained 
except  by  persons  duly  authorized,  who  had  a  real 
commission  from  the  Lord  for  the  purpose.      Now 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  31 

many  may  imagine  that  this  is  a  concession  fatal  to 
the  free  recognition  and  exercise  of  gifts.  They  may 
think  it  yet  more  strange  to  find  that  those  who 
contend  for  the  largeness  of  the  action  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  lay  the  utmost  stress  upon  a  divine  commission 
and  a  definite  authority.  But  be  assured  that  the  two 
things  go  together,  where  they  are  held  according  to 
God.  None  will  be  found  to  be  more  tenacious  of 
godly  order  than  the  very  persons  who  stand  most 
for  the  rights  of  the  Holy  Grhost  in  the  Church. 
My  assertion  is,  that  in  this  very  matter  of  ordination 
Christendom  has  missed  God's  mind  and  will,  and 
is  ignorantly  but  not  without  sin  fighting  for  an 
order  of  its  own,  which  is  mere  disorder  before  God. 
If  Scripture  is  to  decide,  the  common  plan  of  ordina- 
tion for  all  who  minister  to  those  without  and  within 
is  a  departure  from  the  order  of  God  prescribed  in 
His  word. 

Undoubtedly,  in  the  case  of  "  the  seven  "  (Acts  vi.) 
you  do  find  apostolic  appointment.  The  great  point 
in  this  case  was,  that  there  the  congregation  elected 
and  the  apostles  solemnly  appointed.  But  it  was  no 
more  than  the  congregation  choosing  fit  persons  to 
take  care  of  their  poor,  &c.  Nothing  could  be  more 
proper.  It  shows  the  condescending  goodness  of  God 
towards  those  who  gave  of  their  substance  and  those 
who  received  it.  If  the  Church  contribute,  it  is 
according  to  His  will  that  the  Church  should  have  a 
voice  in  the  selection  of  those  in  whom  they  have 
just  confidence  that  they  will  distribute,  in  God's 
sight,  not  only  with  good  conscience  and  feeling,  but 


32  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

wisely.  Tims  one  sees  here  a  conspicuous  instance 
of  God's  wise  and  gracious  care.  The  multitude 
chose  such  men  as  they  deemed  most  suited  to  the 
exigency.  But  even  here  the  mere  choice  of  the 
believers  did  not  give  them  that  place  in  itself;  for 
if  all  chose,  none  but  the  apostles  appointed  them 
over  the  business,  secular  as  it  was. 

The  principle  tells  in  a  directly  opposite  way  with 
regard  to  the  elders,  and  yet  more  as  to  the  minis- 
terial gifts  of  Christ.  We  have  no  such  thought 
expressed  as  a  congregation  choosing  elders — never 
in  any  part  of  Scripture.  On  the  contrary,  we  have 
the  fact  that  the  apostles  went  about ;  and  where 
assemblies  were  already  formed,  in  which  were  per- 
sons possessed  of  certain  spiritual  and  moral  quali- 
fications which  pointed  them  out  to  their  spiritual 
and  experienced  eyes  as  suitable  for  eldership,  such 
they  chose.  Among  these  antecedents,  those  who 
desired  the  office  must  be  persons  of  good  report,  and 
who,  if  married,  had  only  one  wife.  There  were 
many  individuals  brought  to  the  faith  of  Christ 
in  those  days,  who  had  several  wives.  This  was  a 
scandal,  and  sure  to  be  felt  the  more  as  Christian  truth 
spread.  Such  a  direction  showed  what  was  in  the 
mind  of  Grod.  One  could  not  rightly  refuse  the 
confession  of  a  man  who  had  two  or  three  wives,  if 
he  were  converted ;  but  he  must  not  expect  to 
become  an  elder  or  bishop ;  he  could  not  be  a  suitable 
local  representative  of  the  Church  of  Grod. 

Again,  take  the  case  of  a  man  who  had  children 
brought  up  badly.     Perhaps  this  neglect  may  have 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  33 

been  before  lie  was  converted ;  perhaps  after  conver- 
sion, he  may  have  entertained  the  evil  notion  of 
leaving  the  children  to  themselves,  on  the  faithless 
plea  that  Grod,  if  He  saw  fit,  wonld  convert  them 
some  time  or  other.  Such  mistakes  have  been  made, 
and  miserable  have  been  the  results.  Whatever 
the  cause  of  an  unruly  house,  its  head  could  not  be 
a  bishop.  No  matter  what  might  be  his  spiritual 
gifts,  they  could  not  countervail ;  no  such  man 
could  be  charged  with  the  oversight  of  Grod's  assem- 
bly. For  such  an  office,  it  was  not  so  much  a  question 
of  gifts  as  of  moral  weight.  A  man  might  be  a 
prophet,  a  teacher,  an  evangelist — his  disorderly 
wife  or  children  would  not  nullify  his  gifts  ;  but  he 
ought  not  to  be  made  an  elder,  unless  he  brought 
up  his  children  with  godliness  and  gravity,  and 
himself  walked  with  a  good  report  among  those 
without. 

Thus  the  Lord  stringently  required,  in  such  an 
official,  these  moral  qualifications,  as  well  as  spiritual 
capacity  for  his  work.  Even  if  one  possessed  all 
these  things,  he  was  not  an  elder  because  he  had 
them,  unless  duly  authorized.  He  needed  to  be 
ordained ;  he  must  have  a  legitimate  appointment 
besides.  And  in  what  did  this  consist  ?  Manifestly 
the  whole  value  turns  upon  a  valid  appointing  power. 
In  what  consisted  that  competent  authority?  Are 
we  to  set  up  or  to  imagine  one  ?  It  must  be  accord- 
ing to  the  Lord  and  His  word.  Now  the  Scripture 
allows  of  no  valid  appointing  power  except  an  apostle, 


34  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

or  an   envoy  who   had  from  an   apostle   a   special 
commission  for  the  purpose. 

Where  is  there  such  a  delegate  now  that  can  pro- 
duce an  adequate  (that  is,  an  apostolic)  commission 
for  the  work  of  ordaining  ?  You  never  saw,  neither 
do  I  ever  expect  to  see,  the  like.  The  fact  is,  the 
word  of  God  nowhere  hints  at  the  continuance  of 
an  ordaining  power.  It  demonstrates  in  the  most 
explicit  manner  that  after  the  Lord  set  up  churches 
here  and  there,  when  He  established  local  func- 
tionaries in  each  church,  apostolic  appointment  or 
choice,  and  this  only,  was  what  He  stamped  with 
His  approval.  The  requisite  qualifications  are 
clearly  laid  down ;  but  the  fact  is  equally  clear  that 
none  but  an  apostle  or  an  apostolic  delegate  was 
warranted  to  nominate  the  elders  to  their  office, 
and  not  a  word  about  perpetuating  that  power  of 
appointment  after  the  apostles  left  the  earth.  We  have 
an  apostle  writing,  not  to  the  Church  or  churches  to 
choose  elders,  but  to  one  who  was  specially  charged 
to  do  this  task.  Yet  even  to  Titus  there  is  not  a 
word  about  another  continuing  the  task;  nay,  not 
a  hint  that  Titus  himself  was  to  continue  it  after  the 
apostle  was  dead.  Neither  was  Titus  authorized  to 
appoint  where  he  pleased,  but  the  apostle  assigns  him 
the  sphere  of  this  commission.  Besides  being  a  special 
envoy  of  the  apostle,  Titus  was  doubtless  a  teacher 
and  preacher.  But  here  there  was  a  definite  region 
where  he  had  the  duty  of  ordaining  elders  in  every 
city.     Titus  was  responsible  to  do  this  in  Crete ;  but 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  35 

there  is  nothing  said  of  the  establishment  of  elders 
elsewhere  or  at  other  times.  On  the  contrary — and 
this  would  be  a  strange  direction  for  a  diocesan 
— he  was  to  be  diligent  to  come  to  the  apostle  at 
Nicopolis.     He  was  not  to  be  left  at  Crete. 

It  is  evident  that  such  directions  as  these  from  the 
apostle  to  Titus  afford  no  warrant  for  others  to  appoint 
elders  now.  This  is  pure  assumption,  whereas  all 
depends  on  a  valid  authority.  Titus  was  apostoli- 
cally  commissioned,  and  could  produce  an  inspired 
letter  of  instructions  to  him  personally.  Who  can 
do  anything  analogous  ?  "It  must  be  so,"  is  a  poor 
and  vain  reason  to  him  who  respects  due  authority. 
It  is  easy  to  settle  matters  after  a  sort  where  this  is 
allowed  to  pass ;  but,  beloved  friends,  we  want  the 
word  of  Grod.  Let  me  ask  for  a  plain  answer  to  the 
question,  Do  you  believe  that  the  word  is  perfect  ? 
Do  you  doubt  whether  the  Lord,  who  cares  for  His 
own  order  in  the  Church,  did  or  did  not  foresee  all 
the  need  and  difficulty  ?  Do  you  insinuate  that  He 
forgot  anything  of  real  value  to  us  now  ?  Do  you 
suppose  that  He  omitted  to  take  into  account  the 
death  of  the  apostles  ?  He  did  nothing  of  the  kind. 
The  apostle  speaks  distinctly  of  his  death  (and  more 
than  one  apostle  too).  He  speaks  of  perilous  times 
and  the  importance  of  Scripture  after  he  was  gone ; 
1  tut  not  a  thought  about  a  line  of  successors  to  appoint 
afterwards,  not  a  hint  about  bequeathing  his  powers 
in*  this  case.  To  you  who  are  commended  to  God 
and  the  word  of  His  grace,  to  you  who  tremble  at 
His  word,  is  that  silence  nothing  ?  To  my  own 
c  2 


36  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

mind  it  is  a  fact  not  more  surprising  at  the  first 
blush,  than  increasingly  pregnant  with  meaning  the 
more  it  is  weighed. 

Popery,  despising  this  fact,  assumes  the  contrary 
from  human  reason,  and  is  built  upon  this  contrariety. 
Not  that  one  cares  to  denounce  any  one  system  in 
particular  by  name,  save  only  to  bring  out  the  truth, 
which  shows  the  will  of  the  Lord  and  proves  the  evil 
by  the  good.  In  truth,  every  earthly  system,  no 
matter  how  opposed  it  may  become  to  the  word  of 
(rod,  begins  by  adding  something  of  its  own  to  that 
word.  The  power  of  ordination  attaches  not  to 
bishops,  but  to  apostles  and  their  delegates.  The 
moment  you  allow  men  the  principle  of  development 
after  the  Scripture  canon  closed,  the  moment  you 
clothe  with  apostolic  authority  a  body  of  officials  who 
never  were  authorized  divinely  for  the  work  under- 
taken, you  are  off  the  ground  of  faith  in,  and  defer- 
ence to,  the  word  of  Grod.  The  present  practice  has 
not  the  smallest  foundation  in  Scripture. 

Indeed,  one  may  safely  go  farther,  and  affirm  not 
only  that  the  ordination,  of  which  people  talk  so 
much,  before  preaching  and  teaching  Christ,  is  not 
a  thing  to  be  coveted  in  the  present  shape  in  which 
it  is  found  among  men,  but  that  it  is  now  a  disorderly 
institution,  a  grievous  dishonour  to  the  Lord  who 
gives  ministerial  gifts  by  the  Spirit.  In  short,  it  is 
a  mere  and  sorry  imitation  of  what  is  recorded  in 
the  word  of  Grod.  Examine  well,  and  you  will  sot>n 
find  it  does  not  even  resemble  what  we  read  of  there. 
God's  word   remains  true,  sure,    and  plain :    only 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  37 

there  once  was  a  positive  personal  commission,  armed 
with  a  certain  apostolic  authority,  either  direct  or 
indirect ;  and  this  you  ought  to  have,  if  you  pretend 
to  ordain  elders,  as  Titus  did. 

Permit  me  now  to  press  another  question.  Which 
is  the  most  scriptural  course — to  do  what  was  always 
becoming  in  a  Christian,  or  to  copy  an  apostolic 
delegate  ?  Which  commends  itself  most  to  your 
conscience,  to  your  heart,  to  your  faith  ?  We  will 
suppose  now,  in  this  place,  an  assembly  of  God's 
children.  They  see  in  the  word  of  God  that,  beside 
the  common  privileges  and  duties  of  all  saints,  there 
were  certain  gifts  for  ministry,  and  that  there  were 
also  certain  offices,  which  needed  an  apostle  or  his 
representative  to  fill  them  up.  They  would  like  to 
have  them  all,  of  course ;  but  what  is  to  be  done  ? 
Are  they  to  neglect  what  was  written  to  the  assembly 
at  Corinth,  or  to  the  saints  at  Ephesus,  and  to  ape  what 
was  not  written  to  the  Church  but  to  Timothy  or 
Titus?  Would  it  not  be  humbler  to  consult  the 
word  of  Grod,  and  inquire  of  Him,  that  they  might 
learn  what  is  His  will  concerning  this  matter? 
What  do  we  see  there  ?  That  as  to  the  gifts  of 
Christ,  they  never  required  any  sanction  here  below 
before  their  exercise ;  nay,  they  never  admitted  of 
human  intervention.  The  only  exception  is,  where 
there  was  a  positive  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  con- 
veyed by  the  laying  on  of  the  apostle's  hands.  Fully 
do  I  admit  that  there  was  an  exception  in  such  cir- 
cumstances. Timothy  was  designated  by  prophecies 
beforehand  for  the  work  to  which  the  Lord  called 


38  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

him  (compare  Acts  xiii.  1,  2).  Guided  by  prophecy 
(1  Tim.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim.  i.  6),  the  apostle  lays  his 
hands  upon  Timothy  and  conveys  to  him  a  direct 
power  (x^lPlfTFa)  °y  "the  Holy  Ghost,  suited  to  this 
special  service  he  had  to  accomplish.  Along  with 
the  apostle,  the  elders,  who  were  in  the  place,  joined 
in  the  laying  on  of  their  hands.  But  there  is  a 
difference  in  the  expression  the  Spirit  of  God  em- 
ploys, which  shows  that  the  communication  of  the 
gift  depended  for  effective  agency  not  in  any  way  on 
the  elders,  hut  only  on  the  apostle.  The  particle  of 
association  appears  where  the  presbytery  are  spoken  of, 
that  of  instrumental  means  where  the  apostle  speaks 
of  himself.  It  was  an  apostle  that  communicated 
such  a  gift.  Never  do  we  hear  of  elders  thus  con- 
ferring a  gift :  it  was  not  an  episcopal  function,  but  an 
apostolic  prerogative,  either  to  communicate  spiritual 
powers  or  to  clothe  men  authoritatively  with  a  charge. 
Hence  it  is  admitted  that,  in  the  peculiar  case  of 
Timothy,  there  was,  by  the  laying  on  of  apostolic 
hands,  a  very  special  effect  produced;  but  who  can 
do  this  now?  Were  this  the  claim  (however  one 
might  desire  to  view,  not  indifferently,  but  with 
the  patience  of  God,  the  prevalent  and  superstitious 
perversion  of  a  sign,  admirable  in  itself  when  applied 
and  understood  scripturally ) ,  yet  if  any  man  now 
presumed  to  convey  a  spiritual  power,  like  an  apostle, 
should  one  hesitate  to  call  him  an  impostor?  A  mis- 
taken course  in  assuming  the  rights  of  an  earthly 
sovereign  is,  or  may  be,  treason.  What  is  it  to  pre- 
tend falsely  to  communicate  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  a 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  39 

distinct  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord? 

Beloved  friends,  it  is  a  grave  thing  to  trifle  thus 
with  the  Spirit  of  God.  There  are  those  in  our  day 
whose  ignorant  boldness  fears  not  to  arrogate  the 
right  of  conveying  the  Holy  Ghost  and  ministerial 
power  in  this  manner ;  but,  thanks  be  to  God,  they 
are  otherwise  known  to  be  fundamentally  unsound, 
so  that  their  influence  over  the  faithful  is  inconsider- 
able. Then  we  have,  alas  !  the  Eastern  and  Western 
bodies  of  Christendom,  who  are  hardly  less  guilty. 
But  among  ordinary  Protestants,  and  especially 
among  men  of  average  Christian  respectability,  such 
pretensions  are  regarded  with  pity  or  horror.  Even 
where  the  formularies,  as  in  the  Anglican  Com- 
munion, approach  fearfully  near  the  precipice,  the 
excuse  is,  that  their  godly  framers  intended  no  more 
than  to  impart  fitting  and  scriptural  solemnity  to 
various  offices  in  the  Church.  I  admit,  however, 
that  the  excuse  is  lame,  and  that  it  is  hard  to  decide 
whether  these  most  suffer  in  conscience  who  employ 
the  most  serious  forms  ecclesiastically  without  be- 
lieving them,  or  those  are  most  injured  in  faith  who 
accept,  as  divine,  pretensions  which  are  doubtless 
more  respectably  connected  and  venerable,  but  not 
better  founded  than  those  of  a  modern  imposture. 

But  the  important  truth  on  this  subject  to  be 
seen  is,  that  these  ministerial  gifts  were  given  by  the 
Lord  without  any  form  further  than  that  He  war- 
ranted and  sent  them.  Beware  of  disputing  His 
will  and  wisdom.     How  is  one  to  judge  of  the  pos- 


40  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

session  of  a  gift  ?  Undoubtedly  by  its  due  exercise, 
which  finds  an  answer  in  the  conscience.  Let  me 
ask  you  again,  How  do  you  know  a  Christian  ? 
When  people  talk  theoretically,  or  discuss  polemically, 
there  are  always  great  and  numerous  difficulties  in 
the  way.  But  if  you  went,  for  practical  reasons,  to 
a  godly  clergyman  or  dissenting  minister,  he  could 
give  you  ample  means  of  judging  who  are  Christians 
in  what  he  calls  his  flock.  Listen  to  many  a  man 
on  his  knees,  and,  if  he  be  a  Christian,  he  will  speak 
as  a  child  to  his  Grod  and  Father ;  but  hear  him  on  his 
legs,  and  he  will  perhaps  controvert,  without  knowing 
it,  what  he  has  been  just  saying  in  prayer,  till,  on  his 
perverse  principle,  he  cannot  tell  whether  Grod  is  his 
Father  or  not.  How  happy  that  there  are  such 
seasons  of  devotion  where  people  speak  with  simple- 
hearted  truthfulness !  Away  from  their  systems,  let 
them  speak  to  Grod,  and  their  true  characters  and  even 
condition  will  soon  be  manifest,  as  a  general  rule. 
Thus,  the  fact  is  that,  in  practice,  Christians  have 
little  difficulty  in  knowing,  for  the  most  part,  who 
are  converted  and  who  are  not.  There  may  be  a 
certain  number  of  doubtful  souls,  of  whom  we  need 
not  speak  now.  Let  a  believer  be  sent  for  to  a  sick 
man  ;  is  he  wholly  at  a  loss  how  to  speak  ?  Does  he 
not  seek  as  soon  as  possible  to  gather  whether  the 
sick  man  has  peace  in  Christ,  or  is  anxious  about  his 
soul,  or  whether  he  has  ever  realized  his  lost  and 
guilty  condition  ?  If  the  believer  finds  no  sense  of 
sin,  he  will  solemnly  warn  of  judgment,  and  set  before 
that  soul  the  cross,  imploring  him  to  receive  Christ ; 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  41 

or  he  will  exhort  him  to  rest  in  Christ,  because  he  is 
assured  of  his  faith. 

If,  then,  so  little  haze  really  rests  on  the  question, 
who  are  and  who  are  not  children  of  Grod,  think 
you  that  the  possession  of  a  gift  is  a  question  so 
obscure  and  doubtful?  Some  may  have  more  gift 
than  others.  But  the  gift  of  teaching  implies  the 
power  of  bringing  out  the  word  of  God,  and  apply- 
ing it  aright.  Again,  take  the  power  of  ruling — 
for  there  is  such  a  thing  as  rule  in  the  Church, 
and  I  hope  none  here  present  imagine  it  is  gone — 
he  who  has  the  gift  of  rule,  exercises  it,  of  course, 
according  to  the  word  of  Grod.  Scripture  knows 
nothing  of  a  blind  obedience.  The  conscience  is 
awakened,  the  heart  set  free  and  attracted  to  Christ. 
To  these  is  the  appeal  of  Christian  ministry.  It  is 
not  the  blind  leading  the  blind,  nor  is  it  the  seeing 
leading  the  blind ;  but  rather  the  seeing  lead  the 
seeing.  Christ  gives  liberty  as  well  as  life,  and 
this  withal  responsible  to  do  the  will  of  Grod.  There- 
fore it  is  that,  according  to  the  intention  of  Grod,  His 
children  do  not  well  to  contrive  systems  to  escape 
difficulties ;  they  need  faith  to  go  through  them  with 
Grod.  Let  them  prove  their  gifts,  if  indeed  they 
have  gifts  from  the  Lord,  by  real  power.  There 
may  be  severe  trials  and  difficulties  now  and  then. 
Even  Paul  himself  had  to  do  with  doubters  of  his 
apostleship,  and  this  within  the  Church,  and  among 
his  own  children  in  the  faith.  What  true-hearted 
man  should  be  downcast  if  he  is  slighted  ?  But  the 
time  came  when  the  Lord  vindicated  His  servant, 


42  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

and  when  the  self-will  and  pride  which  refused  a 
divine  gift  was  utterly  put  to  shame,  if  the  heart  was 
not  brought  back  to  lowly  thankfulness.  The  chief 
mistake  we  are  apt  to  make  is  in  the  way  of  im- 
patience ;  we  do  not  allow  time  and  space  for  the 
Lord  to  work ;  and  that  lack  of  patient  waiting 
only  defers  the  wished-for  solution,  because  it  makes 
the  difficulty  so  much  the  greater. 

But  as  to  the  discernment  of  a  ministerial  gift  for 
preaching  or  teaching,  it  is  in  general  plain  and 
simple.  If  a  brother  stand  up  to  speak  in  the 
Christian  assembly  without  a  gift  from  Grod,  he  will 
soon  and  painfully  find  it  out.  If  self-judging,  he 
will  learn  much  from  his  own  conscience ;  but  he  may 
quite  sufficiently  soon  hear  from  others  that  which 
will  make  him  understand  that  he  has  not  a  gift  in  the 
judgment  of  his  brethren.  But  where  there  is  really 
a  gift,  is  it  not  possible  that  prejudice  may  act,  and 
this  be  refused  ?  It  may  be,  certainly,  for  a  time. 
Perhaps  the  speaker  thinks  too  highly  of  his  gift ; 
perhaps  he  mistakes  the  character  of  it,  and  the  right 
scene  and  time  for  its  exercise ;  perhaps  he  is  too 
exclusively  occupied  with  his  line  of  things,  and  too 
urgent  or  anxious  to  assert  his  gift.  All  this  may 
be,  often  is,  and  always  creates  difficulty.  But  the 
truth  remains,  that  what  is  of  Grod  approves  itself  in 
the  long  run.  My  own  experience,  as  far  as  my 
limited  range  of  observation  and  knowledge  goes,  in- 
clines me  to  think  that  the  children  of  God  are 
prone  to  make  too  much  rather  than  too  little  of  gift. 
In  the  present  state  of  the  Church  there  is  but  a 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  43 

feeble  development  of  gift,  and  this  is  felt  the  more  in 
proportion  to  spiritual  intelligence  and  a  true  posi- 
tion. Do  you  wish  to  know  your  place  fairly  and 
fully?  Look  in  confidence  to  God,  and  search  the 
word  of  His  grace.  Many  things  there  are  to  hinder 
and  to  draw  away :  partly  the  effect  of  education, 
partly  the  difficulties  of  finding  an  honest  livelihood, 
especially  if  a  man  has  been  a  professional  preacher. 
If  he  abandons,  not  preaching,  but  that  profession,  as 
an  unscriptural  innovation,  he  loses  everything,  for 
the  most  part,  even  his  bread,  unless  he  have  private 
means  of  his  own.  Hence  it  is  that  the  inducements 
for  such  an  one  to  remain  where  he  is  are  enormous; 
the  difficulties  of  coming  out  at  the  word  of  the  Lord 
are  incalculable.  The  power  of  Grod  alone  can  accom- 
plish the  change,  and  sustain  the  soul  in  peace  and 
praise,  "  stedfast,  immoveable,  always  abounding  in 
the  work  of  the  Lord." 

While  we  may  be  sure  that  the  word  and  Spirit  of 
Grod  give  us  clearly  the  true  position  for  the  indi- 
vidual Christian  and  for  the  Christian  assembly,  we 
ought  not,  I  think,  as  things  are,  to  expect  a  great 
variety  and  strength  in  the  gifts  of  the  Lord's  grace. 
Of  course  He  can  work  sovereignly,  and  assuredly  we 
ought  to  be  most  thankful  for  what  is  given.  No 
doubt,  also,  there  are  gifts  distributed  somewhere 
or  other.  There  are  gifts  of  Christ  in  members  and 
ministers  of  the  national  establishments,  I  do  not 
question ;  there  are  His  gifts  likewise  in  the  dissent- 
ing societies ;  and  are  we  to  suppose  there  are  none 
of  His  gifts  of  grace  in  Eomanism  itself?     For  my 


44  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

part,  I  cannot  doubt  there  are.  Who  would,  who 
could,  reject  the  testimony  of  facts  that  there  have 
been  persons  therein  —  such  as  Martin  Boos,  for 
instance,  not  very  long  ago — used  for  the  conversion 
of  sinners,  and  for  the  helping  on  of  saints  in  some 
degree  ?  And  are  such  men  not  gifts  of  Christ  to  the 
Church — as  truly  gifts,  though  in  that  false  position, 
as  if  they  were  out  of  it  ?  Their  being  Romanists — 
ay,  Romish  priests — does  not  destroy  His  grace, 
whatever  we  may  feel  as  to  their  faithfulness.  The 
fact  is,  that  the  Lord  gives  according  to  His  own 
will  by  the  Holy  Grhost,  and  we  ought  to  acknow- 
ledge these  gifts  wherever  they  are.  If  a  man  be  a 
dissenter,  whether  a  minister  or  one  of  the  people,  in 
either  case  I  am  satisfied  he  is  in  a  false  position.  It 
is  not  a  question  of  a  feeling  of  dislike  to  dissent,  if 
one  believe  its  foundations  to  be  unscriptural.  I  ask 
the  forbearance  of  any  dissenters  who  may  be  here,  in 
affirming,  calmly  and  solemnly,  my  conviction  that 
dissent  is  unsound  in  its  distinctive  principles ;  a 
thorough  contradiction  of  the  very  character  of  the 
Church  as  one  body ;  and,  in  the  popular  call  and 
choice,  undermining  ministry  as  a  divine  and  perma- 
nent institution  flowing  from  the  Saviour's  grace. 
Dissent  is  religious  radicalism,  which  essentially 
opposes  Grod's  will  as  much  as,  and  perhaps  more 
than,  any  other  principle.  The  proofs  are  too  plain. 
Dissent  substitutes  the  election  of  the  people  in  the 
place  of  the  sovereign  choice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
whether  immediate  or  mediate. 

But  how  is  the  truth  better  secured  in  the  national 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  45 

bodies  ?  By  patronage,  clerical,  lay,  or  governmen- 
tal !  And  the  painful  apology  for  this  systematic 
self-will  is  that  the  men  nominated  by  the  govern- 
ment of  the  day,  or  a  landlord,  or  a  college,  or  a 
corporation,  have  gone  through  the  usual  forms  !  Is 
there  the  faintest  resemblance  between  this  worldly 
machinery  and  the  divine  system  of  spiritual  gifts 
from  Christ  set  forth  in  Ephes.  iv.  ?  I  see  only  One 
who  has  ascended  up  on  high.  Axe  you  looking  to 
any  other  person  ?  to  any  other  kind  of  ascent  ?  to 
any  other  heaven  for  the  favours  you  crave  after  ?  I 
appeal  to  you  as  Christians.  Do  you  value  the 
word  of  God  ?  Do  you  cherish  that  word  only  for 
the  salvation  of  your  souls?  or  do  you  confide  in 
that  same  word  and  Spirit  for  guidance  as  to  ministry 
and  church  office  ?  What  subjects  more  simply  be- 
long to  the  Lord  ?  For  what  do  we  need  Him 
more  ?  As  a  believer  I  surely  feel  the  want  of 
Cod's  word  for  my  daily  walk,  no  matter  what  my 
circumstances,  or  sphere,  or  duties.  And  do  you, 
can  you  believe  that  the  word  that  lives  and  abides 
for  ever  does  not  concern  itself  with  so  grave,  deli- 
cate, and  spiritually  needful  a  thing  as  the  ministry 
of  the  word ;  or  that,  if  it  speak  thereon,  you  are  not 
bound  to  hear  and  bow  ? 

The  sum  of  what  has  been  said  is,  then,  that  these 
two  great  principles  are  revealed  in  Scripture,  and 
recognized  by  the  early  Church :  namely,  the  Lord 
giving  gifts  of  His  own  grace  which  did  not  require 
human  intervention ;  next  also,  a  system  of  authority 
which  did  require  that  intervention ;  as  in  the  appoint- 


46  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

ment  of  elders  by  the  apostles,  or  persons  commis- 
sioned to  do  their  work  in  certain  cases.  It  is  clear 
that  we  have  neither  apostles  living  on  the  earth,  nor 
representatives,  like  Titus,  charged  by  an  apostle  to 
do  quasi-apostolic  work.  The  consequence  is,  that 
now,  if  subject  to  the  word  of  God,  you  cannot  and 
do  not  look  for  elders  in  their  precise  official  form. 
If  any  man  allege  these  can  be,  it  might  be  well  to 
hear  his  grounds  from  Scripture.  What  has  been 
produced  is,  in  my  judgment,  amply  sufficient  to 
disprove  it.  You  cannot  have  persons  formally  and 
duly  appointed  to  this  office,  unless  you  have  a 
power  formally  and  duly  authorized  of  the  Lord  to 
appoint  them.  But  you  have  not  that  indispensably 
needful  power  to  authenticate  elders :  this  is  your 
fatally  weak  point.  You  have  neither  apostles  nor 
functionaries  commissioned  by  the  apostles  to  act 
in  their  stead;  and  therefore  the  entire  system  of 
appointment  breaks  down  for  want  of  competent 
authority.  Dare  you  say  of  your  elders  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  made  them  bishops?  You  have 
none  really,  scripturally  entitled  to  appoint. 

What  then  ?  Are  there  none  suitable  to  be  elders 
or  bishops,  if  there  were  apostles  to  choose  them  ? 
Thank  God !  there  are  not  a  few.  You  can  hardly 
look  into  an  assembly  of  His  children  without 
hearing  of  some  grave  elderly  men  who  go  after  the 
wanderers,  who  warn  the  unruly,  who  comfort  those 
who  are  cast  down,  who  counsel,  admonish,  and 
guide  souls.  Are  not  these  the  men  who  might  be 
elders,   if  there  were  a   power   existing   to  appoint 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  47 

them?  And  what  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian 
man,  as  things  now  are,  in  the  use  of  what  remains  ? 
I  say  not  to  call  them  elders,  but,  surely,  to  esteem 
them  highly  for  their  work's  sake,  and  to  love  and 
acknowledge  them  as  those  who  are  over  the  rest  of 
their  brethren  in  the  Lord.  I  ask  you  solemnly, 
beloved  friends,  do  you  acknowledge  any  to  be  over 
you  in  the  Lord  ? — any  living  servants  of  the  Lord  to 
be  over  you  in  Him  ?  Do  you  imagine  such  a  re- 
cognition as  this  offends  against  the  principles  of 
Grod  ?  Bather  let  me  warn  you  against  picking  out 
certain  favourite  texts  from  Cod's  word,  to  which 
only  you  pay  obeisance.  If  we  do  so,  we  are  build- 
ing up  a  sect,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  no  less  truly  than 
our  neighbours.  On  the  other  hand,  beware  of 
adopting  that  human  invention — apostolic  succession 
— to  escape  dilemmas.  If  we  dare  to  call  men 
apostles  who  are  not,  under  the  fiction  of  succession, 
the  Lord,  in  due  time,  will  not  fail  to  challenge  our 
word  and  act,  and  will  ask,  who  entitled  us  to 
endorse  such  an  unheard  of  thing  as  this  ?  who  gave 
us  leave,  without  His  word,  virtually  to  acknowledge 
this  or  that  as  an  apostolic  man  by  accrediting  his 
claim  to  ordain  ?  It  is  evident  that  to  ordain  elders 
is,  however  well-meant,  an  imitation  of  what  apostles 
did,  and,  if  unauthorized,  not  only  without  validity, 
but  an  unwitting  usurpation  of  an  authority  which 
reverted  and  now  pertains  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
alone.  Thus,  the  difference  between  a  true  position 
and  a  false  one,  in  the  present  state  of  the  Church, 
is   not  at  all  that  one  has  got  a  due  ordination  and 


48  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

the  other  wants  it.  In  truth  no  body  on  earth  pos- 
sesses it  now.  Do  yon  acknowledge  the  want  ?  or 
are  you  trying  to  cover  the  humiliating  but  evident 
fact  that  you  have  not  the  only  ordaining  power 
which  Scripture  sanctions?  And  yet  you  go  on 
ordaining,  though  you  have  neither  apostle  nor 
apostolic  deputy !  Which  course  is  most  orderly  ? 
To  do  as  you  do ;  or  to  acknowledge  our  actual  lack, 
and  carry  ourselves  accordingly  before  Grod  and  man 
— to  confess  that  we  want  apostles  or  their  delegates, 
and  therefore  that  we  cannot  have  presbyters  duly 
chosen  and  formally  appointed  ?  There  are,  I 
repeat,  men  endowed  with  such  qualifications  as 
would  render  them  eligible,  so  far  as  we  can  pre- 
tend to  say,  if  there  were  a  competent  ordaining 
power.  And  the  general  principle  of  Scripture 
(Rom.  xii.)  manifestly  is,  that  he  who  had  the  gift  of 
ruling,  or  of  taking  the  lead  among  the  saints,  is  bound 
to  use  it  with  diligence  (as  the  teacher,  exhorter,  and 
others,  are  responsible  to  discharge  their  respective 
functions),  even  if  circumstances  made  legitimate 
appointment  to  a  charge  impracticable. 

But  subjection  to  the  word  of  Grod  discovers  readily 
that  a  state  of  things  substantially  analogous  to  our 
own  defective  condition  is  provided  for  in  Scripture. 
The  Lord  in  His  wisdom  let  such  wants  be  felt  in 
the  early  Church.  Thus  the  apostle  was  inspired  to 
write  epistles  to  churches  where  there  were  no  elders ; 
as,  for  instance,  the  epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  and 
the  Corinthians.  The  last  was  notoriously  a  dis- 
orderly church,  and  elders  might  have  been  thought 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  49 

useful  there.  Nevertheless,  not  the  least  word  or 
hint  about  elders  there  is  heard  from  first  to  last. 
Had  elders  been  then '  in  their  midst,  would  not  the 
apostle  have  called  them  to  account,  and  blamed  their 
want  of  godly  care  and  diligence  in  oversight  ?  Of 
this  there  is  not  a  trace.  Further,  we  know  it  was 
not  the  practice  of  the  apostles  to  constitute  elders  in 
an  infant  Church.  Where  Paul  and  Barnabas  chose 
elders  for  the  disciples,  it  was  in  assemblies  that 
had  existed  probably  for  years,  and  thus  there  had 
been  time  for  spiritual  qualifications  to  be  developed. 
But  in  a  new  assembly,  where  the  saints  were  young 
comparatively,  a  certain  time  had  to  be  allowed,  so 
that  those  who  were  competent  for  such  a  work 
should  be  made  evident.  Accordingly  it  is  rather  a 
rare  thing  to  read  of  the  apostles  choosing  or  appoint- 
ing elders. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  first  epistle  to  the  Thes- 
salonians,  we  have  in  the  last  chapter  very  impor- 
tant instruction  given  to  the  saints.  They,  too, 
are  a  similar  instance  of  a  young  Church,  yet  they 
were  told  to  own  those  that  laboured  among  them. 
Hence  all  this  may  be  where  presbyters  are  not. 
Thus,  in  1  Thess.  v.  12,  13,  the  apostle  writes,  "  We 
beseech  you,  brethren,  to  know  them  which  labour 
among  you,  and  are  over  you  in  the  Lord,  and 
admonish  you ;  and  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in 
love  for  their  work's  sake."  The  presence  of  elders 
is  not  requisite  in  order  to  have  and  to  own  those 
who  are  over  us  in  the  Lord.  There  is  much  of 
importance  for  us  now  in  that  Scripture,  for  we  have 

D 


50  gifts  a:nd  local  charges. 

elders  no  more  than  they.  I  think  we  ought  to  lay 
its  exhortations  to  heart.  There  are  not  a  few  ill- 
instructed  souls,  within  and  without,  who  hold  the 
notion  that,  unless  there  be  official  appointment,  they 
cannot  have  anybody  over  them  in  the  Lord.  This 
is  all  a  mistake.  No  doubt,  when  a  man  was  offici- 
ally appointed,  there  was  a  definite  guarantee  in  the 
face  of  the  Church  given  by  an  apostle  or  an  apos- 
tolic man ;  and  there  was,  thereby,  no  little  weight 
given  to  those  who  were  thus  appointed.  Such  a 
sanction  had  great  and  just  value  in  the  Church,  and 
would  be  of  consequence  among  the  unruly.  But 
none  the  less  did  Grod  know  how  to  provide  instruc- 
tion for  assemblies  where  there  was  not  yet  official 
oversight.  How  merciful  for  times  when,  for  want 
of  apostles,  there  could  be  no  elders !  But  it  will 
be  noticed  that  the  Corinthian  assembly  abounded 
in  gift,  though  elders  are  seen  nowhere  among  them. 
The  Thessalonians  do  not  appear  to  have  possessed 
the  same  variety  of  outward  power,  while  elders  or 
bishops  again  are  never  hinted  at.  Yet,  at  Corinth 
the  household  of  Stephanas  devoted  themselves 
regularly  (tra^av)  to  the  service  of  the  saints;  and 
the  apostle  beseeches  the  brethren  to  submit  them- 
selves to  such  and  to  everyone  that  helped  and 
laboured.  The  Thessalonians  he  prays  to  know 
those  who  laboured  among  them,  and  presided  in 
the  Lord,  and  admonished  them.  Evidently  this  did 
not  depend  upon  their  being  apostolically  appointed, 
which  could  hardly  have  been  in  their  circumstances, 
as  lately  gathered.     It  is  founded  upon  that  which, 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  51 

after  all,  is  intrinsically  better,  if  we  mnst  be  con- 
tent with  one  blessing  out  of  two.  Surely,  if  it 
comes  to  be  a  question  between  real  spiritual  power 
and  outward  office,  no  Christian  ought  to  hesitate 
between  them.  To  have  the  power  and  the  office 
combined,  no  doubt,  is  the  best  of  all,  when  the 
Lord  is  pleased  to  give  both ;  but  in  those  early 
days  we  see  that  individuals  were  often  and  rightly 
engaged  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  before  there  could 
be  the  seal  of  an  apostle,  as  it  were,  affixed ;  and 
such  the  apostle  encourages  and  commends  earnestly 
to  the  love  and  esteem  of  the  saints,  before  and  inde- 
pendently of  that  seal.  How  precious  that  we  can 
fall  back  on  this  principle  now ! 

Even  at  Corinth  and  Thessalonica,  then,  those  were 
raised  up  in  the  midst  of  the  saints  who  showed 
spiritual  ability  in  guiding  and  directing  others. 
That  was  the  work  of  those  to  whom  one  epistle 
exhorted  subjection,  and  whom  the  other  epistle 
commended  as  "  over  them  in  the  Lord."  Such  men 
as  these  did  not  labour  only ;  because  some  might  be 
actively  engaged  in  the  Lord's  work,  who  might 
not  be  over  others  in  the  Lord.  But  these  manifested 
power  to  meet  difficulties  in  the  Church,  and  to 
battle  with  that  which  was  ensnaring  souls,  and  so  to 
guide  and  encourage  the  weak,  and  baffle  the  efforts 
of  the  enemy.  They  were  not  afraid  to  trust  the 
Lord  in  times  of  trial  and  danger,  and  therefore  the 
Lord  used  them,  giving  them  power  to  discern,  and 
courage  to  act  upon  what  they  did  discern.  This 
was  part  of  what  fitted  them  to  take  the  lead  in  the 
d  2 


52  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

Lord.  There  were  such  at  Thessalonica  as  well  as 
Corinth,  and  yet  there  is  not  the  slightest  intimation 
that  they  were  regularly  installed  as  elders,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  the  strongest  evidence  that  elders  as 
yet  had  not  been  constituted  in  either  place.  The 
regular  practice  was  to  appoint  elders  after  a  certain 
time;  indeed,  it  could  only  be  when  the  apostles 
came  round,  or  sent  an  authorized  delegate  to  choose 
fit  persons  and  clothe  them  with  a  title  before  the 
Church,  which  none  but  the  bad  would  dispute. 

Need  I  observe  how  Grod  .has  been  graciously  pro- 
viding for  the  wants  of  His  children  ?  This  subject 
will  come  definitely  before  us  on  the  next  occasion  on 
which  it  will  be  my  lot  to  address  you.  I  will  not, 
therefore,  do  more  now  than  draw  attention  to  His 
far-reaching  wisdom  in  meeting  the  difficulties  of  the 
day,  when  a  valid  authority  to  ordain  as  the  apostles 
did  is  not  left  on  the  earth.  Not  that  His  children 
are  left  without  help  ;  they  have  the  same  Lord  and 
the  same  ever-present  Spirit.  Hence  there  is  no 
need  of  some  change  or  new  invention  to  meet  the 
difficulties  of  the  day,  but  the  return  in  faith  to  what 
was  and  is  the  will  of  the  Lord ;  and  this  with  in- 
telligence of  the  actual  state  of  the  Church,  and  the 
feelings  which  become  it. 

"We  have  seen  that  the  Lord  alone,  as  the  rule, 
gave  these  gifts  of  ministry :  it  depends  upon  His 
love  to  His  Church,  His  faithfulness  to  the  saints. 
Is  the  Lord  Jesus  one  whit  less  tender  and  true  now 
than  He  was  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  ?  Who  would 
insinuate  it  ?    Neither  can  I  sympathize  with  those 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  53 

who  look  wistfully  back  on  the  earliest  times,  as  if 
they  only  afforded  scope  for  faithful  souls.  No 
doubt  a  bright  halo  of  grace  surrounds  the  scene 
where  the  Holy  Ghost  was  first  poured  out  on  men, 
with  a  simplicity  and  power  which  carried  all  along ; 
but  who  was  the  spring  and  whence  the  energy  which 
produced  fruits  so  much  the  more  wondrous  when  we 
think  of  the  soil  once  so  hard,  and  stubborn,  and 
cold?  Was  it  not  the  Lord  acting  for  His  own 
name,  by  the  Holy  Grhost,  after  He  took  the  place,  in 
risen  and  ascended  glory,  of  giving  gifts  to  men? 
Is  not  His  grace  as  equal  to  these  perilous  times 
as  He  proved  Himself  when  ushering  in  the  mystery 
that  was  hid  from  ages?  Are  there  saints  to  be 
perfected  and  ministerial  work  to  be  done  ?  Does 
the  body  of  Christ  need  to  be  built  up  ?  Then 
assuredly  His  gifts  cannot  fail  till  the  work  is  done, 
and  all  are  brought  into  the  unity  of  the  faith ;  and 
the  many  adversaries,  and  subtle  snares,  and  increas- 
ing perils,  will  only  draw  the  more  upon  the  faithful 
love  of  the  Lord  of  all.  There  is  fulness  of  blessing 
in  Christ  for  the  Church  now  as  truly  as  then. 
"Would  that  we  but  confided  in  Him  more  for  every 
exigency ! 

Are  we,  then,  to  disparage  the  truth  or  to  doubt 
His  grace,  by  setting  up  some  work  of  our  hands, 
some  calf  of  gold,  as  if  we  knew  not  what  is  become 
of  Him  who  is  gone  on  high?  Far  be  it  from 
Grod's  children  !  Let  me  suppose  you  come  togethei 
as  God's  assembly ;  you  know  not  who  is  to  speak, 
exhort,  give  thanks,  pray.     To  unbelief  this  is  but 


54  GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES. 

confusion.  Certainly  it  looks  so,  if  I  forget  who  is  in 
the  midst ;  certainly  it  does,  if  I  do  not  believe  that 
the  Lord  is  there ;  but  if  assured  that  He,  who  has 
all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  loves  and  cherishes 
the  Church,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  divine  as  He 
is,  dwells  with  and  in  us,  what  need  I  fear  ?  If  this 
position  is  true  for  one  saint,  it  is  true  for  all.  For 
my  part,  I  would  not  dare  for  a  moment  to  stand 
upon  any  foundation  which  did  not  contemplate  the 
whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  Church  of  Grod,  which 
did  not  in  its  faith  and  love  go  out  to  and  embrace 
all  the  saints  of  Grod. 

Of  course,  allowance  must  be  made  for  exceptional 
states,  as  for  persons  guilty  of  sin  that  would  require 
their  exclusion  (immorality,  bad  doctrine,  and  such 
like) .  But  still,  if  I  know  that  this  is  the  ground  of 
the  Church  according  to  Scripture,  and  that  there 
was  no  other  from  the  first  taken  and  acted  on  by 
the  holy  apostles,  the  question  is,  Am  I  upon  it?  If 
I  am  called  to  labour  in  the  word  and  doctrine,  the 
Lord  points  me  out  the  way.  He  opens  the  door 
which  none  can  shut,  and  shuts  and  none  can  open. 
He  finds  a  path  for  the  feeblest  of  His  pilgrims,  and 
gives  them  courage,  and  makes  it  plain  if  they  have 
to  serve  Him.     Let  us  never  doubt  Him. 

But  may  there  not  be  a  number  of  gifts  ?  So 
much  the  better.  If  there  are  five,  or  twice  five, 
gifted  men  in  an  assembly,  let  us  thank  the  Lord. 
There  is  room  for  all.  Grod  forbid  that  we  should 
sanction  the  novelty  of  each  minister  having  his  own 
little  flock !     Is  it  not  a  degradation  for  those  who 


GIFTS    AND    LOCAL    CHARGES.  55 

so  speak,  aud  for  those  so  spoken  of  ?  No  one  behaves 
himself — nay,  he  does  not  even  know  how  to  behave 
himself — who  does  not  bear  the  sense  in  his  soul 
that  the  saints  are  "  the  flock  of  God."  But  evi- 
dently men  do  not  speak  of  Grod's  flock,  if  the  divine 
ground  of  the  Church  be  forgotten  :  then  it  is  "  my 
flock,"  or  "your  flock."  There  is  always  room  for 
the  exercise  of  His  gifts,  whatever  and  however 
many  they  may  be.  Besides,  it  is  a  strange  time 
to  fear  that  any  could  be  spared  as  superfluous. 

The  hour  warns  me  that  this  subject  must  now  be 
closed.  My  endeavour  has  been  to  expound  and 
enforce  the  fundamental  distinction  between  gifts 
and  offices — the  one,  we  saw,  flowing  from  Christ 
on  high,  the  other  requiring  appointment  here  below 
of  men,  themselves  authorized  of  the  Lord  for  the 
purpose.  As  for  gifts,  they  always  remain  sure,  as 
truly  as  Christ  abides  the  head  and  source  of  sup- 
ply. As  for  the  formal  authorization,  it  is  no  longer 
possible,  because  you  have  not  a  duly  authorized 
power  to  appoint.  All  you  can  do  in  the  direction 
of  appointing,  if  you  will  do  something,  is  to  set  up 
a  paltry  and  rather  arrogant  imitation  of  the  apostles 
and  their  delegates.  But  if  you  really  love  the  Lord, 
and  value  godly  order,  is  it  not  your  bounden  duty, 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  acknowledge  all  His 
gifts  in  a  way  you  have  never  done  ?  Acknowledge 
them  privately  and  publicly  in  the  work  He  has 
assigned  them.  If  the  gift  be  small,  acknowledge 
the  Lord  in  it  as  heartily  as  if  it  were  a  great  one; 


56  NOTE    ON    ACTS    XIV.    23. 

and  if  it  be  a  great  one,  acknowledge  it  as  humbly 
and  unjealously  as  a  small  one.  On  the  other  hand, 
do  not  try  to  imitate  what  the  apostles  did ;  beware 
of  pretending  to  do  what  ought  not  to  be  thought 
of,  unless  there  were  apostolic  power.  And  as  to 
appointing  deacons  or  choosing  elders,  Scripture 
affords  no  warrant,  unless  there  was  direct  or  in- 
direct apostolic  authority,  which  does  not  now  exist. 


NOTE  ON  ACTS  XIV.  23. 

This  opportunity  is  taken  to  furnish  clear  and  conclusive 
evidence  against  the  notion  that  the  elders  were  chosen 
by  the  votes  of  the  churches.  The  word  yeipoToviu),  if 
etymologically  viewed,  means  to  stretch  out  the  hand ; 
hence  it  was  applied  to  election,  as  we  say  by  show 
of  hands,  and,  generally,  to  choice  or  appointment 
without  reference  to  the  manner.  Just  so  xf/rjcpiXofiai 
starts  from  mere  reckoning  with  pebbles,  and  was  used 
for  voting  thus,  then  for  voting  in  general,  and  lastly 
for  the  simple  resolve  or  decision  of  the  mind.  The 
context,  not  the  word  in  itself,  shows  which  is  to  be 
understood.  Hesychius  explains  ^Eiporoveiv  by  KaQiar^v 
(compare  Tit.  i.  5),  '<pr)<pl£siv ;  as  Suidas  for  x^porovriffavrsg 
gives  EKXe^ajjievoL.  With  all  this  accords  the  usage  of 
Aristophanes,  as  well  as  of  ^Eschines,  Demosthenes, 
&c,  both  in  the  narrow  and  literal  sense,  and  in  the 
general  meaning  of  choice  or  designation.  Appian, 
Dio  Cassius,  Plutarch,  Lucian,  and  Libanius  afford  many 
examples  where  the  word  conveys  no  more  than  choos- 
ing.    In  these,  therefore,  the  idea  of  popular  suffrage, 


NOTE    OX    ACTS    XIV.    23.  57 

with,  or  without  the  hands  stretched  out,  is  quite  ex- 
cluded. 

But  a  few  instances  must  be  given  from  Hellenis- 
tic writers  familiar  with  the  Old  Testament  and  con- 
temporaneous with  those  inspired  to  write  the  New 
Testament.  Thus  Philo  (irepl  'laW;^)  repeatedly  uses  x- 
of  Pharaoh's  appointing  Joseph  his  prime  minister,  and 
of  Moses  in  the  place  to  which  he  was  chosen  by  God, 
and  in  his  selection,  again,  of  Aaron's  sons  for  the  priest- 
hood. So  Josephus  (Ant.  VI.  xiii.  9)  speaks  of  Saul  as 
"  chosen  king  by  God,"  vtto  tov  Qeov  Kex^porovrjfj.ivov 
fiaaiXia,  and  also  (Ant.  XIII.  ii.  2)  represents  Alexander 
as  writing  to  Jonathan  in  these  terms,  xei9OTOrn^^EV  ^  ae 
crtifiEpov  apxiepia  tu>v  'Iov£cuW.  "  We  constitute  thee  this 
day  high  priest  of  the  Jews."  This  may  suffice  to  prove 
what  we  are  to  judge  of  Dr.  J.  Owen's  statement 
(Works,  vol.  XV.  pp.  495,  496,  Goold's  edition)  that 
"  Paul  and  Barnabas  are  said  to  ordain  elders  in  the 
churches  by  their  election  and  suffrage ;  for  the  word 
there  used  will  admit  of  no  other  sense,  however  it  be 
ambiguously  expressed  in  our  translation."  Indeed, 
Beza,  Diodati,  Martin,  and  others  had  committed  them- 
selves to  the  same  thing.  Dr.  G.  Campbell,  however, 
Presbyterian  as  he  was,  repudiated  this  version  of  the 
text,  and  (in  his  Prelim.  Diss,  x.,  Part  v.  §  7)  pronounced 
per  suffragia,  in  the  Latin  of  Beza,  "  a  mere  interpola- 
tion for  the  sake  of  answering  a  particular  purpose." 
If  one  do  not  endorse  so  strong  a  censure,  the  only 
alternative  is  that  the  gloss  sprang  from  inadequate 
research  and  strong  prejudice. 

The  truth  is,  that  we  need  not  go  beyond  the  New 
Testament  to  demonstrate  the  error ;  for  here,  as  else- 
where, even  when  applied  to  the  most  rigid  election, 


58  NOTE    ON    ACTS    XIV.    23. 

X-  never  means  choosing  by  the  votes  of  others,  which  it 
must  mean  to  bear  the  alleged  sense.  Wherever  the 
word  occurs  technically,  the  person  intended  does  not 
take  the  votes  of  others  merely,  or  preside  as  moderator 
of  the  election,  but  is  the  voter  himself.  Now,  in  this 
case,  the  subject  in  question  is,  beyond  doubt,  not  the 
disciples,  but  Paul  and  Barnabas.  If  any  voted  by 
stretching  out  their  hands,  it  was  the  apostles  only. 
Hence  the  authorized  version  rightly  dropped  "by 
election,"  the  sense  given  in  some  of  the  older  English 
and  foreign  translations,  which  had  been  too  much  in- 
fluenced by  the  Genevese  school,  and  even  Erasmus. 

The  true  meaning  is,  that  the  apostles  chose  elders 
for  the  disciples  in  each  assembly  (not  the  disciples  for 
themselves).  And  this  is  entirely  confirmed  by  Acts 
x.  41  and  2  Cor.  viii.  19 ;  in  one  of  which  passages  God 
is  said  to  have  chosen  beforehand;  in  the  other,  the 
churches  are  the  choosers,  precisely  as  here  the  apostles. 
Neither  God  nor  the  assemblies  gathered  the  votes  of 
others :  no  more  did  Paul  and  Barnabas.  But  this 
is  the  sole  testimony  which  has  ever  been  imagined 
directly  to  favour  the  popular  election  of  elders ;  and  we 
have  seen  that  the  inference  drawn  is  assuredly  fictitious. 
For  the  matter  in  hand  the  usage  of  the  word  in  the 
political  or  civil  affairs  of  Greece  is  no  evidence. 

It  is,  perhaps,  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  %.  does 
not  mean  the  imposition  of  hands,  for  which  Scripture 
supplies  another  phrase,  never  confounded  with  the 
word  in  question.  But  this  confusion  soon  began  to 
show  itself  in  ecclesiastical  authors,  who  not  unfre- 
quently  employ  xEl?OTOVia  where  we  might  expect 
Xeipodema,  or  ?/  eTcideaiQ  tu>v  yeipibv*  This  error  occurs 
in  the  so-called  Apostolical   Canons,  Chrysostom,    and 


NOTE    ON    ACTS    XIV.    23.  59 

subsequent  writers ;  and  it  may  have  led  the  authorized 
translators  to  give  " ordained"  rather  than  " chose,"  or 
''designated."  Bishop  Bilson,  in  his  "Perpetual Govern- 
ment of  Christ's  Church,"  is  guilty,  not  of  this  confusion 
only,  but  of  the  strange  error  that  "  the  elders"  included 
"  deacons."  (See  chap.  vii.  and  x.)  But  really  the  dis- 
cord of  commentators  is  almost  past  belief,  unless  one 
have  read  extensively  and  proved  the  fact  by  experience. 
Thus  Hammond  tries  to  extract  from  this  verse  the 
appointment  of  a  single  bishop  to  each  church  or  city ; 
whereas  one  might  have  inferred  (without  appealing  to 
such  incontestible  proof  to  the  contrary  as  Acts  xx.  17, 
28)  that  the  plurality  of  the  presbyters  with  the  singular 
distributive  was  as  strongly  against  him  as  language 
could  make  the  case,  short  of  an  express  contradiction. 
Had  Hammond's  idea  been  meant,  nothing  could  have 
been  easier  than  to  have  written  TrpevfivTepov  kcit  L-K\rj<jiav 
or  irpeajSwipovQ  kcit  eKKXrjffiag.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I 
may  trust  Mr.  Elsley's  report,  Whitby  opposes  this 
ultra-Episcopalianism,  on  the  equally  untenable  ground 
that  these  elders  were  such  as  had  miraculous  en- 
dowments, either  directly  from  God  (as  in  Acts  ii.  iv.  ix. 
x.  xi.)  or  through  an  apostolic  medium  (as  in  Acts  viii.), 
and  who  had  the  care  at  first  of  the  churches ;  not  fixed 
ministers,  but  nearer  to  the  apostles  in  rank.  Can  any 
statement  be  conceived  more  random  and  unfounded  ? 

The  last,  and  perhaps  the  worst,  specimen  of  this 
speculation  I  take  from  Calvin's  Inst.  IV.  iii.  15,  16, 
where,  according  to  the  author,  "Luke  relates  that 
Barnabas  and  Paul  ordained  elders  throughout  the 
churches  ;  but  he,  at  the  same  time,  marks^the  plan  or 
mode  when  he  says  it  was  done  by  suffrage.  The 
words  are  x-  *p-  k.  Uk\.  (Acts  xiv.  23).     They  therefore 


60  NOTE    ON    ACTS    XIV.    23. 

selected  {creabant)  two ;  but  the  whole  body,  as  was  the 
custom  of  the  Greeks  in  elections,  declared  bij  a  show  of 
hands  which  of  the  two  they  wished  to  have.''''  It  has  rarely 
been  my  lot  to  meet  with  a  more  glaring  perversion  of 
the  facts  and  language  of  inspiration  than  this  passage 
exhibits,  the  refutation  of  which  has  been  already 
anticipated.  The  new  translation  by  H.  Beveridge  is  pur- 
posely cited  to  cut  off  cavil  on  that  score ;  and  the  original 
is  given  underneath  for  verification.*4  It  is  consolatory, 
however,  to  find  that  so  untoward  a  construction  was 
destined  to  no  long  existence ;  for  its  own  author 
smothers  it,  though  with  reluctance,  in  his  commentary 
on  the  passage: — " Presbyterium  qui  hie  collectivum 
nomen  esse  putant,  pro  collegio  presbyterorum  positum, 
recte  sentiunt  meo  judicio." — {Comment,  in  he.) 

But  the  close  of  the  chapter  is  still  more  full  of  per- 
plexity and  error.  "Lastly  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  it 
was  not  the  whole  people,  but  only  pastors,  who  laid 
hands  on  ministers,  though  it  is  uncertain  whether  or 
not  several  always  laid  their  hands.  It  is  certain  that, 
in  the  case  of  the  deacons,  it  was  done  by  Paul  and 
Barnabas,  and  some  few  others.  (Acts  vi.  6  ;  xiii.  3.) 
But  in  another  place  Paul  mentions  that  he  himself, 
without  any  others,  laid  hands  on  Timothy.  '  Wherefore 
I  put  thee  in  remembrance  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of 
God,  which  is  in  thee  by  the  putting  on  of  my  hands' 
(2  Tim.  i.  6).     For  what  is  said  in  the  first  epistle  of 

*  "  Refert  enim  Lucas  constitutes  esse  per  ecclesias  presbyteros  a 
Paulo  et  Barnaba:  sed  rationem  vel  modum  simul  notat,  quum  dicit 
factum  id  esse*  suffragiis,  xeiPOTOt/^<ra,/'r€SJ  in<lu^,  Trpeo-fivrepovs  kot' 
iKK\ri<rlav.  Creabant  ergo  ipsi  duo  :  sed  tota  multitudo,  ut  mos 
Grsecorum  in  electionibus  erat,  manibus  sublatis  declarabat  quern 
habere  vellent."     (Genevae,  1618.) 


NOTE    ON    ACTS    XIV.    23.  61 

the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery  I  do  not 
understand,  as  if  Paul  were  speaking  of  the  college  of 
elders.  By  the  expression  I  understand  the  ordination 
itself  (!);  as  if  he  had  said,  Act  so,  that  the  gift  which 
you  received  by  the  laying  on  of  hands,  when  I  made 
you  a  presbyter  (! !),  may  not  be  in  vain."  That 
apostolic  hands  appointed  the  seven  men  whom  the 
multitude  elected  for  the  service  of  tables  is  clear.  But 
Scripture  is  silent  whether  imposition  of  hands  was 
practised  in  the  establishing  of  elders ;  and  to  me  that 
silence  seems  admirably  wise,  even  if  in  fact  hands 
were  imposed,  as  a  divine  provision  against  super- 
stitious abuse.  But  what  can  be  meant  by  the  reference 
to  Acts  xiii.  3,  connected  with  the  allegation  that  Paul 
and  Barnabas,  &c,  laid  their  hands  on  deacons?  As 
for  the  notion  that  tov  7rpeff(3vrep(ov  (1  Tim.  iv.  14) 
means  not  the  elders  as  a  body,  but  eldership,  and  so 
is  to  be  in  sense  dislocated  from  its  evident  and  neces- 
sary connection  with  \upibv  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  and 
put  in  apposition  with  yapiap.aToq  at  the  beginning,  I 
maintain  that  the  grammar  is  not  more  harsh  and 
unexampled  than  the  resulting  doctrine  is  strange. 
Eldership  in  Scripture  is  not  a  gift,  but  a  local  charge. 


THE  RESOURCE  OP  THE  FAITHFUL 
IS  THE  RUINS  OF  CHRISTENDOM, 

2  Tim.  ii.  11—22, 

LECTURE   VI. 

How  many  elements  of  solemnity  are  crowded  into 
the  subject  now  before  us !  It  is  solemn  to  look 
over  Christendom  and  survey  its  ruins,  now  too 
palpable  to  be  denied.  It  is  solemn,  on  the  other 
side,  to  think  of  the  faithful  goodness  of  Grod,  who 
knew  all  beforehand,  spread  it  out  in  the  unerring 
word  of  His  grace,  and  has  shown  us  that,  if  He  felt 
the  evil  that  was  about  to  cover  the  scene  of  the 
profession  of  Christ's  name  on  earth,  His  loving 
wisdom  descried  a  sure  path — a  path  the  vulture's 
eye  does  not  see,  which,  nevertheless,  He  gives  His 
people  to  discern,  and  by  means  of  which  they  can 
have  the  happy  certainty  that  they  are  pleasing  Grod. 
To  those  who,  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord  and  the 
truth,  deplore,  and  refuse  to  have  fellowship  with 
the  current  practice  of  Christendom,  there  may  be  a 

A 


2  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

certain  necessity  to  give  as  strong  proofs  as  may  be 
of  those  evils  which  now  abound,  and  of  which  the 
word  of  (rod  forewarned  when  they  were  but  in  the 
germ.  Indeed,  there  may  be  a  kind  of  temptation 
to  prove  the  evil,  where  we  feel  in  anywise  the  need 
of  a  justification  for  the  path  of  separation  from  Grod 
But  that  tendency  is  corrected  promptly,  and  tht 
heart  receives  its  due  tone  and  its  right  attitude 
when  we,  think  who,  after  all,  is  most  concerned,  and 
whose  honour  it  is  we  have  to  justify.  The  Lord 
preserve  us  from  thinking  of  ourselves !  It  is  un- 
worthy of  those  who  belong  to  Christ.  Be  it  our 
boast  to  justify  Him  alone. 

It  will  be  my  business  now  to  show,  not  that  He 
needs  aught  from  us,  not  that  His  words  of  light 
require  the  tapers  of  man  to  make  them  more  distinct, 
but  that  divine  charity  seeks  the  blessing  of  every 
one,  especially  those  who  are  comparatively  young 
and  uninformed  in  the  truth  of  God.  I  hope  to 
give  enough,  at  least,  of  the  evidence  to  show  most 
plainly  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is ;  how  faithfully 
His  word  deals  with  us ;  how  worthy  of  trust  both 
He  Himself  is  and  that  which  He  has  put  into  our 
hands.  This  may  encourage  the  most  diffident  of 
(rod's  children  to  look  up  with  confidence,  seeing  that 
the  end  was  as  plain  to  Him  as  the  beginning,  and 
that  for  us  the  only  path  is  that  of  Christ,  for  there 
cannot  be  two.  He  is  the  way,  and  as  there  is  but 
one  Christ,  so  there  can  be,  therefore,  but  one  path 
that  satisfies  the  heart  and  mind  of  Christ  for  those 
who  love  Him. 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  6 

Am  I  going  to  produce  strong  reasons,  as  if  one 
needed  to  justify  this  ?  It  will  be  enough  to  explain 
what  He  has  pointed  out.  To  those  who  know  Him, 
there  will  be  the  completest  justification  and  the 
strongest  reason,  in  the  fact  that  it  is  His  path  for 
us,  though  His  goodness  has  given,  alas !  too  sure 
and  abundant  proof  how  deeply  it  is  needed. 

Further,  I  shall  have  the  opportunity  to-night  of 
slightly  reviewing  the  ground  over  which  we  have 
passed  on  previous  occasions,  and  of  showing  how  all 
that  is  most  precious  has  been  secured  to  the  faithful. 
Not  that  the  Lord  has  not  been  pleased  to  take 
away  much.  Not  that  we  ought  to  be  unfeeling 
about  anything  that  concerns  the  Lord's  power  and 
glory  in  the  Church.  But  if  we  rightly  claim  a 
higher  place  for  that  which  concerns  Grod  in  His 
moral  ways ;  if  we  ought  to  feel  that  what  brings  and 
keeps  before  us  the  grace  of  Christ  must  be  of  deeper 
value  than  any  displays  of  power  before  men ;  yet,  on 
the  other  hand,  beloved  brethren,  it  would  be*  a 
wrong  to  the  Lord  if  we  looked  with  cold  indiffer- 
ence on  the  utter  weakness  of  this  our  day,  and  the 
dishonour  thus  put  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  in 
Christendom  itself.  Alas !  there  is  no  place  among 
the  outside  strangers  to  the  Lord  Jesus  where  there 
is  more  daring  enormity  done  than  in  the  very  scene 
where  men  are  baptized  in  His  name.  When  we 
look  back  at  times  long  past,  at  the  early  days  of  the 
Church's  pilgrimage  on  the  earth,  and  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  then  displayed,  I  am  persuaded  we 
ought  to  feel  for  the  wounds  inflicted  in  the  house  of 
a  2 


4  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

His  friends ;  we  ought  to  be  grieved  that  the  bear- 
ing of  the  Church  was  such  that  the  Lord  coul'd  not 
outwardly  pour  honour  upon  her,  but  was  obliged  to 
strip  her,  as  it  were,  and  shame  her  before  the 
enemies  of  His  name. 

Let  us  own  all  this ;  as  also  the  far  deeper  sorrow 
that  men  so  little  prize  the  truth,  so  tamely  feel  for 
the  honour  of  the  Lord's  Person  in  Christendom,  not 
to  speak  of  the  well-nigh  universal  want  of  feeling 
even  what  the  Church  is,  in  its  barest  and  simplest 
forms,  and  still  more  the  total  forgetfulness  of  its 
bright  portion  as  one  with  the  Saviour,  and  of  that 
which  the  Church  hopes  for  in  the  day  to  comet  Be 
assured  that  if  we  do  not  thus  feel  with  the  Lord,  in 
our  little  measure,  we  are  not  in  a  moral  condition 
rightly  to  act  upon  His  word  in  present  things.  It 
is  a  lesson  of  no  small  importance  to  see  that  the 
Lord  has  not  given  us  in  Scripture  that  which 
admits  of  bare  imitation.  It  does  not  suffice  to  take 
up  the  epistles  of  St.  Paul,  for  instance,  and  set  to 
work  as  if  we  were  competent  to  put  in  order  the 
things  that  are  wanting,  and  ordain  elders  here  or 
there.  It  is  one  thing  to  fall  back  upon  the  word 
God  has  given  us,  and  quite  another  to  assume  that 
we  can  reinstate  the  Church,  now  that  it  has  been 
broken  up  and  ruined.  It  is  right  to  feel  its  low 
estate,  but  that  we  should  now  build  up  again  that 
which  is  thus  fallen,  the  very  thought  proves  that  the 
heart  in  this  has  no  communion  with  Christ;  that 
there  is  a  lack  of  due  holy  distrust  of  self;  that  there 
is  such  insensibility  to  the  true  state  of  things  now, 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  0 

as  unfits  not  merely  for  authoritatively  restoring  the 
Church,  but  even  for  the  humbleness  of  faith  that 
confides  in  the  actual  resources  of  Christ.  For  it  is 
an  unvarying  principle  of  God,  that  when  there  has 
been  a  departure  from  Himself,  it  matters  not  under 
what  circumstances,  or  time,  or  place,  or  people — 
whether  before  the  flood  or  since — whether  in  Israel 
or  in  the  Church — Grod  insists  upon  it  that  the  first 
step  in  that  which  is  morally  good  should  be  the  sense 
of  our  real  evil  in  His  sight.  When  this  is  the  case, 
the  presumption  will  be  far  from  us  that  we  can  make 
good  that  wonderful  display  of  divine  power,  grace, 
and  wisdom — the  Church  of  GOD  !  It  was  the 
greatest  work,  so  to  speak,  that  Grod  ever  wrought 
upon  the  earth  (next  to  the  Cross,  whereby  alone 
such  a  work  became  possible). 

God  forbid  that  in  thinking  of  what  He  has  done, 
we  should  compare  that  which  stands  alone — alone 
throughout  all  eternity  !  But  if  we  look  at  all  that 
has  ever  been  done  upon  the  earth,  or  even  the  very 
making  of  heaven  and  earth,  I  say,  that  the  work  of 
God  in  His  Church — the  Church  of  God — was  greater 
still.  And  now,  we  poor  leaky  vessels  that  could  not 
keep  the  blessing,  we  that  have  been,  through  our 
own  weakness  and  unwatchfulness,  a  prey  to  Satan's 
wiles,  and  let  in  the  thieves  and  robbers  that  have 
spoiled  the  house  of  God,  are  we  the  men  to  set  it 
up  again  ?  Is  this  the  feeling  of  lowly  faith  ?  If  it 
were  bad  for  man  to  go  away,  if  it  were  a  grievous 
thing  for  Israel  to  dishonour  the  law  of  God,  what 
must  it  be  for  the  Church  to  slight  God  the  Holy 


6  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

Grliost?  It  is  the  epistle  of  Christ,  the  habitation 
of  God  through  the  Spirit,  the  object  of  His  most 
perfect  love,  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  even  in  Christ — 
made  the  righteousness  of  Grod  in  Him.  What  is  it, 
then,  for  that  Church  practically  to  forego  the  glory 
of  Grod  here  below — to  prefer  the  work  of  their  own 
hands  to  His  word  and  Spirit — once  more  to  bow 
down  to  idols  graven  by  art  and  man's  device  ? 
Oh  !  it  is  more  loathsome  than  that  which  Scripture, 
or  even  history,  records  of  days  and  men  infinitely 
less  privileged. 

Think  not  that  I  am  exaggerating  what  Christen- 
dom has  done  or  does.  Nor  do  I  wish  to  dilate,  more 
than  is  absolutely  needful,  upon  the  painful  failure  of 
that  which  bears  the  name  of  Christ  here  below.  In 
truth,  it  is  not  so.  But  let  us  hear  what  the  word  of 
Grod  says  upon  the  subject.  Who  would  allow  the 
thought  that  He  speaks  too  strongly  of  that  which 
He  saw  from  the  first,  and  told  us  was  coming,  as 
He  looked  into  the  future  ? 

Let  us  begin  with  the  Saviour  Himself,  and  see 
what  He  intimated  to  His  disciples  should  be  found 
when  He  returns  again  to  the  earth,  when  He  sum- 
mons man  to  give  an  account  of  himself.  In  Luke 
xvii.  He  tells  us,  not  that  the  world  should  become 
gradually  changed  from  a  wilderness  to  a  Paradise, 
nor  that  the  heathen  should  lay  aside  their  false  gods 
and  the  Jews  their  enmity  to  the  true  Messiah.  On 
the  contrary,  He  gives  the  disciples  the  needed  warn- 
ing, that  it  was  to  be  as  in  the  days  of  Noah,  and 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  7 

in  the  days  of  Lot.  These  were  times  of  ease  and 
worldliness,  when  all  mankind  was  rising  up  against 
God;  and  yet  they  furnished  comparisons  for  the 
scenes  which  are  to  meet  the  Lord  as  He  appears 
from  heaven  to  judge  the  world.  "  As  it  was  in  the 
days  of  Noe,  so  shall  it  be  also  in  the  days  of  the 
Son  of  man.  They  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  mar- 
ried wives,  they  were  given  in  marriage,  until  the 
day  that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark,  and  the  flood  came 
and  destroyed  them  all."  The  self-security  and  love 
of  ease  will  be  substantially  the  same  when  the  Lord 
is  revealed,  as  just  before  the  flood.  Then,  as  of  old, 
men  will  be  engrossed  in  the  ordinary  matters  of 
daily  life.  Spite  of  the  law,  spite  of  the  Gospel, 
again  is  seen  and  will  be  continued  that  state  of 
corruption  and  violence  which  brought  the  Deluge 
upon  the  earth,  no  less  guilty  than  utterly  uncon- 
cerned. And  Christ  looks  onward  to  the  day  of  His 
return  :  no  previous  millennium  of  holy  bliss  awaiting 
Him ;  no  happy,  rejoicing  hearts,  characterizing  the 
world  generally  then ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  same 
moral  condition,  the  same  indifference  to  God's  will 
and  glory  which  preceded  the  flood. 

After  the  flood,  when  nations  and  tongues  began, 
there  was  another  scene,  more  appalling  and  degrad- 
ing, which  the  same  book  of  Genesis  brings  before 
us ;  and  this  also  furnishes  its  sad  complement  to 
the  picture  of  the  days  just  before  the  Son  of  man 
comes  again.  "  Like  also  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot ; 
they  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  bought,  they  sold,  they 
planted,  they  builded ;  but  the  same  day  that  Lot  went 


8  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

out  of  Sodom  "  (most  ominous  words !)  "  it  rained  fire 
and  brimstone  from  heaven  and  destroyed  them  all. 
Even  thus  shall  it  be  in  the  day  when  the  Son  of 
man  is  revealed." 

If  we  take  up  now  the  Epistles,  we  shall  find  the 
light  shed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  no  way  weakens  but 
confirms  in  every  respect  the  testimony  of  the  Lord 
Jesus ;  only  that  now  we  have,  naturally,  the  Holy 
Ghost  looking  rather  at  professing  Christendom, 
whereas  our  Lord  made  the  Jews  His  starting  point 
and  centre. 

Thus,  in  Rom.  xi.,  without  dwelling  at  length 
upon  the  chapter,  the  Spirit  of  God  anticipates  the 
end  of  Christendom.  "  Boast  not  against  the  bran- 
ches. But  if  thou  boast,  thou  bearest  not  the  root,  but 
the  root  thee."  Such  is  the  warning  given  to  the 
Gentile  professor.  The  Jews  are  meant  by  the 
natural  branches.  They  had  been  the  depositories 
of  promise  of  old,  and  had  therefore  the  responsible 
place  of  testimony  for  God  upon  the  earth.  Hence 
they  were  the  original  branches  of  the  olive  tree,  the 
line  of  promise  and  testimony  on  the  earth  which  began 
with  Abraham.  But  the  Jews  broke  the  law,  went 
after  idols,  refused  and  slew  the  Messiah.  There  was 
a  resource  in  the  Gospel ;  but  they  refused  the  Gospel 
from  heaven,  as  well  as  the  Lord  their  King  on 
earth.  The  consequence  is,  that  the  natural  branches 
of  the  olive  tree  were  broken  off,  and  the  wild  olive, 
or  Gentile,  grafted  into  the  old  stock  of  profession. 
And  this  is  the  warning  that  is  given  :   "  Thou  wilt 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  9 

say  then,  The  branches  were  broken  off,  that  I  might 
be  grafted  in."  Has  not  this  exactly  been  the  feeling 
of  Christendom  ?  Contempt  for  the  Jews,  astonish- 
ment at  their  wickedness,  utter  insensibility  as  to 
their  own  condition.  "  Well ;  because  of  unbelief, 
they  were  broken  off,  and  thou  standest  by  faith. 
Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear :  for  if  God  spared 
not  the  natural  branches,  take  heed  lest  He  also 
spare  not  thee.  Behold  therefore  the  goodness 
and  severity  of  Grod:  on  them  which  fell,  severity; 
but  towards  thee,  goodness,  if  thou  continue  in  His 
goodness." 

Let  me  ask  any  man  that  has  the  smallest 
fear  of  God,  or  even  outward  acquaintance  with 
His  word,  Has  Christianity  continued  in  the  good- 
ness of  God?  Is  there  any  Protestant,  any  Eoman 
Catholic  who  thinks  so?  Is  there  any  person, 
no  matter  where,  no  matter  who — a  single  soul 
who  dares  to  say  that  Christendom,  the  professing 
Gentile,  has  continued  in  the  goodness  of  God  ? 
The  Eomanist  cannot  think  the  Protestant  schism 
continues  in  the  goodness  of  God.  The  Pro- 
testant is  assured  that  the  Romish  body  is  the 
fruit  of  clean  departure  from  God  into  superstition; 
and  so  we  might  run  through  all  existing  systems. 
They  may  each  plead  for  his  own  association ;  but 
who  will  say  that  even  his  own  has  continued 
faithful  ?  They  may  believe  that  it  means  well, 
and  would  be  admirable  if  carried  out;  but  who 
would  not  acknowledge  that  it  has  not  been  carried 
out  ?     that    consequently   no   sect,   no   portion,   no 


10  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

fragment  even,  has  continued  in  the  goodness  of 
God  ?  All  agree  that,  as  for  the  mass  of  profession 
outside  themselves,  it  has  failed  to  testify  for  the 
goodness  of  Grod.  Consequently  there  rises  up  from 
men  on  every  side  the  acknowledgment  that  the 
Gentile  has  not  continued  in  it.  Not  that  the 
failure  is  felt  as  it  should  be  ;  not  that  there  is 
adequate  confession  and  renunciation  of  our  common 
sin  before  Grod.  Where  sin  is  really  spread  out  to 
Grod,  it  will  not  be  persisted  in.  But,  at  least, 
there  is  an  outward  acknowledgment  to  a  certain 
extent  in  the  earth  now,  and  quite  enough  to  prove 
that  Christianity  has  not  continued  in  the  goodness 
of  Grod.  What  then  says  the  word  of  the  Lord  ? 
"Thou,  also,  shalt  be  cut  off."  The  Gentile  shall 
be  cut  off  for  his  faithlessness,  as  surely  as  the  Jew 
was. 

This,  remark,  is  not  in  some  prophetic  portion  of 
God's  word,  which  some  might  think  ambiguous, 
though  we  do  not  allow  the  thought  for  a  moment 
that  any  part  of  the  word  of  God  is  so.  But  here,  in  an 
epistle  which  every  Christian  allows  to  be  one  of  the 
most  fundamental  and  comprehensive,  which  takes 
up  Christianity  from  its  elements,  and  through  which 
the  Lord  has  established  souls  in  peace,  perhaps  more 
than  through  any  other  portion  of  His  word ;  it  is  in 
this  epistle  to  the  Romans  that  we  have  the  solemn 
announcement  of  the  sure  cutting  off  of  the  Gentiles. 
Not  merely  one  part  or  another,  but  the  Gentile 
profession  is  doomed  of  God,  because  it  has  not  con- 
tinued in   His   goodness;    as  truly  as  the    Jew  is 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  11 

now  cast  out  from  his  heritage,  a  bye-word  and  a 
reproach  to  all  the  earth,  evidently  bearing  his  doom 
stamped  upon  his  brow. 

To  examine  many  of  the  epistles,  would  more  than 
occupy  my  time.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  as  we  travel 
down  the  stream,  from  2  Thessalonians,  which 
was  one  of  the  earliest  epistles  written  by  St.  Paul, 
to  the  latest,  the  Epistles  of  St.  John,  we  have  only 
an  increasing  testimony,  growing  more  distinct  and 
urgent  and  awful.  As  the  evil  grew,  so  the  signs  of 
judgment  became  more  apparent.  The  Spirit  of 
Grod  sounds  the  trumpet  with  no  uncertain  sound, 
and  wakes  up  the  faithful  where  there  is  an  ear  to 
hear.  Christendom  was  gradually  being  under- 
mined, and  would  become,  in  no  long  time,  the 
engine  of  opposition  to  Grod — would  be  made  the 
theatre  of  the  grossest  evil,  taking  up  the  abomi- 
nations, not  only  of  the  Jews,  but  of  the  heathen 
themselves,  and  consecrating  a  system  of  idolatry 
under  the  name  of  Christ  and  His  mother,  saints 
and  angels,  even  more  frighful  and  guilty  than  any- 
thing ever  before  found  here  below.  For  the  very 
fact  of  praying  to  Peter,  Paul,  or  the  Virgin,  proves 
that  the  light  of  Christianity  must  in  some  measure 
have  been  known,  before  it  ended  in  so  distressing  an 
apostacy.  Does  any  one  think  the  expression  "  apos- 
tacy  "  over-strong  ?  Allow  me  to  tell  them  that  the 
very  phrase  "  the  apostacy  "  is  the  expression  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  that  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians. 
There  we  are  told  "  there  is  a  mystery  of  iniquity 
which  now  worketh."    Only  there  is  now  a  hindering 


12  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

power.  Consequently,  it  would  not  burst  out  into 
its  full  development  all  at  once ;  it  is  kept  in  check, 
for  a  certain  time,  by  the  good  hand  of  the  Lord,  for 
the  purposes  of  His  own  grace.  But  the  moment  that 
this  restraint  was  gone,  then  it  would  be  no  myster}^ 
any  longer,  but  would  become  manifest.  It  is  called 
"  a  (or  rather  "  the ")  falling  away,"  or  apostacy. 
This  must  become  ripe,  and  "  the  man  of  sin  "  must  be 
revealed.  Thus  we  have  too  plainly  an  uninter- 
rupted succession  of  evil.  This  is  the  vista  described 
in  the  Scripture ;  a  succession  of  evil  that  goes  on 
always  swelling  in  intensity  and  volume,  till  at  last, 
when  the  restraint  is  removed,  it  bursts  out  into  a 
yet  more  fearful  issue — not  "  the  apostacy"  only, 
but  "the  man  of  sin."  What  a  contrast  to  the  Man 
of  righteousness,  when  man  dares  to  take  the  place 
of  Grod  in  the  temple  of  Grod  ! 

This,  then,  is  what  Christendom  is  to  the  Christian 
watchman.  It  has  not  of  course  been  realized  in 
all  its  force,  though  I  do  not  deny  that  there  have 
been  various  and  also  growing  manifestations  of  evil. 
As  the  apostle  John  tells  us,  "  Even  now  there  are 
many  antichrists,  whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the 
last  time."  This  is  so  much  the  more  remarkable 
because  he  shows  that  the  Antichrist  was  coming, 
the  great  token  of  which  is  that  there  were  many 
antichrists  then.  They  knew  thereby  it  was  the 
last  time.  The  Spirit  would  not  close  the  volume  of 
the  New  Testament  until  the  worst  evil  was  actually 
there,  at  least  in  its  germ  ;  and  this  being  so,  and 
descried  by  inspiration,  there  was  need  of  nothing 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  13 

further.  The  Spirit  of  God  could,  as  it  were,  fold 
up  the  sacred  roll.  It  was  complete.  The  mystery 
of  lawlessness  is  shown  already  at  work,  "  the  man 
of  sin"  is  predicted ;  the  mystery  of  Christ  and  the 
Church  no  longer  hid  but  disclosed.  Scripture 
had  attained  its  full  compass.  There  remains, 
not  some  fresh  view  of  Christy  so  to  speak,  but 
contrariwise,  the  unfolding  of  that  Christ  whom 
they  had  already,  the  bringing  out  more  intimately 
and  appreciatively  the  light  of  the  love  of  Grod  that 
was  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the  beginning. 
This  is  the  antidote  to  all  Satan  can  bring — to  the 
many  antichrists,  and  at  last  to  the  Antichrist.  I 
refer  to  it  in  order  to  give  a  kind  of  connexion 
between  the  different  states — the  rise,  progress,  and 
final  manifestation  of  lawlessness.  Nay,  more,  the 
lawless  one  is  to  exalt  himself  against  the  Lord  of 
glory.  The  last  book  of  the  New  Testament  shows 
the  millennial  reign  over  the  earth,  ushered  in  by 
the  destruction  of  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet, 
with  all  their  company,  as  Babylon  had  been  pre- 
viously destroyed. 

Thus  rapidly  have  we  glanced,  without  entering  into 
all  the  proofs  of  the  doom  of  Christendom.  They  are 
patent  in  the  general  epistles,  and  in  particular  in 
the  epistle  of  Jude,  where  a  most  energetic  sketch  is 
given  in  the  compass  of  a  single  verse  (11) .  With  that 
power  which  the  Spirit  of  Grod  only  knows  how  to 
convey,  the  shadows  of  Cain  are  sketched,  then  of 
Balaam,  and  finally  of  the  gainsaying  Core.  Is 
there  nothing  for  Christendom  there  ?     Is  there  no 


14  THE    RESOURCE    OF   THE    FAITHFUL. 

sound  of  sure  if  slumbering  judgment  there  ?  "  Woe 
unto  them !  for  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain; " 
that  unnatural  brother,  that  pretender  to  religion, 
who  brought  his  offering  to  the  Lord  but  slew  the 
guiltless.  Is  there  no  presage  in  him  who  received 
the  wages  of  unrighteousness — in  the  man  who, 
spite  of  himself,  prophesied  glorious  things  of  a 
people  that  he  loved  not,  but  would  have  sold  to 
destruction  ?  Is  there  no  solemn  lesson  in  the  wages 
received  for  teaching,  it  may  be,  the  glorious  things 
of  God,  without  heart  for  His  people,  still  less  any 
care  or  jealousy  for  His  word,  for  His  will,  for  His 
glory  ?  Finally,  in  that  fearful  rebellion  of  Korah, 
"the  gainsaying  of  Core,"  in  those  who  had  the 
ministry  of  the  sanctuary,  in  the  proud  Levites  who 
coveted  and  arrogated  to  themselves  the  place  of 
Moses  and  Aaron  (the  apostle  and  the  high  priest  of 
the  Jewish  profession),  is  there  no  awful  warning 
there  ?  Have  you  never  heard  of  men  professing  to 
be  servants  of  Christ,  and  yet  pretending  to  be  priests 
strictly,  officially,  and  exclusively — pretending  to  be 
authoritative  channels  of  divine  pardon,  empowered 
on  earth  to  absolve  from  guilt  before  God  ?  I  do 
not  speak  only  of  such  as  claim  in  their  heathenish 
darkness  to  offer  a  sacrifice  for  the  dead  as  well  as 
the  living.  Assuredly  one  thinks  not  with  bitterness 
about  such  things  as  these,  but  we  may  all  stand 
aghast  as  we  survey  the  facts  realized  in  Christen- 
dom. If  it  be  a  prophecy,  it  is  a  prophecy  fulfilled. 
All  this  may  suffice  to  show  how  little  Christen- 
dom has  continued  in  the  goodness  of  God.     Details 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  15 

are  needless.  The  godliest  members  of  the  various 
religious  societies  would  be  the  first  to  confess  the 
failure  of  their  own.  God's  controversy  is  not 
with  one  only,  but  with  all,  though  doubtless 
the  proudest  will  meet  with  a  peculiar  judgment. 
It  is  evident,  also,  that  the  word  of  God  leaves 
it  not  to  human  experience  or  to  spiritual  judg- 
ment to  infer  His  thoughts  of  Christendom;  He 
has  pronounced  upon  it  Himself.  Hence  it  is  not  pre- 
sumptuous, but  on  the  contrary  the  part  of  humble 
faith,  to  believe  God  in  this.  How  good  He  is  thus 
to  cut  off  the  fear  of  forming  a  judgment  so  stern ! 
For  now  he  that  does  not  pronounce  after  the  Lord, 
is  ignorant  of  his  Master's  mind,  or  is  false  to  His 
will.  He  that  would  defend  or  justify  Christendom, 
does  not,  in  effect,  fear  to  give  the  Lord  the  lie. 
From  the  Scriptures  enough  has  been  given  to  show 
that  the  man  who  can  look  on  Christendom  and  vin- 
dicate what  is  around  us,  ignorantly  or  wilfully 
slights  all  the  instruction  that  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
given  on  the  subject.  Undoubtedly  this  is  strong ; 
but  it  is  the  Lord's  goodness  which  makes  the  owning 
of  it  now  to  be  a  matter  of  sjTnpathy  with  Him,  and 
not  of  a  proud  claim  to  superior  light. 

God's  word  is  open  to  all.  By  it  we  are  all  bound 
to  see  as  He  sees.  The  Lord  admits  of  no  vain  excuses, 
that  we  cannot  judge.  The  Spirit  of  God,  who  judges 
and  discerns  all  things,  dwells  in  every  Christian. 
He  that  says  he  cannot  judge  Christendom,  virtually 
denies  himself  to  be  a  spiritual  man ;  but  if  we  do 
judge  that  Christendom  has  fallen  into  these  predicted 


16  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

evils,  one  after  another,  and  that  what  was  then  bnt 
budding,  is  now  bearing  the  most  bitter  and  baneful 
fruit,  I  ask,  are  we  to  partake  of  it  ?  Are  we  to  be 
insensible  to  our  own  share  of  the  common  sin  ?  If 
the  Lord  graciously  imparts  the  strongest  warning, 
are  we  to  satisfy  ourselves  with  that  flimsiest  and 
most  profane  of  apologies,  that  when  the  Lord  comes, 
He  will  set  it  all  right  ?  Yes,  but  it  will  be  too  late 
to  set  right  my  conscious,  Christ-dishonouring  un- 
faithfulness ;  it  will  be  to  my  shame  to  live  till  then 
indifferent  to  His  word,  careless  of  His  glory,  regard- 
less of  the  Holy  Grhost,  who  is  grieved  by  that  which 
I  have  been  allowing  practically.  Am  I,  or  am  I 
not,  to  refrain  from  that  which  insults  Him  ?  If  I 
know  these  things,  am  I  to  content  myself  without 
doing  them  ?  He  who  does,  puts  himself  in  the 
guiltiest  place  of  all.  Do  I  know  and  feel  the  despite 
Christendom  does,  and  I  have  done,  to  the  Spirit  of 
grace  ?  Then  let  me  look  up  in  dependence  on  the 
Lord,  that  I  may  do  it  no  more,  nor  settle  down  in 
a  pretext  so  lame  and  criminal,  as  that  the  Lord  will 
set  all  to  rights  again.  Is  He  not  coming  to  judge 
every  evil  way  ?  No  doubt,  He  will  bring  in  good, 
and  this  from  above  ;  but  He  will  judge  all  evil,  and 
yet  more  than  in  times  past.  In  vain,  then,  do  I 
essay  to  shelter  myself  under  the  blessed  truth,  that 
the  Lord  is  coming  to  display  the  kingdom  of  God 
upon  earth.  Assuredly,  He  will.  From  the  heavens 
He  will  come,  and  fill  the  earth  with  the  peace  and 
blessing  He  brings  with  Himself,  instead  of  finding 
here  below.      A  few  poor  broken  hearts  He  will  find 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  17 

in  the  world — a  godly  remnant,  crying  out,  like  the 
importunate  widow  in  the  guilty  city  where  ruled  the 
judge  that  feared  neither  God  nor  man.  Such  and 
worse  will  be  the  state  of  things,  and  in  their  midst 
shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  Yes,  but  crying 
out  in  alarm.  And  so  He  will  clear  the  world  with 
the  avenging  sword,  before  He  establishes  His  throne 
of  righteousness  upon  it.  Of  course,  I  speak  figura- 
tively now ;  but  the  fact  will  be  unsparing  divine 
judgment ;  and  therefore  how  blind  for  any  to  harden 
themselves,  in  going  on  with  sin,  under  the  plea  that 
the  Lord  is  coming  to  set  the  world  and  Church  to 
rights ! 

Allow  me  to  say  tether,  that  the  Lord  has  not 
left  us  to  our  own  thoughts  any  more  of  the  good  than 
of  the  evil.  He  has  given  us  His  path,  and  this  is 
what  the  heart  desires  to  come  to — the  resources  of 
the  faithful  in  the  ruins  of  Christendom.  It  were 
strange  indeed  if  the  word  of  Grod  shed  no  sure  light 
where  it  is  so  needed  ?  Can  we  conceive  such  a  thing 
as  the  Lord  giving  His  view  of  the  darkening  future, 
and  no  provident  care  for  His  beloved,  and  feeble, 
and  trembling  followers  ?  We  began  with  the  Lord's 
testimony  about  man's  evil ;  let  us  see  how  He  en- 
sures good  for  His  people  in  the  midst  of  it.  For 
Matt,  xviii.  we  may  bless  the  Lord.  Although  He 
is  giving  instruction  as  to  the  animating  spring  of  the 
assembly,  which  is  grace,  (as  law  was  the  governing 
principle  of  the  synagogue,)  the  Lord  provides  what 


18  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

would  be  deeply  needed,  if  they  were  reduced  to  a 
handful.  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together 
in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them"  (ver.  20) . 
Could  one  conceive  more  tender  thought,  or  more  evi- 
dent wisdom  than  the  Lord  thus  caring  for  His  own 
in  a  dark  day  ?  To  this  the  goodly  flock  might  come  ; 
that  assembly  which  once  stood  out  so  fair,  with  its 
thousands  on  whom  great  grace  rested.  How  wise 
thus  to.  prepare  the  hearts  of  His  servants  !  How 
well  He  knew  and  guarded  against  the  anxieties  of 
His  servants  !  We  know  what  numbers  are  to  the 
worldly  spirit,  and  how  apt  we  are  to  rest  upon  that 
which  looks  great  in  the  earth.  Yet  nothing  is  more 
destructive  of  Christianity.  He  that  has  not  a  heart 
for  the  two  or  three,  must  be  only  a  dead  weight  if 
he  were  among  ten  thousand.  It  might  be,  no  doubt, 
that  he  would  be  carried  along  the  stream  of  happy 
multitudes  ;  and  that  which  was  thus  unfaithful  to  the 
mind  of  Christ,  might  pass  unnoticed  in  the  strong  cur- 
rent and  new-born  delight  in  the  Saviour,  transporting 
all  around,  as  was  no  doubt  the  case  on  that  bright 
day  when  the  Holy  Grhost  came  down  from  heaven 
to  be  the  herald  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  to 
make  believing  men  on  earth  the  dwelling-place  of 
Grod.  We  can  understand  that  at  Pentecost  the 
tide  of  joy  rose  so  high  as  to  cover  all  such  elements, 
sure  as  they  were  to  appear  later  on. 

And  soon  it  came,  too  soon,  when  sounds  of  dis- 
content were  heard  even  in  that  blessed  habitation 
of  God,     Alas !  man  was  there ;  not  Grod  only,  in 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  19 

His  goodness,  but  man;  and  behind  was  the  ad- 
versary, ready  to  dishonour  the  one  through  the 
other. 

The  Church,  like  man  and  Israel,  has  to  be  tried 
on  earth.  What  is  the  declared  issue  ?  Never  was 
there  such  blessing  entrusted  to  man ;  but  man  is  as 
faithless  under  the  Grospel  as  he  was  rebellious  under 
the  law.  The  Holy  Grhost  is  slighted,  as  the  Son 
had  been ;  and  in  the  day  when  eternal  realities  are 
revealed,  man  turns  back  to  the  shadows  of  Judaism, 
preferring  them  to  the  substantial  truth  of  (rod. 
This  is  the  history  of  Christendom.  Anri  the  Lord, 
with  it  all  spread  out  before  His  prescient  eyes, 
comforts  His  followers,  were  they  ever  so  few  and 
weak,  with  the  assurance  of  His  presence  where  His 
name  has  its  central  place  to  their  faith. 

In  the  prospect  of  coming  evil,  how  gracious  of 
the  Lord  to  think,  it  may  be,  of  some  obscure  village 
— of  some  solitary  ship  that  travels  across  the  ocean 
— of  some  comparatively  desert  island — yea,  or  of 
the  vast  and  crowded  city,  where  the  very  solitariness 
of  discipleship  is  more  realized  sometimes  than  any- 
where else  !  "Wherever,  however,  whenever  it  might 
be,  the  Lord  gives  His  own  weight  of  authority  to 
the  two  or  three  gathered  unto  His  name.  It  is  not 
merely  His  blessing-j-where  could  He  not  bless? 
Blessing  He  went  on  high,  and  never  since — if  I  may 
so  say — never  has  He  laid  down  the  hands  which 
He  then  lifted  up  in  blessing.  It  could  not  be  other- 
wise, till  He  come  in  judgment.  His  work  was 
infinite.     Who  could  limit  the  preciousness  of  His 

B    2 


20  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

blood  ?  Who  could  say  that  redemption,  like  the 
first  covenant,  was  grown  old,  and  ready  to  vanish 
away?  Could  any  difficulty,  danger,  or  need  in 
Christendom  turn  that  grace  back,  as  it  were,  into 
its  spring,  or  dry  up  those  rivers  of  living  waters 
which  they  that  believe  should  receive?  It  could 
not  be ;  but  there  is  more  than  all  that  here.  Not 
only  is  there  blessing,  but  there  is  also  the  weight  of 
His  authority  guaranteed  to  the  smallest  real  repre- 
sentative of  His  assembly.  We  know  that  men 
shrink  back  from  Church  discipline  ;  and  he  need 
not  wonder  at  this  who  is  aware  how  it  was  made 
the  most  abominable  scourge  of  tyranny,  under  the 
fairest  pretences,  the  earth  ever  beheld.  One  can- 
not, therefore,  be  surprised  that  Christians  who  had 
escaped  from  the  weight  of  that  iron  hand  should 
somewhat  shrink  back  at  the  bare  sound.  But  we 
must  beware  of  mistrusting  Him  to  whom  we  owe 
our  every  blessing,  because  Babylon,  the  world- 
Church,  has  perverted  His  words.  But  if  there 
were  only  two  or  three,  there  ought  to  be  as  much 
jealousy  as  if  they  were  three  thousand,  to  maintain 
publicly  and  privately,  collectively  and  individually, 
ways  consistent  with  the  character  of  Christ.  This 
cannot  be  unless  there  be  discipline.  The  obligation 
of  an  united  pure  walk  is  l^und  up  with  the  very 
integrity  and  being  of  Grod's  assembly.  It  ceases  to 
be  the  Church  of  Cod,  unless  there  be  the  holy, 
earnest,  solemn  carrying  out  of  that  which  the  Lord 
has  laid  down.  "  Purge  out,  therefore,  the  old 
leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  un- 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  21 

leavened."  •  No  ruin  can  touch  this  responsibility 
for  a  moment.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Lord  takes 
care,  in  His  grace,  that  blessing  shall  flow,  spite  of 
failure. 

But  there  is  more  than  the  sovereign-  action  of 
olivine  grace,  where  responsibility  may  have  been 
little  felt  and  the  will  of  (rod  misunderstood.  The 
Lord  watches  over  those  gathered  together  to  His 
name,  and  is  there  present,  in  their  midst,  were  they 
but  two  or  three.  What  unfailing  and  inestimable 
comfort !  Conceive  for  a  moment  some  Christian 
awakened  to  feel  that  the  place  of  a  believer  is  not  to 
be  a  member  merely  of  the  ecclesiastical  system  of 
the  country,  or  of  particular  views,  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  the  only  thing  which  suits  and  is  due  to 
Christ,  is,  that  we  should  renounce — we  cannot  be 
too  lowly,  but  neither  can  we  be  too  thorough  in 
renouncing — every  tie  that  is  not  connected  with 
Christ.  Where  we  can  obey  Christ  in  the  midst  of 
those  that  are  His — where  the  Holy  Ghost  is  allowed 
freedom  to  work  according  to  the  word  of  God — 
there  is  Cod's  Church,  and  nowhere  else.  The 
liberty  of  the  Spirit  is  to  exalt  Christ,  and  this  only. 
This  is  a  universal  principle,  true  of  an  individual, 
and  true  of  the  assembly.  It  would  be  a  miserable 
thing  if  the  assembly  were  not  a  scene  of  true  and 
blessed  liberty;  but  such  it  is,  that  Cod  may  be 
glorified  by  Christ  Jesus.  There  will  be  also  the  con- 
sciousness of  that  which  is  offensive,  just  in  propor- 
tion to  the  spiritual  power  that  is  in  the  assembly. 

A  great  or  a  small  company  makes  no  essential 


22  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

difference.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  sent  down  to  care  for 
the  interests  of  the  name  of  Christ.  The  two  or  three 
weak  and  ignorant  ones  gathered  to  it  at  least  know 
that  they  are  His ;  that  they  ought  not,  therefore, 
to  belong  to  man ;  that  they  ought  not,  therefore,  to 
be  under  any  other  tie  ;  that  rules  made  by  one,  or 
many,  or  all — if  they  were  the  very  best  that  were 
ever  produced — are  not  entitled  to  bind  Christians, 
seeing  that  God  has  already  furnished  the  only  per- 
fect standard  not  only  of  faith,  but  of  Church  fellow- 
ship, and  that  to  own  another  is  to  dishonour  the  word 
of  God  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  here  to  make  it 
good  in  power.  The  question  is  not  whether  we  can 
do  better  than  others.  God  forbid.  That,  indeed, 
were  presumption.  But  this  I  ask,  whoever  you 
may  be  (and  I  trust  that,  if  you  are  a  Christian,  you 
will  agree  with  me),  Which  is  best,  your  rules  or  God's 
word?  If  God,  and  not  you,  be  the  wiser,  how 
came  you  to  invent  these  rules  ?  You  thought  the 
word  of  God  insufficient,  and  you  must  supply  the 
deficiency  !  What  is  the  result  ?  Take  what  is 
going  on  at  the  present  moment,  and  in  any  society 
you  like.  The  very  newspapers  ring  with  the  scandal 
of  what  is  done  under  the  name  of  Christ.  What 
do  your  rules  avail  ?  Neither  you  nor  the  wisest  of 
men  can  construct  a  standard  for  all  time ;  and  why 
should  it  be  attempted  ?  God  has  given  His  own, 
and  His  children  need  no  other. 

We  have  already  the  only  sure  and  divine  rule. 
The  only  want  is  the  faith  to  value  and  act  upon  it. 
True,   the    consequences   are  serious.      Faithfulness 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  23 

to  Christ  costs  much  now  as  ever.  But  is  it  not 
a  solemn  thought  that  now,  in  this  boasted  nine- 
teenth century  after  the  Lord  has  accomplished 
redemption,  we  are  only  awakening,  as  it  were,  to 
feel  that  the  word  o*f  God  is  better  than  the  word  of 
man  ?  What  a  discovery  !  Yet  it  is  great,  as  it  is 
humbling  that  it  should  be  a  new  thing ;  a  discovery 
which  many  of  the  children  of  God  have  not  yet 
made.  All  admit  that  God's  word  is  infinitely  wise 
for  the  soul's  salvation.  Who,  when  it  is  a  question 
of  eternal  issues,  would  trust  his  soul  to  the  doctrines 
of  men  ?  Then  is  felt  the  value  of  that  word  which 
reveals  the  Saviour,  and  of  the  blessed  Spirit  who 
makes  the  word  precious  in  the  revelation  of  Him. 
But  is  it  not  daring  to  draw  these  distinctions  in  the 
word  of  God,  and  put  aside  that  which  speaks  of  the 
Church,  ministry,  worship,  the  breaking  of  bread, 
and  prayer  ?  How  comes  it  that  men  should  behave 
practically  as  if  God's  word  had  less  decision  and 
authority  in  these  matters  than  the  shifting  thoughts 
of  man  ?  How  comes  it  that  men  so  seldom  think 
of  being  guided  only  by  the  word  of  God?  How 
comes  it  that  believers  resort  as  a  matter  of  course 
to  human  ecclesiastical  rules  ?  How  comes  it,  for 
example,  that  Dissenters,  the  best  of  them,  when  they 
want  a  minister  in  the  word,  proceed  at  once  to  elect 
him  without  a  syllable  of  Scripture  for  that  course  ? 
Who  gave  them  licence  to  do  so  ? 

"  It  must  be  so  ;  we  have  our  own  doctor  and  our 
own  lawyer,  and  why  not  our  own  minister?"  It 
is  exactly  this  worldly  principle  that  has  done  the 


24  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

mischief.  Why  is  not  God  consulted  in  His  word  ? 
How  comes  it  that  in  Scripture  a  Church  never  elects 
a  minister  ?  Of  course  there  must  have  been  many 
who  wanted  ministerial  help  in  those  days  as  now ; 
and  God,  who  knew  all  that  is  good,  must  have 
known  every  want  also.  How  comes  it  that  there  was 
never  a  man  chosen  by  a  Christian  congregation  to 
preach  the  gospel  or  teach  the  saints — not  a  solitary 
instance  in  the  word  of  God  ?  They  cannot  get  rid 
of  the  difficulty.  What  are  they  to  do  ?  The  fact 
is,  the  dissenting  principle  is  broken  at  the  very 
outset.  They  cannot  step  over  the  threshold.  They 
cannot  do  without  a  minister,  and  they  cannot  elect 
a  minister  according  to  Scripture.  Let  us  look  now, 
not  at  Congregationalism,  but  at  the  two  or  three 
gathered  to  the  name  of  Christ.  They,  too,  want 
help,  these  feeble  ones  ;  and  what  are  they  to  do  ? 
This  is  the  word  of  their  Lord,  "  Where  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  unto  my  name,  there  am  I  in 
the  midst  of  them."  God  forbid  that  I  should  dis- 
parage the  advantages  of  ministry ;  but  to  be  simply 
subject  to  the  Lord,  whether  or  not  He  sends,  is  the 
best  of  all.  The  fact  is,  as  we  are  not  authorized,  so 
we  have  no  need,  to  elect  any ;  for  all  are  ours  already, 
"  whether  Paul,  Apollos,  or  Cephas."  It  is  for 
God  to  choose  and  give.  He  has  bound  up  and  made 
all  His  ministers  part  and  parcel  of  the  Church. 
They  are  members  of  Christ's  body.  They  are  His  gifts 
to  the  Church.  It  is  ignorant  and  evil  meddling 
for  the  Church  to  elect.  Besides,  the  moment  you 
elect  one   to   be   peculiarly  your  minister,  by  that 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  2-J 

very  act  you  defraud  yourselves  of  all  the  rest.  You 
are  going  out  of  the  path  of  God,  in  order  to  enrich 
yourselves  in  this  respect ;  hut  that  very  act  of 
selfish  haste,  like  every  other  departure  from  the 
path  of  faith,  brings,  as  the  necessary  result,  the 
surest  impoverishment.  Suppose,  then,  people  get 
their  minister ;  he  may  be  but  young,  and  they  may 
want  to  be  nourished  and  fed  up  in  truth.  Unless 
he  have  all  the  gifts  centred  in  his  single  person, 
they  are  reduced  to  his  individual  measure.  An- 
other, again,  may  be  a  pastor,  and  love  the  saints ; 
but  the  congregation  consists,  for  the  most  party  of 
persons  needing  to  be  converted,  while  he  is  not  an 
evangelist,  but  a  pastor,  and  perhaps  a  teacher.  How- 
evident  that,  if  tested  thus  practically,  man's  ways 
always  ruin  God's  work !  The  parochial  system  in 
the  established  bodies  works  as  much  or  more  eviL 
It  may  seem  natural  and  prudent,  but  human 
wisdom  in  divine  things  is  as  foolish  as  it  is  fatal.. 
What  else  could  be  expected,  by  those  who  know 
God  and  man,  from  a  departure  from  the  rich  pro- 
vision the  Lord  has  made  ? 

Let  us  now  look  on  the  other  side.  The  Lord  is 
there.  The  "  two  or  three"  do  not  exactly  see  their 
way.  They  are  in  presence  of  a  great  difficulty. 
Perhaps  they  have  heard  the  whisper  of  some  dread- 
ful doctrine,  and  they  do  not  understand  it,  not  being 
versed  in  these  matters.  What  then  ?  They  wait 
upon  the  Lord — a  wholesome  thing  for  any  of  us — 
most  wholesome  to  be  obliged  to  feel  that  the  Lord 
alone  can  avail.     But  He  does  love  and  care  for  His 


26  THE    RESOURCE    OE    THE    FAITHFUL. 

saints.  He  raises  up  and  sends,  it  may  be,  a  servant 
of  His.  The  latent  evil  is  brought  out  plainly ;  and 
the  moment  the  light  of  God,  by  whatever  means,  is 
oast  upon  it,  the  conscience  of  the  saints  answers  to 
the  call  of  the  Lord,  and  they  repudiate  it  heartily 
for  themselves. 

Again,  there  is  one  fallen  into  what  may  seem  a 
'little  evil,  yet  enough  to  render  him  indifferent  to  the 
•Lord,  to  His  word,  to  His  grace.  He  refuses  to 
listen  to  the  warning  of  one,  then  of  more,  and  lastly, 
of  the  assembly  of  Grod.  "  Let  him  be  unto  thee  as  a 
heathen  man."  He  is  not  a  heathen,  but  supposed 
to  be  a  brother ;  yet  he  is  treated  as  if  he  were  a 
heathen,  because  he  despises  Christ  in  the  Church. 
This  in  fact  is  the  case  here  supposed  (Matt,  xviii). 
Such  decision  is  trying  to  the  heart,  where  will 
works  among  the  saints.  But  it  shows  plainly  that 
not  their  wisdom  nor  their  experience  guides  aright, 
but  the  Lord  in  their  midst ;  and  He  promises  His 
presence  if  it  were  but  to  two  or  three  gathered  to  His 
name.  Here  then  we  have  a  clear  and  positive  pro- 
vision for  the  faithful  in  the  worst  of  times.  It  is 
hardly  possible  to  conceive  of  circumstances  where 
there  might  not  be  ""  two  or  three." 

It  is  well,  however,  to  add  that  the  essential  point 
is  their  gathering  #to  His  name.  It  is  not  such  a 
gathering  unto  Christ,  where  narrowness  is  allowed, 
or  sectarianism,  any  more  than  in  the  grosser  forms  of 
letting  in  the  world  or  tolerating  evil.  If  any  "  two 
or  three"  were  so  happy  together,  as  to  look  with 
suspicion  on  godly  men  outside  them,  they  would 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  27 

forfeit  tlieir  place  of  privilege,  and  be  in  a  false 
position.  Does  the  Lord  so  regard  His  disciples? 
Does  He  scrutinize  them  as  if  they  were  doubtful 
characters,  or  put  them  in  quarantine  as  if  the 
plague  might  be  in  them  ?  I  speak  of  saints  where 
there  is  no  suspicion  of  evil  doctrine,  direct  or  in- 
direct, or  of  unholy  walk.  The  Lord  welcomes  them, 
and  so  should  we.  His  name  has  not  its  value  where 
we  are  not  large  for  His  sake. 

But  there  may  be  another  case.  A  person  comes, 
of  great  repute  in  the  world,  who  has  been  preaching, 
and  is  universally  respected ;  but  alas '  he  betrays 
himself  by  a  lack  of  heart  and  conscience  where 
Christ  is  concerned.  Him  they  refuse.  Thus  the 
same  name  of  Christ,  which  is  their  warrant  for 
welcoming  the  weakest  that  loves  Him,  is  here 
exactly  the  same  power  for  refusing  the  highest  who 
does  not  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  incorruption. 
What  might  is  in  that  name  to  bring  and  keep 
together  hearts  otherwise  alien,  and  yet  withal  what 
a  delicate  test  for  detecting  and  excluding  what  is 
not  of  God !  If  it  be  a  question  of  truth,  the  name  of 
the  Lord  is  the  only  real  touchstone  ;  if  it  be  a 
question  of  discipline,  that  name  is  strength  to  the 
. feeblest  heart ;  if  it  be  a  question  between  persons 
and  principle,  there  only  is  found  all  needed  wisdom 
and  power,  both  individually  and  as  regards  the 
assembly. 

But  let  us  look  now  at  2  Tim.  ii.  We  have  a 
picture  drawn  by  the  Holy  Ghost  of  the  professing 
body,  the  house  of  God.     The  first  epistle  duly  cares 


28  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

for  order  and  good  government  in  the  house  of  God. 
The  second  epistle  anticipates  the  influx  of  evils  to 
such  an  extent,  that  the  house  is  merely  alluded  to  as 
a  comparison.  Still "  the  foundation  of  God  standeth 
sure,  having  this  seal," — on  one  side,  "  The  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  His,"  and  on  the  other,  "  Let 
every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  the  Lord  depart 
from  iniquity."  There  are  thus  the  sovereignty  of 
the  Lord  on  one  side,  and  just  responsibility  on  the 
other — two  great  principles  which  meet  us  every- 
where. Then  follows  a  more  detailed  application  : — 
"  But  in  a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vessels  of 
gold  and  of  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth,  and 
some  to  honour  and  some  to  dishonour."  Some 
would  take  the  place  of  knowing  the  Lord  whom  He 
did  not  own,  and  who  felt  not  the  incongruity  of 
His  name  with  iniquity.  Timothy  must  be  pre- 
pared for  the  development  of  evil  among  those  that 
confess  Christ — not  only  "  some  to  honour"  but  "some 
to  dishonour."  "  If  a  man  therefore  piu*ge  himself 
from  these,  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sancti- 
fied and  meet  for  the  Master's  use,  and  prepared 
unto  every  good  work."  Separation  from  evil  is  the 
invariable  principle  of  God,  modified  as  to  the 
manner,  of  course,  by  the  special  character  of  the 
dispensation.  So  Isaiah,  Jeremiah  and  the  prophets 
generally.  Is  Christianity  less  stringent  ?  It  is  now, 
on  the  contrary,  that  it  becomes  more  urgent  and 
absolute.  "If  a  man  purge  himself  from  these  [the 
vessels  to  dishonour],  he  shall  be  a  vessel  to  honour." 
Put  away  the  wicked  (1  Cor.  v.) ;  if  this  be  no  longer 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL,  29 

possible,  purge  yourself  out  from  them.  There  is 
nothing  man  dreads  and  feels  so  deeply.  You  may 
protest,  you  may  denounce,  and  it  will  be  borne  by 
the  world  as  long  as  you  walk  with  it  in  the  main ; 
but  "he that departeth,"  now,  as  ever,  " maketh him- 
self a  prey."  Act  on  your  convictions,  and  the  most 
honeyed  courtesy  turns  sour ;  your  desire  to  please 
(rod  at  all  cost  will  be  branded  as  Pharisaical 
pride  and  exclusiveness.  It  matters  not  how  gently 
and  lovingly  you  purge  yourself  from  the  vessels  to 
dishonour ;  the  pain,  the  grievance  lies  there,  and 
nothing  can  sweeten  it,  above  all  in  the  eyes  of  those 
it  condemns.  Indeed  it  is  more  felt,  the  more 
graciously  it  is  done,  provided  it  be  done  thoroughly ; 
for  then,  evidently,  your  motive  is  not  disappointed 
feeling,  but  desire  to  be  wholly  subject  to  Christ, 
with  a  heart  perfectly  happy  in  what  they  know 
nothing  of  and  could  not  enjoy. 

All  this  is  an  unpardonable  affront  in  the  world's 
eyes.  Add  to  this,  that  separation  is  claimed,  in 
2  Tim.,  frftm  the  religious  or  Christian  world.  "The 
Christian  world  !"  what  a  phrase  !  what  a  contradic- 
tion !  as  if  there  could  be  the  smallest  possible 
alliance  between  Christianity,  which  is  of  heaven  and 
Christ,  and  that  outside  world  which  crucified  Him. 
No  wonder  that  in  this  epistle  we  read  of  perilous 
times  in  the  last  days.  What  greater  peril  than,  after 
they  have  known  the  truth,  going  back  into  the  sub- 
stantially same  conditions  of  evil  as  were  found  in 
the  heathen  world  before  Christianity  entered  it. 
Compare  2  Tim.  iii.  with  Eom.  i.      How  painful  the 


30  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

resemblance !  The  difference  is,  that  some  of  the 
grosser  characteristics  of  heathenism  have  been  re- 
placed by  subtler  evil.  The  comparison  is  most 
instructive.  In  this  state  of  things,  the  Christian 
profession  is  indeed  a  great  house  ;  and,  as  in  such 
a  house,  there  is  that  which  is  destined  to  the  basest 
uses,  no  less  than  what  is  for  the  best  purposes,  so  in 
that  great  house  which  bears  the  name  of  Christ — ■ 
if  you  please,  "  the  Christian  world  " 

If  there,  what  ought  you  to  do  ?  It  is  a  solemn 
question  for  the  believer.  He  has  no  hesitation  about 
the  profane  world ;  but  the  world  bearing  the  name 
of  Christ  is  a  difficulty  to  him.  Seeing  that  the 
Christian  profession  is  there,  am  I  not  setting  myself 
up  and  virtually  condemning  the  excellent  of  the 
earth?  But  will  you  name  any  evil  thing  that 
has  not  had  a  good  name  attached  to  it  ?  I  do  not 
speak  now  of  such  fatal  poison  as  Socinianism  or 
the  like ;  but  take  Romanism,  or  the  Greek  Church, 
or  even  sects  known  to  be  heretical,  and  yet,  by  the 
malice  of  the  enemy  and  the  subtlety  with*  which  he 
has  concealed  his  work,  some  children  of  Grod  have 
been  entangled.  It  is  too  plain,  therefore,  that,  what- 
ever good  men  may  do  here  or  there,  the  only  real 
inquiry  is  as  to  the  will  of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  a  ques- 
tion of  making  others  walk  in  your  light,  but  you 
must  not  walk  in  their  darkness.  This  is  the  great 
point,  not  occupying  ourselves  with  others,  prescrib- 
ing what  they  must  do,  but  feeling  my  own  sin,  as 
well  as  the  common  sin,  yet  by  grace  resolved  at  all 
costs  to  be  where  I  can  honour  and  obey  the  Lord. 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  31 

Is  this  not  a  true,  plain,  imperative  duty,  an  undeni- 
able principle  of  Scripture,  that  commends  itself  to 
your  conscience  ?  It  may  be  that  you  do  not  act 
accordingly ;  but  you  cannot  deny  that  it  is  a  right 
thing,  and  what  you  ought  to  do. 

But  you  are  tied,  and  have  difficulties.  Perhaps 
you  have  a  family  and  friends  you  cannot  bear  to 
grieve ;  perhaps  you  have  hopes  for  your  children,  if 
not  for  yourself.  Can  a  heart  purified  by  faith  thus 
set  aside  the  Lord's  word  ?  Do  you  think  He  does 
not  know  your  wants,  and  does  not  feel  for  your 
family  ?  You  know  the  Lord  loves  yourself ;  cannot 
you  trust  Him  for  a  bit  of  bread  ?  You,  who  are 
trusting  Him  for  eternal  life  and  for  heaven,  cannot 
you  trust  Him  to  take  care  of  you  in  the  face  of  these 
trials  and  obstacles  of  every  day  ?  Perhaps  you  are 
too  comfortable,  too  anxious  about  what  is  respect- 
able for  yourself  and  your  children.  Let  the  Lord 
deal  with  you ;  I  am  sure  He  will  not  harm  you,  but 
only  do  what  is  most  loving  and  tender  towards  you 
and  yours.  Impossible  for  any  heart  to  be  beyond 
the  Lord's  love,  and  wisdom,  and  generous,  con- 
siderate care.  If  you  really  believe  in  Him,  why  not 
cleave  to  His  word  without  compact  or  condition, 
and  come  forth  at  His  bidding  ?  You  do  not  know 
what  the  next  steps  may  be.  It  is  enough  that  you 
know  you  are  doing  contrary  to  the  word  of  Grod 
now.  In  vain  we  talk  of  loving,  if  we  are  not  pre- 
pared to  follow  His  word.  Do  you  say  you  do  not 
know  what  next  to  do  ?  The  Lord  does  not  ask  you; 
it  is  not  His  way  to  show  all  at  once.     Act  on  what 


32  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

you  see  from  the  word,  and  trust  the  Lord  for  what 
will  follow.  He  is  worthy  of  your  confidence,  and 
will  give  you  more  when  you  have  taken  the  first 
step.  But  leave  for  ever  that  which  is  condemned  in 
God's  word.  "  Eememher  Lot's  wife,"  and  look  not 
hack,  hut  go  forth  at  His  word  wherever  it  points, 
and  you  will  find  that  "  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall 
he  given."  And  as  regards  the  way,  to  the  Lord,  rough 
or  smooth,  is  alike,  deep  or  shallow,  great  or  small ; 
it  may  make  a  great  difference  to  you,  hut  the 
greatest  difficulties  only  hecome  the  means  of  proving 
what  the  Grod  is  that  we  have  found. 

But  there  is  more  in  2  Tim.  ii.  Not  only  are  you 
to  separate,  or  purge  yourself,  from  these  vessels  of 
dishonour,  hut  the  word  is,  "  Flee  also  youthful  lusts, 
hut  follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace,  with 
them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  Thus 
there  is  no  excuse  for  isolation.  Turn  your  hack 
upon  what  you  know  is  opposed  to  Scripture.  Have 
I  to  demonstrate  to  any  Christian  that  what  is  un- 
scriptural  is  unholy  ?  Have  I  to  urge  that  "  to  him 
that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it 
is  sin  ?"  If,  then,  you  abandon  what  has  no  warrant 
from  Scripture,  hut,  on  the  contrary,  is  condemned 
hy  it,  hear  this  word  of  Grod  :  "  Follow  righteousness, 
faith,  charity,  peace."  Follow  them,  not  solitarily, 
hut  "  with  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure 
heart."  What  consolation,  even  if  there  were  hut 
two  or  three  !  Are  you  afraid  because  there  are  only 
two  or  three  ?  Grod  may  act  on  hundreds  or  thou- 
sands :  this  is  a  matter  for  Him.     You  are  to  follow 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  33 

the  Lord's  path  through  His  word,  with  chastened 
spirit  yet  not  sadly,  but  full  of  joy  and  thankfulness, 
if  you  find  ever  so  few  who  call  upon  the  Lord  out 
of  a  pure  heart.  In  other  words,  faith  has  a  divine 
warrant  to  expect  companions  in  its  path,  though  it 
lie  now  through  the  ruins  of  the  Christian  profession. 
As  it  is  imperative  to  turn  away  from  all  known 
evil,  and  there  can  be  no  valid  excuse  for  refusing 
God's  call,  so  there  is  enjoined  companionship  in 
following  after  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  and 
peace,  with  such  as  call  upon  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure 
heart.  May  no  hindrances  nor  dangers  alarm,  but, 
knowing  that  it  is  the  Lord  who  has  thus  graciously 
thought  of  us,  may  you  and  I,  and  every  one  that 
loves  that  blessed  name,  have  unbroken  confidence  in 
Him !  He  addresses  Himself  to  hearts  grieved  in 
the  midst  of  dishonour  to  His  grace  and  truth,  and 
He  has  taken  care  to  mark  most  distinctly  the  path, 
not  of  separation  only,  but  of  association  ;  the  path 
of  departure  from  evil,  and  of  piu,suing  what  is  good. 
How  clearly  the  great  moral  principles  of  Grod  re- 
main in  spite  of  disorder !  How  the  operations  of  His 
grace  survive  all  ruin  !  Thus,  the  principle  of  the  as- 
sembly of  Grod  abides  in,  it  may  be,  only  two  or  three, 
gathered  to  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Thousands  of 
Christians,  in  a  national  system  or  in  a  dissenting  sect, 
could  not  redeem  their  fundamental  error ;  members 
of  Christ  may  be  in  them,  but  the  principle  of  Grod's 
assembly  is  abandoned  in  their  very  constitution. 
Let  "two  or  three"  come  out  at  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  making  His  name  their  centre,  and  owning 

c 


34  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

the  Spirit  of  Grod  as  in  and  with  them  to  guide  them 
according  to  Scripture;  these,  and  these  only,  are 
carrying  out  His  mind  in  the  real  intelligence  of  the 
Holy  Grhost.  It  is  no  question  of  numbers,  but  of 
being  gathered  together,  few  or  many,  unto  the 
name  of  the  Lord. 

All  here  know  what  the  House  of  Commons  is. 
A  hundred  members  of  that  House  might  belong  to 
the  United  Service  Club,  or  the  Athenaeum,  or  any- 
thing else  you  please.  These  hundred  members 
might  discuss  the  measures  actually  before  the 
House  in  their  club  ;  but  this  could  never  make 
the  club  to  be  the  House ;  whereas,  in  their  true 
position,  with  the  Speaker  in  the  midst,  a  much  less 
number  would  constitute  a  House.  It  is  exactly 
the  same  principle  here,  What  constitutes  Grod's 
assembly  ?  "  Two  or  three  "  gathered  to  the  Lord's 
name.  He  has  been  pleased  to  bring  it  down  to  the 
point  described,  with  the  fullest  possible  stamp  of 
His  approval  and  authority. 

On  the  other  hand,  suppose  ten  thousand  Christians 
meeting  simply  as  Christians — is  that  enough?  I 
can  conceive  an  assembly  of  professing,  yea,  real 
Christians ;  and  yet  there  would  be  no  more  reason 
to  call  them  Grod's  assembly,  than  to  consider  any 
number  of  members  at  their  club  the  House  of  Com- 
mons. It  is  not  the  fact  of  being  Christians  that 
constitutes  Grod's  assembly,  but  their  being  gathered 
unto  the  name  of  the  Lord.  The  true  difference  is, 
whether  we  are  gathered  to  the  name  of  Christians 
merely,  or   to  the  name  of  Christ.     If  the  former ? 


THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL.  35 

you  must  accept  of  any  evil  thing  into  which  the 
enemy  succeeds  in  dragging  Christians.  For  if  the 
man  be  a  Christian,  I  must  receive  him,  spite  of  evil 
he  is  doing  or  sanctioning.  But  no  !  the  question  is, 
Does  he  call  upon  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart  ? 
The  exclusion  of  this  word  of  (rod  has  widely  over- 
run Christendom,  to  the  incalculable  injury  of  souls, 
and  never  more  than  now,  when  men  practically  put 
Christians  in  lieu  of  Christ,  the  consequence  of  which 
is  confusion  and  every  evil  work. 

Whereas,  if  the  Lord  have  His  place,  and  be  the 
centre  to  which  I  come,  I  have  then,  in  His  name,  a 
ground  and  rallying  point  to  which  I  can  claim, 
with  the  most  entire  humility,  every  saint  in  the 
world — yea,  I  could  not  and  ought  not  to  rest  in  my 
spirit  as  long  as  there  is  outside  one  that  belongs  to 
Him.  What !  even  those  under  discipline,  or  avoided 
for  grave  causes  ?  Yes,  every  one  ;  not,  of  course,  to 
receive  them  with  known  evil  upon  them,  but  yet  to 
desire  themselves,  what  is  contrary  to  Christ  being 
judged  and  removed. 

The  Lord  make  us  steadfast,  and  give  us  to  feel 
that  the  lowliest  spirit  becomes  us !  How  can  we 
boast  of  ceasing  to  do  evil  we  ourselves  have  done  ? 
May  we  look  to  Him  increasingly !  He  who  has 
brought  us  out  has  compelled  us  to  prove  by  our  own 
difficulties  the  true  state  of  the  Church;  but  He 
has  turned  to  profit  our  very  mistakes,  though  in  a 
hiunbling  way.  He  has  used  the  storm,  as  it  were, 
to  purge  the  hazy  air,  and  displayed  more  clearly 


36  THE    RESOURCE    OF    THE    FAITHFUL. 

than  ever  the  central  place  of  His  own  name  for  our 
gathering  together,  no  less  than  our  salvation. 

Thus,  we  may  leave  all  fears  and  anxieties.  If 
the  Lord  be  our  helper,  why  fear  ?  What  will  man 
do  ? — Then,  as  for  charges  of  sectarianism,  presump- 
tion, or  disorder,  it  were  easy  indeed  to  show  that 
those  are  really  guilty  who  are  quick  to  raise  and 
scatter  them.  We  know  that  Scripture  condemns 
every  church  association  that  is  not  based  on  and 
governed  by  the  name  of  Christ.  It  is  not  a  mere 
question  of  wrongs  here  or  there ;  but  are  they 
Christians  gathered  to  the  name  of  Christ  ?  Neither 
is  it  a  question  of  the  amount  of  evil ;  for  what  did 
not  slip  in  at  Corinth  through  ignorance  and  un- 
watchfulness  ?  The  refusal  to  judge  known  evil  is 
no  doubt  fatal.  But  supposing  the  absence  of  every- 
thing gross,  the  true  question  is,  Are  we  where  the 
Lord  would  have  us  be?  Then  happy  are  we,  if 
but  "two  or  three  thus:"  were  we  ten  millions 
anywhere  else,  all  must  be  wrong,  because  Christ  is 
not  the  acknowledged  and  exclusive  centre  ecclesi- 
astically. He  who  is  the  only  adequate  and  rightful 
object  for  all  the  saints  on  earth,  deigns  to  be  the 
centre  of  but  "  two  or  three,"  as  He  says,  that  are 
"  gathered  together  unto  His  name." 


Date  Due 


MY18'53 


I  131996" 


