Southern  Baptist 
foreign  Missions 


Glass  Ifix^^dO 

Book. TFf3 

Copyright  K? 


COPYRIGHT  DEPOSIT. 


THE    THREE    SECRETARIES 

JAMES  B.  TAYLOR,   1845-1871 

H.  A.  TUPPER,   1872-1893 

.R.  J.  WILLINGHAM,   1893- 


Southern  Baptist 
Foreign  Missions 


^ 


t.  b:  ray  and  others 


"  Expect  great  things  from  God, 
Undertake  great  things  for  God." 


Sunday  School  Board 

Southern  Baptist  Convention 

Nashville,  Tenn. 


<£> 


COPYRIGHTED  1910,  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  BOARD 
SOUTHERN  BAPTIST  CONVENTION 


)CLA2?1080 


TO 

OUR  FOREIGN  MISSIONARIES 

WHOSE  DEVOTION  HAS  BROUGHT  SALVATION 

TO  THE  NATIONS  ABROAD  AND  INSPIRATION  TO  OUR 

PEOPLE  AT  HOME  THIS  BOOK  IS 

AFFECTIONATELY 

DEDICATED 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTEB  PAGE 

Introduction 5 

I.    Baptist  Missions  Before  1845— T.  B.  Ray 9 

II.    The  Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  Southern 

Baptist  Convention— T.  B.  Ray 30 

III.  The  South  China  Mission— E.  Z.  Simmons 51 

IV.  The  Central  China  Mission— R.  T.  Bryan 69 

V.    The  North  China  Mission— C.  W.  Pruitt 92 

VI.    The   Interior    China   Mission — Annie   Jenkins 

Sallee 114 

VII.    The  African  Mission— C.  E.  Smith 124 

VIII.    The  Italian  Mission— D.  G.  Whittinghill 148 

IX.S  The  Brazilian  Mission— S.  L.  Ginsburg__ 174 

X.    The  Mexican  Mission— R.  P.  Mahon 198 

XI.    The  Japan  Mission— E.  N.  Walne 218 

XII.    The  Argentine  Mission— S.  M.  Sowell 242 

Appendix  A 263 

Appendix  B 264 

Appendix  C 265 

Appendix  D 266 

Appendix  E 269 

Appendix  F 273 

Appendix  G 274 

(4) 


INTRODUCTION. 


In  the  preparation  of  this  book,  we  have  asked 
a  missionary  on  every  field  where  missions  are 
fostered  by  the  Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the 
Southern  Baptist  Convention,  to  write  the  story 
of  the  work  done  on  his  field.  Every  author  has 
been  left  to  tell  his  story  in  his  own  way.  This 
gives  us  first-hand  information  and  a  greater  vari- 
ety of  treatment  than  would  have  been  possible  if 
one  writer  had  written  about  all  the  fields. 

In  order  to  give  a  good  background  for  the 
chapters  on  the  fields,  we  have  prepared  two 
chapters  upon  the  rise  and  growth  of  mission  senti- 
ment in  our  country,  with  special  reference  to  the 
Southern  States.  Southern  Baptist  appreciation 
of  missions  was  not  an  accident,  nor  did  it  have  a 
sudden  beginning  in  1845,  when  the  Southern 
Baptist  Convention  was  formed.  It  was  the 
product  of  forces  which  have  been  at  work  in  our 
denomination  since  the  rise  of  missionary  enthusi- 
asm in  England  in  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth 
century.  Our  forefathers  were  in  close  touch 
with  this  movement,  and  have  transmitted  to  us  a 
wealth  of  mission  sentiment  which,  to  understand 
and  appreciate,  we  must  trace  to  its  historic  con- 
nections. 

(5) 


6  Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

The  outlines  found  at  the  end  of  every  chapter 
are  not  outlines  of  the  chapters  themselves,  but 
are  designed  to  state  as  clearly  as  possible  what  is 
found  upon  the  field  under  consideration.  In  this 
way  statistics  concerning  the  fields  are  simplified 
and  rendered  more  easily  accessible.  The  names 
of  the  missionaries  on  every  field  are  given  every 
month  in  the  Foreign  Mission  Journal* 

We  send  forth  this  book  in  the  hope  that  those 
who  read  and  study  will  do  so  in  the  same  spirit  of 
prayer  which  was  upon  the  members  of  the  Not- 
tinghamshire Baptist  Association  when  they 
passed  the  resolutions  in  1784  that  established 
the  Monthly  Concert  of  Prayer  for  Missions.  To 
help  us  catch  this  spirit,  we  give  in  full  these  reso- 
lutions, which  were  the  true  origin  of  modern 
missions,  as  follows : 

"Upon  a  motion  being  made  to  the  ministers  and 
messengers  of  the  associate  Baptist  churches 
assembled  at  Nottinghamshire,  respecting  meet- 
ings for  prayer,  to  bewail  the  low  estate  of  religion 
and  earnestly  implore  a  revival  of  our  churches 
and  of  the  general  cause  of  our  Bedeemer  and  for 
that  end  to  wrestle  with  God  for  the  effusion  of 
his  Holy  Spirit,  which  alone  can  produce  the 
blessed  effect,  it  was  unanimously  resolved  to  rec- 
ommend to  all  our  churches  and  congregations,  the 
spending  of  one  hour  in  this  important  exercise,  on 
the  first  Monday  of  every  calendar  month. 


*See  Appendix  "A"  for  bibliography. 


Introduction.  7 

"We  hereby  solemnly  exhort  all  the  churches  in 
our  connection  to  engage  heartily  and  persever- 
ingly  in  the  prosecution  of  this  plan.  And  as  it 
may  be  well  to  endeavor  to  keep  the  same  hour  as 
a  token  of  our  unity  herein,  it  is  supposed  that  the 
following  scheme  may  suit  many  congregations, 
viz. :  to  meet  on  the  first  Monday  evening  in  May, 
June  and  July  from  eight  to  nine;  in  August, 
from  seven  to  eight;  September  and  October,  six 
to  seven;  November,  December,  January  and 
February,  from  five  to  six;  March,  from  six  to 
seven ;  and  April,  from  seven  to  eight.  Neverthe- 
less, if  this  hour  or  even  the  particular  evening 
should  not  suit  in  particular  places,  we  wish  our 
brethren  to  fix  on  one  more  convenient  to  them- 
selves. 

"We  hope  also  that  as  many  of  our  brethren 
who  live  at  a  distance  from  our  places  of  worship 
may  not  be  able  to  attend  there,  that  as  many  as 
are  conveniently  situated  in  a  village  or  neighbor- 
hood, will  unite  in  small  societies  at  the  same 
time. 

"And  if  any  single  individual  should  be  so  situ- 
ated as  not  to  be  able  to  attend  to  this  duty  in 
society  with  others,  let  him  retire  at  the  appointed 
hour,  to  unite  the  breath  of  prayer  in  private  with 
those  who  are  thus  engaged  in  a  more  public 
manner.  The  grand  object  in  prayer  is  to  be,  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  may  be  poured  down  on  our  min- 
isters and  churches,  that  sinners  may  be  converted, 
the  saints  edified,  and  the  name  of  God  glorified. 


8  Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

At  the  same  time  remember,  we  trust  you  will  not 
confine  your  requests  to  your  own  societies,  or  to 
our  own  immediate  connection ;  let  the  whole  in- 
terest of  the  Redeemer  be  affectionately  remem- 
bered, and  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  to  the  most 
distant  parts  of  the  habitable  globe,  be  the  object 
of  your  most  fervent  requests.  We  shall  rejoice 
if  any  other  Christian  societies  of  our  own,  or 
other  denominations,  will  unite  with  us,  and  we 
do  now  invite  them  most  cordially  to  join  heart 
and  hand  in  the  attempt. 

"Who  can  tell  what  the  consequences  of  such  a 
united  effort  in  prayer  may  be?  Let  us  plead 
with  God  the  many  gracious  promises  of  his  Word, 
which  relate  to  the  future  success  of  his  gospel. 
He  has  said,  'I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired  of  by 
the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them,  I  will  in- 
crease them  with  men  like  a  flock.'  Ezek.  36: 
37.  Surely  we  have  love  enough  to  Zion  to  set 
apart  one  hour  at  a  time  twelve  times  in  a  year  to 
seek  her  welfare." 

Is  not  the  revival  of  this  Concert  of  Prayer  one 
of  our  greatest  needs?  The  modern  missionary 
enterprise  was  born  in  prayer ;  it  must  advance  in 
the  power  of  prayer.     We  pass  the  call  on  to  you. 

T.  B.  Kay. 

Richmond,  Va.,  April,  1910. 


CHAPTER  I. 


BAPTIST  FOREIGN  MISSIONS  PRIOR  TO  1845. 

To  gain  a  just  appreciation  of  the  devotion  of 
Southern  Baptists  to  foreign  missions,  we  must 
trace  first  the  rise  of  the  missionary  movement  in 
England;  second,  its  development  in  America 
down  to  1845 ;  and  third,  follow  the  story  of  the 
foreign  mission  endeavor  by  Southern  Baptists 
under  the  leadership  of  their  own  Foreign  Mission 
Board. 

Eisb  in  England. 

One  of  the  most  potent  factors  in  the  modern 
missionary  enterprise  has  been  the  "Monthly  Con- 
cert of  Prayer"  which  is  used  by  all  denominations 
of  Christians.  It  was  originated  by  the  ministers 
of  the  Nottinghamshire  Baptist  Association  in 
1784.  These  ministers  drew  up  a  resolution  call- 
ing upon  all  Baptist  churches  to  observe  one 
stated  hour  every  month  in  earnest,  united  prayer 
for  the  support  of  pure  religion  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.     Their  exhortation  ran : 

"Let  the  spread  of  the  gospel  to  the  most  distant 
parts  of  the  habitable  globe  be  the  object  of  your 
fervent  requests."* 


*See  Introduction. 


10        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Little  did  they  dream  that  they  were  inaugurat- 
ing the  modern  missionary  enterprise  and  giving 
it  an  agency  which  would  prove  one  of  its  greatest 
supports. 

The  date  usually  given  for  the  beginning  of  the 
modern  missionary  enterprise  is  1792,  but  we  must 
go  back  to  the  institution  of  this  "Monthly  Concert 
of  Prayer"  in  1784  for  its  inspiration.  It  is  grati- 
fying to  learn  that  modern  missionary  endeavor 
took  its  origin  in  prayer. 

The  situation  among  the  Baptists  of  England  at 
that  time  was  gloomy.  They  were  not  very  numer- 
ous ;  the  paralyzing  pall  of  a  limited  theology 
hung  over  them;  division  severed  their  scattered 
ranks ;  they  had  few  ministers  of  culture ;  and  a 
general  air  of  discouragement  enveloped  them. 
From  the  earnest  hearts  of  some  who  felt  the  dis- 
tressing weight  of  inactivity  in  behalf  of  the  lost, 
came  this  call  to  prayer.  Prayer  and  a  great 
purpose  were  the  powers  which  brought  to  this 
divided  and  discouraged  people  unity  and  leader- 
ship. It  made  a  new  people  and  saved  them  for 
an  honored  place  in  the  service  of  our  God  and  our 
fellow  men.  Dr.  Andrew  Fuller,  in  speaking  of 
the  benefits  of  the  new  missionary  movement,  says : 
"A  new  bond  of  union  was  furnished  between  dis- 
tant ministers  and  churches.  Some  who  had 
backslidden  from  God  were  restored,  and  others 
who  had  long  been  poring  over  their  unfruitful- 
ness  and  questioning  the  reality  of  their  personal 
religion,  having  their  attention  directed  to  Christ 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  1845.     11 

and  His  Kingdom,  lost  their  fears  and  found  that 
peace  which  in  other  pursuits  they  had  sought  in 
vain." 

Of  course,  it  cannot  be  claimed  that  the  Bap- 
tists of  England  originated  the  idea  of  foreign 
missions  in  modern  times.  As  early  as  1705,  Fred- 
erick IV  of  Denmark  sent  out  to  Tranquebar, 
India,  Bartholomew  Ziegenbalg  and  Henry  Plut- 
schau.  The  Moravians,  in  1732,  sent  missionaries 
to  St.  Thomas,  and  in  1733  sent  other  missionaries 
aries  to  Greenland.  Other  Protestant  mission- 
aries were  sent  out  from  the  continent  of  Europe. 
These  efforts,  however,  were  either  in  the  form  of 
colonies  or  the  missionaries  were  sent  out  to  col- 
onies already  formed.  It  was  given  to  these 
English  Baptist  ministers  of  Nottinghamshire 
Association,  under  the  leadership  of  Carey,  Fuller, 
Eyland,  and  others,  to  launch  the  mission  enter- 
prise which  made  the  last  century  glorious  by 
organizing  the  first  modern  Foreign  Mission 
Board. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  Nottinghamshire  Baptist 
Association,  May  30, 1792,  William  Carey  preached 
his  famous  sermon  on  Isaiah  54 :  2,  3,  in  which  he 
sounded  the  note  for  missionary  effort  to  the  end 
of  time — "Expect  great  things  from  God,  under- 
take great  things  for  God."  "It  was  as  if  the 
sluices  of  his  soul  were  thrown  fully  open  and  the 
flood  that  had  been  accumulating  for  years  rushed 
forth  in  full  force  and  irresistible  power." 

Even  then,  the  Association,  after  deliberating 


12        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

awhile,  was  just  about  to  adjourn,  when  William 
Carey,  seizing  Dr.  Fuller  by  the  hand,  imploringly 
asked,  "And  are  you,  after  all,  going  again  to  do 
nothing?"  This  was  a  dramatic  hour.  The  time 
at  last  had  come  for  the  turning  of  the  tide. 
Carey's  zeal  compelled  the  Association  to  take  the 
irrevocable  step  which  resulted  in  the  organization 
of  the  first  great  modern  missionary  society  for 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  in  foreign  parts.  It 
was  resolved,  "That  a  plan  be  prepared  against 
the  next  ministers'  meeting  at  Kettering  for  form- 
ing a  Baptist  Association  for  the  propagation  of 
the  gospel  among  heathen."  We  shall  sympa- 
thize with  the  hesitancy  of  the  brethren  and  under- 
stand the  colossal  faith  of  Carey  if  we  will  listen 
to  Dr.  Fuller's  statement  of  some  of  the  difficulties 
that  faced  them.  He  says:  "We  were  inexperi- 
enced in  the  work;  we  knew  of  no  opening  for  a 
mission  in  any  one  part  of  the  world  more  than 
another;  we  had  no  funds  to  meet  the  expense 
that  must  attend  an  undertaking  of  this  kind; 
our  situation  in  an  inland  part  of  the  country  was 
inconvenient  for  foreign  correspondence;  the 
persons  who  would  have  the  management  would 
live  at  such  a  distance  from  each  other  as  to  ren- 
der frequent  consultation  impracticable;  and 
finally,  in  forming  such  a  society,  there  would  be 
danger  of  its  falling  under  irreligious  influence. 
From  these  and  other  considerations,  those  who 
were  expected  to  engage  in  the  work  entered  upon 
it  with  much  fear  and  trembling." 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  1845.     13 

Previous  to  this  tidal  hour,  the  hand  of  God  had 
been  shaping  a  deep  undercurrent  which  eventu- 
ated in  the  action  of  the  Minister's  Meeting  at 
Nottinghamshire.  Not  the  least  of  these  Prov- 
idences had  been  the  shaping  of  Carey,  himself. 
He  was  born  at  Paulerspury,  near  Northampton, 
August  17,  1761.  His  father  was  a  schoolmaster. 
One  of  the  remarkable  traits  of  the  boy  was  his 
resolution  to  finish  whatever  he  had  begun,  no 
matter  what  were  the  difficulties  in  the  way.  He 
had  an  intense  thirst  after  knowledge.  At  four- 
teen he  was  apprenticed  to  a  shoemaker.  He  was 
converted  in  1783 — about  a  year  before  the  issu- 
ance of  the  call  to  the  aConcert  of  Prayer."  On 
the  walls  of  his  shop  he  hung  a  map  of  the  world, 
drawn  on  sheets  of  paper,  and  on  it  he  entered 
facts  concerning  the  condition  of  the  nations. 
"Captain  Cook's  Voyages  Around  the  World"  was 
the  first  book  that  called  out  his  sympathies  for 
the  heathen.  He  was  pastor  at  Moulton,  where  on 
a  salary  of  f  75  a  year  he  struggled  to  build  up  the 
church.  Afterward  he  went  to  the  pastorate  of 
the  church  at  Leicester.  At  the  meeting  of  the 
Nottinghamshire  Association  in  1791,  after  listen- 
ing to  powerful  sermons  by  Doctors  Sutcliff  and 
Fuller,  Carey  raised  the  question  of  the  duty  of 
preaching  the  gospel  to  the  heathen  world.  The 
most  this  Association  would  do  was  to  call  for  a 
publication  of  Carey's  pamphlet  which  had  been 
prepared  for  some  time,  entitled,  "An  Inquiry 
Into  the  Obligations  of  Christians  to  Use  Means 


14        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

for  the  Conversion  of  the  Heathens."  This  pam- 
phlet, which  doubtless  contains  the  main  argu- 
ments presented  in  his  famous  sermon  at  the 
Association,  in  May,  1792,  was  published  a  short 
time  before  the  meeting  of  the  Association.* 

Doubtless  the  period  between  May  and  October, 
1792,  was  one  of  earnest  prayer  and  anxiety.  The 
day  for  carrying  out  the  instructions  of  the  Asso- 
ciation at  its  meeting  at  Nottinghamshire  arrived. 
The  simple  record  reads  thus : 

"At  the  ministers'  meeting  at  Kettering,  October 
2,  1792,  after  the  public  services  of  the  day  were 
ended,  the  ministers  retired  to  consult  farther  on 
the  matter  and  to  lay  a  foundation  at  least  for  a 
society,  when  the  following  resolutions  were  pro- 
posed and  unanimously  agreed  to: 

"1.  Desirous  of  making  an  effort  for  the  propa- 
gation of  the  gospel  among  the  heathen,  agreeably 
to  what  is  recommended  in  Brother  Carey's  late 
publication  on  that  subject,  we,  whose  names  ap- 
pear to  the  subsequent  subscription,  do  solemnly 
agree  to  act  in  society  together  for  that  purpose. 

"2.  As  in  the  present  divided  state  of  Christen- 
dom, it  seems  that  each  denomination,  by  exert- 
ing itself  separately,  is  most  likely  to  accomplish 
the  great  ends  of  a  mission,  it  is  agreed  that  this 
society  be  called,  The  Particular  (Calvinistic) 
Baptist  Society  for  Propagating  the  Gospel  among 
the  Heathen. 


*Lately  republished  in  a  volume  with  others. 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  1845.     15 

"3.  As  such  an  undertaking  must  needs  be  at- 
tended with  expense,  we  agree  immediately  to 
open  a  subscription  for  the  above  purpose  and  to 
recommend  it  to  others. 

"4.  Every  person  who  shall  subscribe  ten  pounds 
at  once,  or  ten  shillings  and  sixpence  annually, 
shall  be  considered  a  member  of  the  society. 

"5.  That  the  Eev.  John  Byland,  Eeynold  Hogg, 
William  Carey,  John  Sutcliff,  and  Andrew  Fuller, 
be  appointed  a  committee,  three  of  whom  shall  be 
empowered  to  act  in  carrying  into  effect  the  pur- 
poses of  this  society. 

"6.  That  the  Eev.  Eeynold  Hogg  be  appointed 
treasurer  and  the  Eev.  Andrew  Fuller  secretary. 

"7.  That  the  subscriptions  be  paid  in  at  the 
Northampton  Ministers'  Meeting,  October  31, 1792, 
at  which  time  the  subject  shall  be  considered  more 
particularly  by  the  committee  and  other  subscrib- 
ers who  may  be  present. 

" Signed,  John  Eyland,  Eeynold  Hogg,  John 
Sutcliff,  Andrew  Fuller,  Abraham  Greenwood, 
Edward  Sherman,  Joshua  Burton,  Samuel  Pearce, 
Thomas  Blundel,  William  Heighton,  John  Eayres, 
Joseph  Timms,  whose  subscriptions  in  all 
amounted  to  £13:2:6"  ($63.52). 

The  place  to  which  "the  ministers  retired  to 
consult  farther"  was  in  the  little  back  parlor  of 
Mrs.  Beeby  Wallis,  widow  of  good  deacon  Beeby 
Wallis,  of  the  church  at  Kettering,  who  had  passed 
away  six  months  previously. 

Dr.  Godwin,  in  his  sermon  preached  in  Ketter- 


16        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

ing  fifty  years  afterward,  beautifully  says:  "The 
origin  of  the  mightiest  rivers  is  often  found  in 
some  sequestered  spot.  And  Kettering  has  the 
honor  of  being  the  birthplace  of  this  society;  and 
whatever  political  or  commercial  changes  may 
pass  over  this  town,  it  will  descend  to  posterity 
associated  with  all  that  is  great  and  holy  in  our 
missionary  enterprise.  'My  thoughts  are  not  your 
thoughts,  neither  are  my  ways  your  ways,  saith 
the  Lord  of  Hosts.'  " 

The  committee  met  November  13,  1792.  A  letter 
from  Mr.  Carey,  who  was  not  present,  called  atten- 
tion to  the  fact  that  a  Mr.  Thomas,  a  surgeon  of 
Bengal,  India,  was  then  in  London  trying  to  raise 
money  for  a  Mission  to  India,  and  was  also  very 
anxious  to  find  a  companion  to  engage  in  the  work 
with  him.  Mr.  Fuller  was  appointed  to  confer 
with  Mr.  Thomas. 

It  developed  at  the  next  meeting  of  the  commit- 
tee, January  10,  1793,  that  Mr.  Thomas  was  the 
son  of  a  Baptist  deacon  at  Fairford  in  Gloucester- 
shire, and  that  he  had  gone  out  early  in  life  as  a 
surgeon  to  India.  He  was  so  affected  by  condi- 
tions in  India,  that  in  1785,  while  on  a  visit  to 
England,  he  was  baptized  and  licensed  to  preach 
in  order  that  he  might  minister  to  the  needs  of  the 
people.  At  the  time  of  the  organization  of  the 
society,  Mr.  Thomas  was  back  in  England  on  a 
second  visit  and  engaged,  as  indicated,  in  raising 
funds  for  a  mission  to  India.  After  conference, 
"the  committee  being  fully  of  the  opinion  that  a 


WILLIAM  CAREY 

Baptistry  in  Calcutta,  India,  in  which 
Judson  was  Baptized 


Pulpit  in  which  Carey  Preached 
ADONIRAM  JUDSON 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  1845.     17 

door  was  now  open  in  the  East  Indies  for  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  heathen,  agreed  to 
invite  Mr.  Thomas  to  go  out  under  the  patronage 
of  the  Society;  engaging  to  furnish  him  with  a 
companion  if  a  suitable  one  could  be  obtained. 
Brother  Carey  was  then  asked  whether,  in  case 
Mr.  Thomas  should  accede  to  our  proposal,  he  was 
inclined  to  accompany  him.  To  this,  he  readily 
replied  in  the  affirmative."  While  the  Society 
was  still  in  sesson,  Mr.  Thomas,  impatient  to  see 
his  future  colleague,  entered  the  room.  Mr.  Carey 
rose  to  greet  him.  They  fell  on  each  other's  necks 
and  wept. 

"From  Mr.  Thomas'  account,  we  saw,"  said  Mr. 
Fuller,  "there  is  a  gold  mine  in  India,  but  it  seems 
almost  as  deep  as  the  center  of  the  earth.  Who 
will  venture  to  explore  it?" 

"  'I  will  go  down/  said  Carey,  'but  remember, 
you  must  hold  the  ropes.'  We  solemnly  agreed  to 
do  so,  nor  while  we  live  shall  we  desert  him." 

The  question  of  how  to  raise  the  necessary  funds 
now  confronted  the  Society.  They  were  at  the 
beginning  of  the  business  of  taking  offerings  for 
missions,  and  no  habit  of  giving  to  this  cause  had 
been  established.  It  was  a  hard  task  to  raise 
money  for  a  cause  so  imperfectly  understood  and 
against  which  there  was  so  much  positive  opposi- 
tion. As  Mr.  Fuller  tramped  through  the  streets 
of  London,  soliciting  contributions,  often  he  would 
turn  from  the  more  public  streets  into  side  alleys 
that  he  might  not  be  seen  as  he  wept  over  his 

2 


18        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions, 

meager  collections.  What  a  picture!  Andrew 
Fuller  weeping  through  the  streets  of  London  wTas 
a  perfect  picture  of  many  another  Secretary  of  a 
Foreign  Mission  Board,  as  he  has  striven  in  tearful 
anxiety  to  raise  funds  from  reluctant  contributors 
for  the  cause  that  lay  so  heavy  upon  his  heart. 

Great  affliction  came  to  Carey  from  the  fact  that 
his  wife  was  unwilling  to  accompany  him  upon  his 
mission.  She  was  a  pious  woman  and  loved  her 
husband,  but  she  did  not  share  with  him  the  desire 
to  go  upon  a  mission  in  a  foreign  land.  She  re- 
fused to  go,  and  it  was  decided  that  she  should 
remain  in  England  with  the  children  while  her 
husband  went  out  to  India.  This  was  a  sore  trial, 
but  Carey  felt  called  of  God  to  endure  it. 

Accordingly,  he  and  Mr.  Thomas  made  prepara- 
tions to  embark.  They  took  ship  in  a  vessel  sent 
out  by  the  East  India  Company.  They  had  not 
proceeded  far  before  their  real  mission  was  dis- 
covered, and  they  were  compelled  to  disembark. 
In  this  way  they  felt  for  the  first  time  the  ironf 
hand  of  opposition  from  the  East  India  Company 
— that  commercial  organization  which  obstructed 
the  progress  of  missions  in  India  for  many,  many 
years.  Carey  and  Thomas  turned  back  to  London, 
greatly  perplexed.  Their  misfortune,  however, 
proved  to  be  a  blessing  in  disguise,  for  before  they 
were  ready  to  sail  a  little  later,  on  a  Danish  vessel, 
Mrs.  Carey  consented  to  go  with  her  husband. 

On  June  13,  1793,  this  band  of  missionaries — 
Carey,  his  wife,  four  children,  his  wife's  sister. 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  1845.     19 

and  Mr.  Thomas — put  out  to  sea  on  the  Kron 
Princessin  Maria. 

The  Progress  in  America. 

To  follow  Carey  and  his  associates  in  their 
efforts  to  establish  a  mission  in  India  would  be  a 
grateful  task.  What  hardships  they  endured 
from  poverty,  sicknesw,  and  the  opposition  of  the 
East  India  Company !  How  glorious  that  achieve- 
ment in  translating  the  Scriptures  into  the  lan- 
guage of  one-third  of  the  population  of  the  globe 
and  beginning  the  work  which  has  already  resulted 
in  the  salvation  of  millions  of  the  human  race! 
Blessings  be  upon  the  Dutch  who  gave  the  mis- 
sionaries asylum  and  a  base  of  operations  at 
Serampore!  The  fifteen  miles  square  about  that 
city,  owned  by  the  Dutch  as  a  trading  station,  was 
indeed  a  refuge  for  the  storm-tossed  of  India. 

We  have  dwelt  at  length  upon  the  rise  of  the 
modern  mission  movement  in  England,  because  it 
has  such  an  important  bearing  upon  the  movement 
among  our  own  people  in  the  United  States.  But 
we  must  now  turn  aside  from  these  operations  to 
trace  the  progress  of  mission  sentiment  and  en- 
deavor in  our  own  country. 

It  will  be  seen  that  as  the  rise  of  the  great  for- 
eign mission  movement  unified  and  revived  our 
Baptist  brethren  in  England,  the  incoming  of  that 
same  tremendous  purpose  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
all  the  world,  uplifted  and  unified  our  scattered 
and  despised  people  in  the  United  States. 


20        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Mention  has  been  made  of  the  East  India  Com- 
pany. Its  misdoings  strikingly  illustrate  how 
the  providence  of  God  can  overrule  the  machina- 
tions of  men  and  make  their  very  evil  deeds  praise 
him.  We  saw  how  the  refusal  of  this  Company 
to  allow  Carey  to  travel  in  its  ship,  delayed  him 
long  enough  to  persuade  his  wife  to  go  with  him. 
Its  refusal  to  allow  other  missionaries  to  sail  in  its 
ships  caused  many  missionaries  to  first  sail  to 
America  and  then  take  ship  for  India.  When 
these  missionaries  were  on  our  shores,  they  were 
hospitably  received  in  our  homes  and  presented 
the  cause  of  missions  in  our  churches.  This  con- 
tact had  much  to  do  with  creating  sympathy  in 
America  for  the  mission  work  in  the  Far  East. 
Then,  too,  the  misdeeds  of  the  East  India  Company 
provoked  Claudius  Buchanan,  one  of  its  former 
chaplains,  to  write  "The  Star  in  the  East,"*  a  pam- 
phlet which  finally  broke  its  power  in  England 
and  which,  republished  in  America,  was  largely 
responsible  for  the  rise  of  mission  sentiment  in 
the  United  States  and  the  organiaztion  of  the 
American  Boards.  It  was  the  reading  of  this 
pamphlet  which  decided  Adoniram  Judson  to  offer 
his  life  for  service  in  the  foreign  field. 

Dr.  William  Staughton,  who  afterward  became 
the  first  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  old  Tri- 
ennial Convention,  was  a  member  of  that  famous 
meeting  in  England  which  gave  birth  to  the  En- 


*  Found  in  "Highway  of  Mission  Thought." 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  18If5.     21 

glish  Baptist  Society.  Dr.  Staughton  became  a 
living  link  between  the  Baptists  of  the  two  coun- 
tries, and  his  influence  for  missions  was  profound. 

It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  to  discover  that 
our  American  Baptists,  who  had  such  intimate 
touch  with  the  English  movement,  should  make 
substantial  contributions  ^to  the  work  in  India. 
This  brought  Carey  into  correspondence  with  the 
American  Baptists.  His  letters  to  them  were 
frequent,  and  some  of  these  letters  were  published 
the  United  States  and  the  organization  of  the 
in  the  Massachusetts  Baptist  Missionary  Mag- 
azine, the  organ  of  the  missionary  society 
which  had  been  organized  in  1802  for  work 
among  the  American  Indians.  How  far  all 
these  influences  affected  the  minds  of  our  Bap- 
tist fathers  cannot  be  said.  They  certainly 
produced  a  profound  impression  and  were 
the  leaven  that  permeated  our  people  with  a  con- 
sciousness of  their  obligation  to  help  evangelize 
the  world. 

It  would  be  most  interesting  if  we  could  trace 
in  detail  how  the  English  movement  affected  our 
Southern  people.  We  can  give  only  an  instance  or 
two.  The  first  church  in  America  to  adopt  the 
"Monthly  Concert  of  Prayer"  was  the  old  Pee  Dee 
Baptist  Church  in  South  Carolina.  The  news  of 
this  event  is  reported  in  the  English  Baptist  Reg- 
ister, May  13,  1790.  The  record  of  the  church  in 
Charleston,  S.  C,  deserves  especial  mention.  It 
not    only    adopted    the    "Quarterly    Concert    of 


22        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Prayer/'  but  early  adopted  the  "Monthly  Concert 
of  Prayer/'  in  harmony  with  the  suggestion  of  the 
English  brethren,  and  did  much  toward  encourag- 
ing the  organization  of  these  Concerts  of  Prayer 
in  the  churches  adjacent  to  Charleston.  So  inter- 
ested in  missions  was  this  church  that  when  its 
pastor,  Eichard  Furinan,  was  about  to  abandon 
his  purpose  to  attend  the  meeting  in  Philadelphia, 
which  formed  the  Triennial  Convention,  "his 
church  overruled  his  objection,  made  a  liberal  con- 
tribution for  his  use,  and  gave  him  leave  of  absence 
until  the  winter/'  It  should  be  remembered  also 
that  Eichard  Furman  was  one  of  the  most  active 
men  in  America  in  gathering  and  forwarding 
funds  for  the  support  of  the  work  fostered  by  the 
English  Baptist  Society  in  the  Far  East.  As 
much  as  |500  is  credited  to  him  in  one  report. 
These  instances  are  enough  to  show  that  our 
Southern  churches  caught  the  spirit  of  the  English 
movement  and  gave  to  it  both  prayers  and  money. 
But  the  greatest  hour  in  the  history  of  missions 
among  American  Baptists  was  the  one  when  Adon- 
iram  Judson  wrote  to  Dr.  Baldwin,  Pastor  of  the 
Second  Baptist  Church,  Boston.  "Should  there 
ever  be  formed  a  Baptist  Society  for  the  support  of 
a  Mission  in  these  parts,  I  shall  be  ready  to  con- 
sider myself  their  missionary."  No  trumpet  call 
ever  sounded  a  more  imperious  note.  It  was  a 
summons  to  battle,  and  the  hosts  responded  with 
an  enthusiasm  which  did  them  everlasting  honor. 
What  an  hour  it  was ! 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  18If5.     23 

Among  a  number  of  missionaries  sent  out  to  the 
Far  East  in  February,  1812,  by  the  American 
Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions 
(Congregationalist)  was  Adoniram  Judson.  On 
the  way  out  he  fell  to  studying  the  Scriptures  rel- 
ative to  the  subject  of  baptism.  He  knew  he 
would  be  thrown  into  contact  with  the  Baptists 
of  Serampore,  and  he  felt  that  he  should  be  pre- 
pared to  controvert  their  arguments  about  the 
manner  and  purpose  of  baptism.  As  he  proceeded 
in  his  studies,  both  on  shipboard  and  after  his 
arrival  in  Calcutta,  he  became  convinced  that  the 
Baptist  position  was  the  Scriptural  one.  He  pre- 
sented the  matter  to  his  wife,  and  she  soon  came 
to  share  his  views.  Soon  afterward  they  were 
immersed  by  Dr.  William  Ward  in  Calcutta,  Sep- 
tember 6,  1812. 

Luther  Eice,  another  of  these  missionaries,  after 
weeks  of  study  in  Calcutta,  and  after  hearing  a 
sermon  on  baptism  by  Mr.  Judson,  adopted  the 
same  views  and  was  immersed  by  Dr.  Ward  on 
November  1,  1812.  By  these  acts  a  very  delicate 
and  trying  situation  was  created.  It  became 
apparent  at  once  that  the  Judsons  and  Mr.  Kice 
could  not  proceed  further  with  their  fellow  mis- 
sionaries, with  whom  they  had  gone  out.  It  was 
just  as  imperative  that  all  relations  be  broken 
with  the  Congregationalist  Board  in  Boston, 
which  had  sent  them  out.  Both  of  these  steps 
were  unhesitatingly  taken.  The  Judsons  and 
Eice   separated   from   their   companions   and   in- 


24        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

formed  the  American  Board  of  their  decision. 
The  Baptist  missionaries  at  Serampore  generously 
undertook  to  care  for  Judson  and  Bice  until  they 
could  get  support  from  either  America  or  England. 
The  question  of  support  was  not  so  serious  as  the 
turning  from  old  associations,  friends  and  tradi- 
tions. 

The  courageous  act  of  Judson  and  Bice  was  met 
by  a  response  in  America  just  as  courageous.  The 
Baptists  accepted  the  challenge  and  threw  them- 
selves enthusiastically  into  the  foreign  mission 
enterprise  with  a  purpose  which  has  made  them 
one  of  the  mightiest  missionary  forces  in  all  the 
world.  As  President  Francis  Wayland  has  well 
said: 

"The  change  in  sentiment  in  Messrs.  Judson  and 
Bice  was  just  the  event  which  was  required  to 
awaken  the  dormant  energies  of  the  Baptists  in 
America  and  concentrate  them  all,  in  every  part 
of  the  country,  upon  one  object,  truly  Christian  in 
its  essence  and  yet  denominational  in  its  form. 
It  was  universally  acknowledged  that  in  this  mat- 
ter the  providence  of  God  had  left  us  no  option. 
Not  to  enter  at  once  and  vigorously  on  the  work 
of  missions  would  be  to  belie  our  profession  as 
Christians  and  expose  us  to  the  merited  scorn  of 
the  whole  religious  world." 

Immediately  upon  receipt  of  the  "letter  from 
Judson  announcing  his  change  of  views,  the  Ameri- 
can Baptists  began  to  plan  for  his  support. 
Within  a  month  from  the  receipt  of  this  letter  by 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  1845.     25 

Dr.  Baldwin,  the  "Baptist  Society  for  Propagating 
the  Gospel  in  India  and  Other  Foreign  Parts"  was 
formed  in  Boston.  The  first  plan  was  to  form 
societies  in  this  country  which  should  support  the 
missionaries  in  connection  with  the  parent  society 
in  England.  The  English,  however,  declined  to 
make  such  an  arrangement,  believing  it  would  be 
better  for  the  American  Baptists  to  organize  their 
own  foreign  mission  work  on  an  independent  basis. 
The  Boston  society  inspired  other  centers  to  form 
similar  organizations,  and  the  spread  of  these  soci- 
eties over  the  entire  country  became  a  marked 
feature  in  the  development  of  the  foreign  mission 
enterprise. 

A  great  impetus  was  given  to  this  movement  by 
the  return  of  Luther  Bice  from  India  in  1813. 
Having  allied  himself  with  the  already  organized 
Boston  society,  he  threw  himself  with  marvelous 
zeal  and  industry  into  the  effort  to  arouse  Ameri- 
can Baptists  upon  the  subject  of  foreign  missions, 
telling  his  story  from  one  end  of  the  country  to  the 
other  and  pleading  his  great  cause  with  rare  elo- 
quence and  power. 

Soon  the  foreign  missionary  societies  began  to 
multiply.  The  "Baptist  Foreign  Missionary  So- 
ciety of  Virginia"  was  organized  in  Richmond, 
October  28,  1813;  the  Missionary  Society  in 
Charleston,  S.  C,  probably  in  November  in  the 
same  year ;  the  "Philadelphia  Baptist  Society  for 
Foreign  Missions"  in  December,  and  before  the 
close  of  1813,  the  "Savannah  Baptist  Society  for 


26        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Foreign  Missions/'  the  "Beaufort,  S.  C,  District 
Missionary  Society  for  Foreign  Missions/'  and  the 
"North  Carolina  Baptist  Society  for  Foreign  Mis- 
sions" came  into  existence.  By  the  time  of  the 
general  meeting  in  Philadelphia,  May  18,  1814, 
societies  had  been  formed  in  Baltimore,  Freder- 
icksburg, Va.,  Washington,  D.  C,  Kentucky,  Dela- 
ware, and  in  other  sections  of  the  country.  This 
movement  was  fostered  chiefly  by  Mr.  Rice,  who 
organized  twenty-five  new  societies  and  enlisted 
many  more  in  the  first  year  of  his  service  after  his 
return. 

It  soon  became  evident  that  some  sort  of  con- 
certed action  was  necessary  to  give  continuity  to 
the  work  and  to  carry  it  forward  in  the  most 
economical  and  effective  manner.  Accordingly, 
on  the  18th  of  May,  1814,  there  assembled  in  Phil- 
adelphia thirty-three  delegates  representing  the 
missionary  societies  and  other  religious  bodies  of 
the  Baptist  persuasion  from  eleven  different  States 
and  from  the  District  of  Columbia,  for  the  purpose 
of  "organizing  a  plan  for  eliciting,*  combining, 
and  directing  the  efforts  of  the  whole  denomina- 
tion in  one  sacred  effort  for  sending  the  giad  tid- 
ings of  salvation  to  the  heathen  and  to  nations  des- 
titute of  pure  gospel  light."  This  Convention, 
small  in  numbers  but  weighty  in  influence,  has 
the  added  significance  of  being  the  first  national 
gathering  of  the  Baptists  of  America. 


*See  Appendix  "B." 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  1845.     27 

Eichard  Furman,  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  w&s 
chosen  President  of  this  Convention.  He  was, 
"perhaps  the  foremost  Baptist  in  America." 
Thomas  Baldwin,  of  Massachusetts,  to  whom 
Judson  had  written  announcing  his  change  of 
views,  was  chosen  Secretary.* 

After  six  days'  deliberation,  a  Constitution  was 
adopted  which  formed  the  "General  Missionary 
Convention  of  the  Baptist  Denomination  of  the 
United  States  of  America  for  Foreign  Missions." 
This  Convention  became  known  as  the  Triennial 
Convention  from  the  fact  that  it  met  every  three 
years. 

The  Constitutiont  of  this  Convention  provided 
for  the  appointment  of  a  Board  of  twenty-one 
Commissioners  called  "The  Baptist  Board  of  For- 
eign Missions  for  the  United  States,"  which  should 
transact  business  during  the  recesses  of  the  Con- 
vention. The  first  meeting  of  the  Board  was  held 
May  24,  1814.  Mr.  Kice  and  Mr.  Judson  were 
appointed  as  missionaries,  and  provision  was  made 
for  their  support.  The  English  Baptist  Mission- 
ary Society  was  informed  of  these  actions,  and 
that  the  American  Board  was  ready  to  reimburse 
the  English  Missionary  Society  for  the  funds 
advanced  to  Mr.  Judson. 

From  the  formation  of  the  Triennial  Convention 
in  1814,  down  to  1845,  the  work  of  American  Bap- 


*See  Appendix  "0." 
{See  Appendix  "D." 


28        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

tists,  North  and  South,  in  foreign  missions  was 
conducted  by  the  Foreign  Mission  Board  of  this 
Convention.  In  1815  and  1816,  South  Carolina 
was  the  largest  contributor  to  the  work  of  the 
Board.  In  1818  this  honor  fell  to  Virginia. 
Georgia  led  in  1837.  The  five  States  leading  in 
total  contributions  from  its  organization  in  1814 
to  the  organization  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Con- 
vention in  1845,  were  New  York,  Massachusetts, 
Georgia,  Virginia,  South  Carolina. 

Southern  Baptists,  then,  should  not  fall  into  the 
error  of  thinking  that  their  interest  ia  foreign 
missions  began  with  the  organization  of  the  South- 
ern Baptist  Convention  in  1845.  Luther  Bice 
traveled  extensively  in  the  South,  laboring  in  be- 
half of  missions,  and  was  everywhere  loved  and 
cordially  welcomed.  He  sleeps  in  the  cemetery  at 
Edgefield,  S.  C.  The  great  career  of  Judson,  who 
died  in  1849,  is  practically  spanned  by  the  period 
covered  by  the  life  of  the  old  Triennial  Convention. 
Southern  hearts  and  hands  were  with  him,  and 
his  devoted  co-laborers,  in  their  great  work  in 
Burmah.  It  was  a  Southern  man,  E.  A.  Stephens, 
of  Georgia,  who  completed  the  Burman-English 
Dictionary  on  which  Judson  was  laboring  when 
he  died.  The  remarkable  work  done  in  Sierra 
Leone  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  originated  in 
Bichmond,  Va.,  and  after  it  was  taken  over  by  the 
Triennial  Convention,  received  the  heartiest  coop- 
eration from  Southern  people.  The  affection  of 
Southern  Baptists  for  the  work  performed  by  the 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions  Prior  to  1845.     29 

old  Triennial  Convention  was  eloquently  voiced 
in  the  minutes  of  the  first  Convention,  in  1845. 
Indeed,  the  thrilling  story  of  the  heroism,  the 
sacrifices,  and  the  achievements  of  these  early  days 
is  the  priceless  heritage  of  the  whole  Baptist  fam- 
ily in  America. 

Mission  Dates  to  be  Eemembered. 

1784.  Monthly  Concert  of  Prayer  recommended  by  the 
Nottinghamshire  Baptist  Association. 

1792.  May  30.  Carey  Preached  Famous  Sermon  on 
Isaiah  54 :  2,  3. 

1792.  October  2.      ''The  Baptist  Missionary  Society  for 

Propagating  the  Gospel  Among  the  Heathen," 
formed  at  Kettering. 

1793.  June  13,  Carey  and  Thomas  sail  for  India. 

1812.  February  19,  Judson  sailed  for  India. 

1813.  February.      "Baptist  Society  for  Propagating  the 

Gospel    in    India    and    Other    Foreign    Parts," 
organized  in  Boston. 

1813.  October  28,  Institution  of  "The  Baptist  Missionary 

Society  of  Virginia." 

1814.  May  18,  Meeting  of  "The  Baptist  General  Conven- 

tion for  Foreign  Missions"   (Triennial  Conven- 
tion) in  Philadelphia. 
1845.     Southern  Baptist  Convention  organized  in  Augusta, 
Georgia. 


CHAPTER  II. 


FOREIGN  MISSION  BOARD  OF  THE  SOUTHERN 
BAPTIST  CONVENTION. 

In  1845  it  became  apparent  to  Baptists,  both 
North  and  South,  that  a  separation  was  inevitable 
on  account  of  divergent  views  upon  the  question 
of  slavery.  The  Southern  people  could  no  longer 
be  induced  to  support  a  Board  which  declared  it 
would  not  appoint  a  Southern  man  to  be  a  mission- 
ary if  he  were  a  slaveholder,  and  the  Northern 
churches  were  becoming  disrupted  by  the  heated 
discussions  which  were  being  held  in  all  their 
churches.  So  far  had  this  dissatisfaction  gone  in 
the  North  that  in  1843  there  was  organized  in 
Boston  a  Free  Mission  Society,  for  the  ex- 
pressed intention  of  not  cooperating  with  the 
Southern  churches  and  in  opposition  to  the  For- 
eign Mission  Board  of  the  Triennial  Convention. 
Furthermore,  the  Boston  Board  was  so  far  remote 
from  the  South  that  it  was  unable  to  cultivate 
very  satisfactorily  the  Southern  field.  A  separa- 
tion was  necessary,  therefore,  to  save  the  mission 
cause,  both  North  and  South.  In  1845,  the  Vir- 
ginia Foreign  Mission  Society  issued  an  address 
suggesting  that  a  convention  be  held  in  Augusta, 
Ga.,  in  May  of  that  year  "to  confer  on  the  best 

(30) 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  8.  B.  C.      31 

means  of  promoting  the  foreign  mission  cause  and 
other  interests  of  the  Baptist  denomination  in  the 
South." 

In  response  to  this  call  of  the  Virginia  Foreign 
Mission  Society,  328  delegates  from  eight  South- 
ern States  and  the  District  of  Columbia  met  in 
Augusta,  Ga.,  May  8, 1845,  and  organized  the  South- 
ern Baptist  Convention.  This  Convention  issued 
an  address  in  which  in  the  following  language  it 
showed  clearly  that  the  Constitution  was  essen- 
tially the  same  as  that  of  the  old  Triennial  Con- 
vention : 

"The  Constitution  we  adopt  is  precisely  that  of 
the  original  union ;  that  in  connection  with  which, 
throughout  his  missionary  life,  Adoniram  Judson 
has  lived,  and  under  which  Ann  Judson  and 
Boardman  have  died.  We  recede  from  it  no 
single  step.  .  .  .  We  use  the  very  terms  as  we 
uphold  the  true  spirit  and  great  object  of  the  late 
'General  Convention  of  the  Baptist  Denomination 
of  the  United  States.'  " 

It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  separation 
was  not  over  any  point  of  doctrine,  but  was  over 
the  practical  promotion  of  the  activities  of  the 
denomination.  The  Southern  Baptist  Convention 
was  not  formed  in  a  factional  spirit.  We  must 
accept  as  genuine  the  purpose  of  this  Convention 
as  declared  in  the  following  resolution : 

"Resolved,  That  for  peace  and  harmony,  and  in 
order  to  accomplish  the  greatest  amount  of  good, 
and  for  the  maintenance  of  those  Scriptural  prin- 


32        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

ciples  on  which  the  General  Missionary  Conven- 
tion of  the  Baptist  Denomination  of  the  United 
States  was  originally  formed,  it  is  proper  that  this 
Convention  at  once  proceed  to  organize  a  Society 
for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel." 

The  Augusta  Convention  provided  for  two 
Boards,  one  for  foreign  and  one  for  home  missions, 
which  should  serve  as  large  Committees  to  trans- 
act the  business  of  the  Convention  between  the 
meetings  of  that  body.  It  would  be  a  pleasing 
task  to  trace  here  the  inspiring  work  the  Home 
Mission  Board  has  carried  forward  during  these 
fifty-odd  years,  but  the  limits  of  this  sketch  do  not 
permit  us.  We  must  give  our  attention  to  a  brief 
discussion  of  the  work  done  by  the  Foreign  Mis- 
sion Board. 

Immediately  after  the  Convention  in  Augusta, 
the  Foreign  Mission  Board,  composed  of  twenty- 
one  members,  living  in  Richmond,  Va.,  and  a  Vice- 
President  in  every  Southern  State,  organized  for 
business.  The  history  of  this  Board  falls  natur- 
ally into  three  periods.  The  period  of  beginnings, 
1845-1860;  the  period  of  retardment,  1861-1879; 
the  period  of  enlargement,  1880  to  the  present 
time. 

Period  of  Beginnings,  1845-1860. 

After  searching  diligently  for  some  months,  the 
Board  selected  Bev.  James  B.  Taylor,  D.D.,  of 
Virginia,  to  be  the  Corresponding  Secretary.  Dr. 
Taylor  accepted  and  conducted  the  administrative 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  8.  B.  C.       33 

work  of  the  Board  with  signal  ability  and  states- 
manship until  1871. 

The  selection  of  fields  and  the  securing  of  mis- 
sionaries to  occupy  them  was  a  difficult  task.  The 
first  field  to  which  missionaries  were  appointed 
was  China.  In  1845,  J.  L.  Shuck,  I.  J.  Roberts, 
Samuel  C.  Clopton,  and  George  Percy  were  ap- 
pointed to  labor  in  China.  Shuck  wras  the  first 
Baptist  missionary  ever  to  be  located  in  China. 
He  had  been  sent  out  in  1836  under  the  Foreign 
Mission  Board  of  the  Triennial  Convention. 
When  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention  was 
formed,  he,  being  a  Virginian,  naturally  sought 
employment  under  the  new  Board,  and  received 
from  it  the  first  commission  it  ever  gave. 

From  the  time  when  Lott  Carey  and  Colin 
Teague  (both  colored)  went  out  from  Richmond, 
Va.,  to  Liberia,  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  in  1821, 
under  the  appointment  of  the  Triennial  Convention, 
the  effort  to  reach  the  millions  of  Africa  had  been 
cordially  supported  by  Southern  Baptists.  It 
was  to  be  expected,  therefore,  that  when  our  own 
Convention  was  formed,  our  Board  would  imme- 
diately plan  to  send  missionaries  to  the  African 
continent.  Accordingly,  in  the  fall  of  1846,  John 
Day  and  A.  L.  Jones  were  appointed  to  serve  in 
Liberia.  These  two  fields  were  the  only  ones 
occupied  by  the  Board  during  this  first  period.  In 
1859,  the  Board  resolved  to  enter  Japan,  but  the 
approach  of  the  Civil  War  delayed  this  for  many 
years. 

3 


34        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

It  was  necessaiy  also  to  determine  upon  the 
policies  which  should  control  the  operations  of 
the  Board  in  foreign  lands.  With  statesmanlike 
foresight  and  skill,  the  policies  were  inaugurated 
which  have  since  required  but  slight  modification. 
The  Board's  first  Beport  outlined  procedure  along 
evangelistic,  educational,  and  medical  lines. 

Mr.  Francis  C.  Johnson,  of  South  Carolina,  on 
account  of  his  exceptional  ability,  was  sent  to 
China  in  1846  to  undertake  the  special  work  of 
instructing  native  preachers.  Today  the  school 
work  has  been  enlarged,  until  all  kinds  of  schools, 
from  the  Kindergarten  to  the  College  and  Theo- 
logical Seminary  are  employed.  These  schools 
gain  the  sympathy  of  the  people  to  a  very  remark- 
able degree,  and  thus  become  very  effective  evan- 
gelistic agencies. 

The  problem  of  enlisting  the  masses  of  our 
people  in  behalf  of  the  mission  cause  was  graphic- 
ally stated  by  the  first  Corresponding  Secretary 
of  the  Board.  "The  population  of  the  South  is 
comparatively  sparse.  Our  churches  are  not  of 
easy  access,  their  members  being  scattered  often 
over  many  miles  of  territory.  Our  forces  are  not 
well  trained,  nor  are  their  capabilities  brought 
into  suitable  exercise.  .  .  .  Our  country  is 
not  filled  up  with  towns  and  villages.  They  are 
principally  agriculturalists,  and  must  be  visited 
upon  their  farms,  or  called  together  at  their  coun- 
try places  of  worship." 

The   Board   addressed   itself  diligently  to  the 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  S.  B.  C.       35 

solution  of  this  problem.  Effort  was  made,  with 
varying  success,  to  employ  agents  who  would  rep- 
resent the  cause  of  missions  in  their  several  States. 
The  Southern  Baptist  Mission  Journal  was  called 
into  existence  to  help  supply  information.  The 
Secretary,  who  at  first  gave  only  a  portion  of  his 
time  to  the  Board,  soon  turned  his  entire  attention 
to  the  development  of  the  field,  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  He  went  among  the  churches  trying  to 
rally  them  to  the  support  of  the  cause.  In  1854, 
Dr.  A.  M.  Poindexter,  of  Virginia,  was  elected 
Assistant  Secretary  and  wrought  most  efficiently. 
One  of  the  greatest  impulses  given  to  the  foreign 
mission  cause  was  by  J.  L.  Shuck.  He,  in  com- 
pany with  Yong  Seen  Sang,  a  native  Chinese  con- 
vert, was  visiting  in  this  country  at  the  time  of  the 
organization  of  the  Convention.  Mr.  Shuck  and 
Mr.  Yong  were  asked  by  the  Board  to  visit  the 
churches.  Wherever  they  went,  they  created 
deep  interest  in  missions  and  gave  an  impetus  to 
the  cause  which  was  felt  for  many  years.  That 
these  agencies  quickened  the  missionary  zeal  of 
Southern  Baptists  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact 
that  the  contributions  for  foreign  missions  in- 
creased from  $11,689.05  in  1845,  to  $41,195.07  in 
1860. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  '50's,  the  outlook  was 
bright  for  a  splendid  advance  in  foreign  mission 
endeavor.  The  work  in  China  and  Africa  had 
been  firmly  established.  Already  the  Board  had 
undertaken  to  open  the  work  in  Japan  and  Brazil, 


36        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

and  was  considering  other  fields.  But  in  1860 
the  War  Cloud  arose,  and  the  impending  storm 
began  to  chill  the  activities  of  the  people. 

Period  op  Betardment,  1861-1879. 

The  Civil  War,  which  destroyed  so  much  wealth 
and  decimated  the  population  of  the  South,  crip- 
pled most  seriously  the  activities  of  the  Foreign 
Mission  Board.  The  hopeful  progress  just  preced- 
ing the  War  received  a  violent  check  when  this 
fearful  strife  began. 

The  income  of  the  Board  fell  until  in  1863  it 
amounted  to  only  $8,634.43.  Even  if  the  income 
had  been  larger,  it  would  not  have  been  possible  to 
send  the  money  to  the  missionaries  at  the  front 
because  of  the  blockade  that  was  maintained  so 
rigidly  against  the  South.  So  little  could  be  done 
that  Dr.  Taylor,  the  Secretary  of  the  Board,  en- 
gaged himself  to  the  Virginia  Sunday  School  and 
Publishing  Board  to  give  a  portion  of  his  time  as 
a  colporteur  among  the  hospitals  of  Bichmond, 
and  Dr.  A.  M.  Poindexter,  the  Assistant  Secretary, 
retired  to  his  farm. 

Correspondence  with  the  missionaries  was  very 
limited,  and  at  times  entirely  cut  off.  In  this 
crisis,  the  good  offices  of  the  brethren  in  Maryland 
and  Kentucky  were  most  generously  tendered  to 
the  Board.  These  two  States  suffered  less  than 
the  others  from  the  ravages  of  the  War,  and  being 
on   the  border,   could   communicate  more  easily 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  S.  B.  G.       37 

with  the  outside  world.  These  brethren  raised 
considerable  sums  of  money  and  forwarded  them 
to  the  missionaries.  Had  it  not  been  for  this 
generous  action  by  the  Maryland  and  Kentucky 
Baptists,  our  missionaries  would  have  suffered 
far  more  than  they  did. 

Of  the  actions  of  the  missionaries,  themselves, 
the  Keport  of  1866  can  best  speak.  "The  brethren 
connected  with  the  different  missions  deserve  espe- 
cially the  grateful  thanks  of  the  Board  for  their 
considerate  regard  to  our  condition  by  voluntarily 
reducing  their  stipulated  allowance  and  otherwise, 
by  a  partial  arrangement  for  their  own  support. 
As  the  Board  had  authorized  them  in  the  event  of 
straitened  circumstances,  to  secure  loans,  it  is 
easy  to  see  how  an  embarrassing  debt  might  have 
been  created  from  which  it  would  have  been  diffi- 
cult to  release  ourselves.  But  these  brethren 
preferred  to  suffer  privation  and  hardship,  being 
willing  to  share  with  the  sorrowing  ones  at  home 
who  were  drinking  in  various  forms  the  bitter  cup 
of  affliction." 

The  War  left  the  South  stunned  and  impover- 
ished. Thousands  of  those  who  had  contributed 
to  missions  before  the  War  now  lay  dead  on  the 
battlefields.  Many  plantations,  previously  flour- 
ishing, were  now  deserted  and  profitless.  Not- 
withstanding these  conditions,  our  Baptist  hosts 
rallied  with  wonderful  devotion  to  the  support  of 
foreign  missions  and  instructed  the  Board  to  as 
quickly  as  possible  resume  all  work  undertaken 


38        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

previous  to  the  outbreak  of  the  War.  The  debt 
of  f  10,000  which  was  on  the  Board  at  the  close  of 
the  War  wras  soon  wiped  out,  and  by  1879  the  in- 
come was  rapidly  approaching  the  proportions 
reached  in  1860.  Italy  wTas  entered  in  1870,  and 
the  work  attempted  in  Brazil  just  before  the  War, 
was  resumed  in  1879.  In  1875,  the  Foreign  Mis- 
sion Journal,  which  had  been  suspended  during 
the  War,  was  revived,  and  in  the  same  year  the 
Board  undertook  to  rehabilitate  the  long-neglected 
work  in  Africa. 

On  the  11th  day  of  December,  1871,  Dr.  J.  B. 
Taylor,  Corresponding  Secretary  since  the  organ- 
ization, resigned,  and  eleven  days  afterward  passed 
to  his  heavenly  reward.  Of  his  distinguished 
services,  the  Board  makes  the  following  record : 

"Kev.  J.  B.  Taylor,  D.D.,  has  been  the  only 
acting  Corresponding  Secretary  of  this  Board. 
During  the  whole  period  of  its  existence,  extend- 
ing through  twenty-six  years,  he  has  performed 
the  duties  of  his  office  with  a  diligence,  fidelity, 
and  disinterestedness  never  excelled,  and  with  a 
judgment  and  prudence  and  efficiency  rarely 
equalled.  He  has  been  in  truth  the  life  and  motive 
power  of  the  Board." 

The  year  1879  is  taken  as  the  close  of  this 
period,  because  that  date  marked  a  significant 
turning  point  in  the  history  of  the  Southern  Bap- 
tist Convention.  The  fact  of  slavery  was  the 
greatest  single  cause  for  the  formation  of  the 
Southern  Baptist  Convention.     When,  therefore, 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  8.  B.  C.       39 

the  War  was  over  and  Keconstruction  days  had 
passed,  it  was  natural  that  the  question  should 
rise  whether  American  Baptists  should  not  reunite 
their  activities.  The  Convention  held  in  Atlanta, 
1879,  finally  decided  that  the  separate  organiza- 
tion should  be  continued.  Many  considerations 
influenced  this  decision. 

"But  the  sturdiest  prop  of  an  institution  that 
was  almost  ready  to  fall  was  the  Board  of  Foreign 
Missions.  They  had  no  rivals  in  prosecuting  the 
foreign  mission  work  of  Southern  Baptists.  On 
either  side  of  the  Mississippi,  all  States  and  Terri- 
tories were  opened  to  them;  their  agents  were 
kindly  welcomed  everywhere.  By  consequence  it 
was  in  their  power  to  exhibit  a  degree  of  prosper- 
ity that  was  unequaled  for  that  time  and  to  pre- 
sent reports  that  were  always  gratifying  and  often 
surprising.  Friends  of  the  Convention  could  urge 
with  entire  propriety  that  there  was  no  serious  call 
to  surrender  as  long  as  this  creditable  work  re- 
mained intact." — Dr.  William  H.  Whitsitt,  in 
Jubilee  Address,  Washington,  1895. 

Period  of  Enlargement,  1880  to  the  Present. 

With  the  question  of  the  separate  existence  of 
the  Convention  settled  and  the  South  in  some 
measure  recovered  from  the  retarding  circum- 
stances incident  to  the  Civil  War,  the  Foreign 
Mission  Board  found  itself  in  1880  upon  the 
threshold  of  a  new  era  in  which  it  might  hope  and 
plan  for  extensive  enlargement. 


40        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

It  was  possible  now  for  the  Board  to  look  to 
other  fields  and  to  equip  more  adequately  the  sta- 
tions already  established.  The  first  year  of  this 
period  was  signalized  by  the  establishment  of  a 
Mission  in  Mexico.  Japan  was  entered  in  1889, 
and  a  mission  was  established  in  Argentina  in 
1903,  thus  bringing  the  number  of  countries  in 
which  the  Board  labors  up  to  seven. 

Great  advancement  has  been  made,  but  we 
should  not  imagine  that  it  was  effected  without 
arduous  toil  and  in  the  face  of  serious  difficulties. 
Dr.  H.  A.  Tupper,  who  became  Secretary  on  Feb- 
ruary 20,  1872,  did  heroic  service  in  spite  of  poor 
equipment  on  the  foreign  fields  and  difficult 
though  ever-improving  conditions  in  this  country. 
For  more  than  twenty-one  years  this  faithful  serv- 
ant labored  for  the  Board,  and  was  permitted  to 
see  its  work  quadrupled  both  in  workers  and  con- 
tributions. He  resigned  his  position  on  June  30, 
1893. 

"Between  these  dates — February  20,  1872,  and 
June  30,  1893 — the  voluminous  records  of  the 
Board  and  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention 
contained  on  almost  every  page  some  proofs  of  the 
zealous,  assiduous,  faithful,  incessant  labors  of 
this  very  modest,  quiet,  Christian  gentleman  In 
every  State  of  our  vast  domain  and  in  every  conti- 
nent of  the  globe,  his  autograph  letters  have  car- 
ried wise  advice  couched  in  terms  of  kindly  senti- 
ment and  most  courtly  politeness,  while  his  un- 
written record  stamped  upon  the  minds  and  hearts 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  8.  B.  C.       41 

of  members  of  the  Board  and  missionaries  under 
our  appointment  is  beyond  the  power  of  human 
language  to  represent.  Eternity  alone  will  suffice 
to  estimate  the  power  of  his  faith,  his  calmness, 
his  prudence,  his  consecration." 

Dr.  E.  J.  Willingham  was  called  to  the  Secre- 
taryship and  began  his  work  September  1,  1893. 
Coming  from  a  successful  pastorate  in  the  First 
Baptist  Church,  Memphis,  Tenn.,  he  threw  himself 
into  the  work  and  conducted  a  campaign  for  ad- 
vancement in  the  face  of  debt  and  many  discour- 
agements, with  the  magnificent  results  that  the 
reports  of  the  years  eloquently  display. 

During  the  entire  existence  of  the  Board  there 
have  been  only  three  Corresponding  Secretaries — 
Drs.  J.  B.  Taylor,  H.  A.  Tupper,  and  E.  J.  Willing- 
ham.  At  different  times  the  Board  had  also  an 
Assistant  Secretary.  Eev.  A.  M.  Poindexter,  D.D., 
served  with  Dr.  Taylor;  Eev.  T.  P.  Bell,  D.D., 
with  Dr.  Tupper;  Eev.  E.  Y.  Mullins,  D.D.,  Eev. 
A.  J.  Barton,  D.  D.,  Eev.  E.  E.  Bomar,  D.D.,  with 
Dr.  Willingham.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  over- 
estimate the  value  of  the  services  of  this  group  of 
Assistant  Secretaries.  They  gave  themselves  un- 
stintedly to  the  cause,  and  their  labors  contributed 
in  a  large  way  to  the  splendid  success  attained 
by  the  Board. 

No  history  of  the  Foreign  Mission  Board  would 
be  complete  without  special  recognition  of  the 
untiring  zeal  and  unfailing  support  our  women 
have  given  to  this  cause.     When  Yong  Seen  Sang 


42        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

was  appointed  missionary  in  the  first  year  of  the 
Convention,  the  Woman's  Society  of  the  First 
Baptist  Church,  Richmond,  Va.?  undertook  his 
support  and  kept  it  up  for  more  than  thirty-five 
years.  The  first  plan  was  that  the  women  should 
undertake  the  support  of  the  women  missionaries. 
There  was  a  special  report  upon  the  women's  work 
in  the  Convention  in  1872,  which  urged  that  the 
organization  of  female  societies  be  encouraged  in 
all  the  churches.  A  similar  report  in  1876  conveys 
the  information  that,  "In  many  of  our  churches, 
female  missionary  societies  have  been  organized  for 
the  support  of  female  missionaries.  Perhaps  the 
largest  group  of  these  societies  is  in  South  Caro- 
lina, where  they  already  number  as  many  as  sixty- 
eight,  and  have  greatly  increased  the  missionary 
contribution  in  that  liberal  State.  Others  of  a  sim- 
ilar sort  exist  in  Maryland,  Virginia,  Georgia,  Ala- 
bama, and  Kentucky,  and  no  doubt  in  some  addi- 
tional States,  but  we  are  unable  to  report  their 
number.  It  is  desirable  that  they  be  established 
in  all.  Female  societies,  cooperating  in  the  gen- 
eral work  of  the  Board,  have  from  the  beginning 
largely  contributed  to  its  revenues  and  successes, 
especially  in  the  older  States,  but  we  doubt  not 
that  this  specific  object  will  awaken  an  interest  in 
behalf  of  missions  such  as  they  have  never  cher- 
ished heretofore." 

In  1888  the  Woman's  Missionary  Union,  auxil- 
iary to  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention,  was 
organized  in  the  form  under  which  it  operates  to- 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  S.  B.  C.      43 

day,  with  central  Committees  in  all  the  States. 
Its  work  is  auxiliary  to  all  of  the  Boards  of  the 
Convention.  This  new  organization  has  greatly 
increased  the  efficiency  of  the  women's  societies. 

In  addition  to  raising  large  sums  of  money  for 
both  home  and  foreign  missions,  the  Woman's 
Missionary  Union  maintains  &n  extensive  mission 
literature  department  at  its  headquarters  in  Bal- 
timore, Md. ;  a  home  for  missionaries'  children  in 
Greenville,  S.  C,  and  a  Training  School  for  women 
in  Louisville,  Ky.  Miss  Annie  W.  Armstrong  was 
the  capable  Secretary  for  the  first  eighteen  years 
of  the  Union's  history.  Her  self-sacrificing  devo- 
tion and  intelligent  direction  contributed  one  of 
the  most  signal  services  ever  rendered  the  cause 
of  missions  in  the  South.  She  was  succeeded  by 
Miss  Edith  Campbell  Crane,  who  serves  efficiently 
in  this  same  capacity  today. 

We  have  attempted  in  the  preceding  pages  to 
pass  in  review  the  glorious  history  of  the  South- 
ern Baptist  Convention  from  the  time  of  its  forma- 
tion down  to  the  present  day.  It  has  not  been 
possible  to  portray  the  difficulties,  the  heartaches, 
the  anxieties  which  the  Board  and  its  mission- 
aries have  felt  during  these  trying  years.  With 
the  deepest  gratitude  we  give  praise  to  God  for 
his  wonderful  blessing  and  for  his  faithful  guid- 
ance through  all  the  problems  down  to  this  good 
hour.  He  has  enlarged  our  work  until  it  wins 
our  cordial  admiration  and  leads  us  to  expect  far 
larger  achievements  in  the  years  to  come. 


44        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

It  may  be  interesting  to  say  something  about  the 
present  form,  activities  and  methods  of  the  Board. 
The  Board  is  composed  of  twenty-one  members 
who  reside  in  Bichniond,  and  a  Vice-President  in 
every  State.  It  is  appointed  annually  by  the 
Southern  Baptist  Convention,  to  which  it  makes 
report.  It  is  served  at  the  present  time  by  R.  J. 
Willingham,  Corresponding  Secretary;  William  H. 
Smith,  Editorial  Secretary;  S.  J.  Porter,  Field 
Secretary;  T.  B.  Bay,  Educational  Secretary; 
B.  B.  Gwathmey,  Treasurer.  The  Secretaries  and 
the  Treasurer  are  the  only  members  who  receive 
any  salary. 

The  work  of  the  Board  is  divided  into  four  de- 
partments, each  in  charge  of  a  Secretary.  Dr. 
B.  J.  Willingham  has  charge  of  the  General  Ad- 
ministrative Department,  and  exercises  a  general 
supervision  over  the  entire  work  of  the  Board. 
Dr.  William  H.  Smith  has  charge  of  the  Editorial 
Department,  and  edits  the  Foreign  Mission  Jour- 
nal and  other  pamphlet  literature.  Dr.  S.  J. 
Porter  has  charge  of  the  Field  Department,  and 
through  the  Vice-Presidents  of  the  Board  in  the 
hundreds  of  Associations  in  the  bounds  of  the 
Convention  and  by  visiting  the  churches  and  con- 
ventions, keeps  in  touch  with  the  home  field.  Dr. 
T.  B.  Bay  has  charge  of  the  Educational  Depart- 
ment, and  through  organizing  Mission  Study 
Classes  in  the  churches,  schools,  and  colleges,  cir- 
culating missionary  literature,  visiting  Conven- 
tions, Summer  Assemblies,  and  churches,  endeav- 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  8.  B.  C.      45 

ors  to  faster  the  study  of  missions.  Of  course, 
each  Secretary  assists  in  all  departments  of  the 
Board's  work  as  far  as  possible. 

The  administrative  work  of  the  Board  is  done  in 
the  regular  Board  meetings  held  on  the  second 
Tuesday  in  every  month,  with  an  occasional  called 
meeting.  Every  matter  of  importance  is  referred 
to  a  committee  and  receives  careful  consideration 
before  it  is  presented  to  the  Board.  There  are 
committees  on  China,  Africa,  Japan,  Italy,  Mex- 
ico, Brazil,  Argentina,  Finances,  Appointments, 
Publications,  Ways  and  Means,  Woman's  Work, 
and  Young  People's  Work. 

On  every  field  there  is  a  regularly  organized 
Mission.  A  Mission  is  made  up  of  the  missionaries 
who  are  laboring  in  any  particular  field.  For 
instance,  there  are  four  Missions  in  China,  one 
consisting  of  the  workers  in  South  China,  called 
the  South  China  Mission;  another,  the  workers 
in  Central  China ;  another,  the  workers  in  North 
China;  a  fourth,  the  missionaries  in  Interior 
China.  The  Missions  consider  the  work  of  their 
respective  fields,  and  from  time  to  time  make  rec- 
ommendations to  the  Board.  Of  course,  the 
Board  is  in  constant  communication  with  the 
individual  missionary.  Once  a  year  the  Mission 
meets  and  adopts  an  estimate  of  expenses  for  the 
coming  twelve  months,  including  salaries  of  the 
missionaries  and  of  the  native  helpers  and  build- 
ings and  other  equipment  required.  This  becomes 
the  basis  of   appropriations   by  the   Board,   the 


46        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

funds  available  and  the  needs  of  all  the  fields  being 
taken  into  consideration. 

The  work  of  the  Foreign  Mission  Board  upon 
the  foreign  fields  is  divided  into  four  departments 
— the  evangelistic,  educational,  medical,  and  lit- 
erary. It  should  be  remembered,  however,  that 
these  divisions  are  for  the  sake  of  definition. 
They  overlap  in  many  ways,  and  the  object  of  all 
of  them  is  to  bring  the  gospel  of  Christ  in  saving 
power  to  the  knowledge  and  acceptance  of  the 
people.  Everything  is  made  to  contribute  to  this 
one  great  end. 

The  evangelistic  work  consists  of  those  labors 
of  the  missionaries  which  have  to  do  directly  with 
the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  and  with  the  direct- 
ing of  the  religious  work  of  the  Mission.  All  of 
our  missionaries,  whatever  may  be  their  technical 
work,  preach  the  gospel  and  endeavor  to  win  men 
to  Christ  through  personal  work.  All  share  in  the 
organization  of  churches,  the  conducting  of  Sun- 
day schools,  and  preaching  tours. 

The  educational  work  consists  of  all  forms  of 
school  work,  from  the  Kindergarten  in  which  the 
most  elemental  wTork  is  done,  up  through  the 
Academy,  the  College,  the  Theological  Seminary. 
These  schools  are  effective  means  of  reaching  the 
people,  and  render  them  more  receptive  to  the 
gospel  message.  The  importance  of  the  impres- 
sion made  upon  the  child's  mind  in  these  schools 
cannot  be  estimated,  and  the  necessity  of  having 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  8.  B.  C.       47 

a  trained  native  ministry  is  of  transcendent 
moment. 

Industrial  school  work  has  been  recently  added 
in  one  or  two  fields.  It  aims  to  make  the  students 
self-supporting,  giving  them  an  education  and  a 
trade  at  the  same  time.  This  makes  those  who 
are  unsuited  for  teachers  enlightened  wage-earning 
citizens  and  more  efficient  church  members. 

The  medical  missionary  is  necessary  both  for 
protecting  the  lives  of  the  missionaries  and  for 
the  good  he  can  accomplish  in  winning  the  sym- 
pathy of  native  people.  Our  physicians  in  China, 
Mexico,  and  Africa  are  exercising  a  far-reaching 
influence.  As  they  treat  their  thousands  of 
patients,  they  turn  many  to  Christ. 

Christian  literature  is  an  exceedingly  important 
factor  in  every  stage  of  mission  endeavor.  Large 
quantities  of  tracts,  Bibles,  periodicals,  books, 
must  be  provided  by  the  missionaries  to  enlighten 
the  people  about  the  gospel  and  to  counteract  the 
evil  effects  of  some  other  literature  which  comes 
from  our  shores.  In  some  countries  we  have 
established  printing  plants  and  publishing  houses 
whose  success  has  demonstrated  their  usefulness. 

The  income  of  the  Board  is  from  two  sources. 
The  main  source  of  income  is  from  the  free-will 
offerings  of  our  people  all  over  the  bounds  of  the 
Southern  Baptist  Convention.  This,  in  the  last 
few  years,  has  greatly  increased  but  is  still  alto- 
gether inadequate  to  meet  the  distressing  and  im- 
perative needs. 


48        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

The  other  source  of  income  is  from  legacies 
which  are  received  from  time  to  time.  Not  a  large 
sum  has  been  received  in  this  way,  but  it  is  increas- 
ing every  year.  Occasionally,  gifts  are  made  to 
the  Board  on  condition  that  an  annuity  be  paid 
the  donors  during  their  lifetime. 

All  contributions  are  received  by  the  Treasurer, 
deposited  by  him  in  bank  and  acknowledged 
promptly  by  mail  and  in  the  Foreign  Mission 
Journal.  Once  a  month,  he  makes  a  full  report  to 
the  Board  of  all  funds  received  and  paid  out.  The 
Treasurer  pays  out  all  money  on  the  order  of  the 
Board,  for  which  he  receives  vouchers  which  are 
examined  by  the  Auditor  of  the  Board  and  duly 
reported  under  his  certificate.  The  annual  report 
of  the  Treasurer,  after  being  audited  by  the  Board, 
is  printed  in  the  Minutes  of  the  Convention. 

The  appointment  of  new  missionaries  is  a  serious 
responsibility.  When  anyone  wishes  to  be  ap- 
pointed as  a  missionary  of  the  Foreign  Mission 
Board,  he  makes  application  to  the  Corresponding 
Secretary,  who  then  sends  him  a  blank  form  to 
ascertain  the  leading  facts  about  his  life,  his  spir- 
itual experience,  educational  attainments,  expe- 
rience in  religious  work,  field  preferred,  and  other 
important  points.  The  Secretary  also  corresponds 
with  the  friends  and  acquaintances  of  the  appli- 
cant and  endeavors  by  diligent  inquiry  to  discover 
the  fitness  of  the  applicant  for  appointment  to  the 
work  of  a  foreign  missionary.  The  applicant  is 
given  a  thorough  medical  examination  by  a  com- 


Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  S.  B.  G.       49 

petent  physician,  and  the  statement  of  this  physi- 
cian is  passed  upon  by  the  Board's  consulting 
physician  in  Kichmond. 

After  all  the  information  has  been  gathered  and 
the  Board  is  satisfied  that  the  applicant  is  prob- 
ably suitable,  he  is  requested  to  come  before  the 
Board  for  examination.  At  this  examination  he 
is  questioned  as  to  his  conversion,  his  acceptance 
of  Baptist  beliefs,  and  his  call  to  the  mission  work. 
If  the  applicant  successfully  passes  these  examina- 
tions, he  is  appointed  and  his  field  is  assigned. 

When  the  young  missionary  is  ready  to  start 
to  his  field,  a  railroad  ticket  is  bought  direct  to  the 
Atlantic  or  Pacific  seaboard,  his  steamer  ticket 
having  been  provided  beforehand. 

In  general,  it  is  expected  that  missionaries 
spend  seven  years  on  the  field  before  returning 
home  for  the  first  furlough,  and  that  their  second 
term  of  service  cover  nine  years,  but  owing  to 
climatic  conditions,  sickness,  etc.,  this  varies  very 
much  with  different  workers. 

The  Board  has  sent  out  549  missionaries,  of 
which  246  now  are  in  the  service.  In  addition  to 
these,  there  have  been  a  larger  number  of  native 
workers.  A  few  of  the  missionaries  have  died 
of  old  age  and  a  smaller  number  by  violence, 
but  the  majority  of  those  who  have  died  have 
succumbed  to  the  effects  of  hostile  climates  and 
overstrain  in  their  work.  Whatever  have  been 
the  hardships,  these  missionaries  have  been  and 
are  today  as  happy  and  hopeful  a  band  as  can 

4 


50        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

be  found  anywhere.  They  for  the  joy  that  is 
set  before  them  endure  their  crosses.  They  have 
said  with  the  Apostle,  "But  none  of  these  things 
move  me,  neither  count  I  my  life  dear  unto  myself, 
so  that  I  might  finish  my  course  with  joy  and  the 
ministry  which  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
to  testify  of  the  grace  of  God."  Let  us  thank  God 
for  such  as  these.  May  a  spirit  of  consecration 
like  theirs  so  abound  that  our  churches  will  give 
increasingly  to  these  missionaries  and  the  Board 
which  is  appointed  to  sustain  them,  sympathy  and 
support. 

The  Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  Southern 
Baptist  Convention. 

1.  Organized  May,  1845. 

2.  Fields  entered. 

China,  1845. 
Africa,  1846. 
Italy,  1870. 
Brazil,  1879. 
Mexico,  1880. 
Japan,  1889. 
Argentina,  1903. 

3.  Corresponding  Secretaries. 

Rev.  J.  B.  Taylor,  D.D.,  1845-1871. 

Rev.  H.  A.  Tnpper,  D.D.,  1872-1893. 

Rev.  R.  J.  Willingham,  D.D.,  1893  to  the  present. 

4.  Present  Secretarial  Force. 

Rev.  R.  J.  Willingham,  D.D.,  Corresponding  Sec'y. 
Rev.  William  H.  Smith,  D.D.,  Editorial  Secretary. 
Rev.  S.  J.  Porter,  D.D.,  Field  Secretary. 
Rev.  T.  B.  Ray,  D.D.,  Educational  Secretary. 

5.  Woman's  Missionary  Union  organized,  1888. 


CHAPTER  III. 


THE  SOUTH  CHINA  MISSION 

The  first  Baptist  missionary  to  China  was  the 
Eev.  J.  L.  Shuck,  of  Virginia,  sent  out  by  the  Tri- 
ennial Convention  in  1836.  He  first  located  at 
Macao,  and  in  1842  he  moved  east  forty  miles  to 
Hong  Kong.  In  1844  he  and  Kev.  I.  J.  Eoberts 
moved  to  Canton.  When  our  Convention  was 
organized,  in  1845,  Mr.  Shuck  was  engaged  by  our 
Board  to  continue  the  work  in  Canton.  His  visit 
to  America,  accompanied  by  Yong  Seen  Sang,  our 
first  Chinese  preacher,  created  much  interest  in 
mission  work  in  China.  After  Mr.  Shuck's  return 
to  China,  he  located  in  Shanghai.  Mr.  Eoberts 
became  a  member  of  our  mission.  He  had  pre- 
viously been  conducting  an  independent  mission, 
and  worked  mainly  in  Canton.  He  was  for  some 
tim£,  a  kind  of  adviser  to  the  leader  of  the  Tai 
Ping  rebellion.  He  organized  a  small  church, 
which  was  disbanded  after  he  left  Canton.  Mr. 
Eoberts  died  at  Upper  Alton,  111.,  in  1866,  of  lep- 
rosy which  he  contracted  by  having  some  lepers 
live  in  one  of  the  lower  rooms  of  his  house. 

There  were  quite  a  number  of  missionaries  to 
join  the  mission  up  to  the  time  of  Dr.  E.  H. 
Graves'  arrival,  in  1856.     Among  them,  Mr.  Gail- 

(51) 


52         Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 


The  South  China  Mission.  53 

lard  was  the  most  useful  and  most  popular  with 
the  Chinese.  The  early  members  remembered  him 
most  affectionately.  He  was  killed  in  1862  by 
his  house  being  blown  down  on  him  in  the  great 
typhoon  of  July  of  that  year,  when  some  ten  thou- 
sand Chinese  were  killed..  Up  to  this  time,  two 
churches  had  been  organized — the  First  Church,  in 
the  old  city,  of  which  Dr.  Graves  is  co-pastor,  and 
the  Shiu  Hing  Church,  eighty  miles  west  of  Can- 
ton. For  three  years  before  the  destructive  ty- 
phoon, Dr.  Graves  had  done  considerable  country 
work,  and  had  opened  a  station  at  Wuchow  in  the 
Kwongsi  Province.  He  now  had  to  live  in  Can- 
ton and  give  most  of  his  time  to  work  in  this 
great  city. 

There  were  many  dangers  and  hardships  passed 
through  during  the  Opium  War,  the  Tai  Ping 
rebellion,  and  our  Civil  War  in  America.  Many 
of  these  have  never  been  made  known  to  the  world. 
These  were  the  times  when  the  foundations  of  our 
work  were  being  well  laid.  There  was  steady 
growth.  When  Dr.  Graves  took  his  first  furlough 
after  fourteen  years  of  hard,  faithful  labor,  there 
were  120  members.  He  is  still  at  the  helm, 
and  has  led  to  our  present  large  and  successful 
work.  This  is  due  largely  to  his  strong  faith,  per- 
severance along  Scriptural  lines  of  work,  to  his 
conservatism  and  his  untiring  energy.  He  never 
stops  work.  It  is  the  plodder  that  succeeds  in 
China. 


54         Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 
Our  Plans  of  Mission  Work. 

We  have  stood  for  the  preaching  of  the  gospel 
as  God's  plan  for  the  salvation  of  the  people. 
This  we  have  done  in  the  chapels,  on  the  streets,  in 
the  market  towns,  in  the  villages,  and  everywhere 
we  could  get  hearers.  It  is  true  that  much  of  this 
work  has  not  yielded  much  apparent  results,  but 
the  sowing  of  the  seed  has  been  far  and  wide,  and 
we  are  gathering  in  the  harvest  in  many  ways  and 
places. 

Much  itinerating  has  been  done  up  and  down 
the  numerous  waterways  of  this  mission  field. 
We  have  sought  to  make  much  use  of  our  members 
and  native  preachers  in  this  work.  We  would 
hire  a  boat  and  take  trips  of  from  a  few  days  to  a 
month.  This  boat  would  serve  as  our  home. 
When  we  came  to  towns  and  villages,  we  would 
stop  and  preach,  and  talk  to  the  people  as  we 
walked  and  sold  tracts  or  Scriptures.  Several  of 
us  would  preach  short  sermons  at  the  same  place. 
We  would  learn  much  from  each  other. 

The  distribution  of  Scriptures  and  Christian 
literature  is  a  very  important  part  of  our  work. 
When  itinerating  we  carry  a  good  supply.  While 
some  are  preaching,  others  are  selling  tracts  to 
those  who  are  too  far  away  to  hear  or  that  do  not 
want  to  listen.  It  is  a  good  plan  for  the  preacher 
to  begin  by  telling  in  brief  the  contents  of  a  tract 
or  a  gospel.  Those  who  may  be  interested  will 
buy  a  book,  and  the  truths  will  be  fastened  in  the 


The  South  China  Mission.  55 

mind  when  the  preacher  has  passed  on.  There  has 
been  a  gracious  harvest  from  the  distribution  of 
Christian  literature.  It  has  not  always  been  the 
policy  to  sell  the  Scriptures  and  tracts.  I  had  not 
heard  of  any  being  sold  up  to  1871.  On  our  first 
country  trip  up  the  West  Kiver,  in  1871,  the  sell- 
ing came  about  in  this  way.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Piercey, 
of  the  Wesleyan  Mission,  and  myself  and  wife 
came  to  Wingon  Market.  There  was  a  big  crowd 
of  people  present.  We  went  out  to  distribute 
our  literature.  The  Chinese  are  anxious  to  get 
anything  when  it  is  free.  They  crowded  upon 
Mr.  Piercey  and  took  his  books  from  him,  tearing 
many  of  them  in  the  scuffle.  I  managed  to  hold  on 
to  mine.  I  then  urged  that  we  sell  the  tracts  for 
a  nominal  price.  He  did  not  like  the  idea,  but  I 
persisted,  and  he  said,  "Well,  when  we  come  to 
another  market  town,  if  it  is  market  day,  we  will 
try  selling.  A  few  days  later,  we  came  to  Luk  Po, 
a  large  market  twenty  miles  west  of  Shiu  Hing. 
There  was  a  big  crowd  present.  We  filled  our 
canvas  bags,  and  having  agreed  upon  the  price  for 
each  tract  and  gospel,  we  mounted  an  ater,  a 
raised  platform  of  stone  about  two  and  one-half 
feet  high.  When  we  told  the  people  that  our 
literature  was  for  sale,  it  had  a  very  quieting 
effect  on  them.  This  gave  us  a  chance  to  tell  what 
the  tracts  were  and  why  we  sold  them.  Soon 
some  one  bought  one.  Then  "they  went  like  hot 
cakes."  We  sold  all  the  gospels  and  tracts  that 
we  had  with  us. 


56        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

This  was  the  beginning,  so  far  as  I  know,  of  the 
selling  of  tracts  to  the  natives  in  China.  From 
that  day  to  this,  we  have  been  selling.  Only  in 
exceptional  cases  does  anyone  give  them  away  now. 
Some  of  the  older  missionaries  used  to  remon- 
strate with  me  for  selling  tracts,  but  all  have 
adopted  this  policy. 

One  good  brother,  probably  to  show  me  how  to 
do  the  work,  sent  two  coolie  loads,  four  big  bas- 
kets, of  literature  with  some  brethren  to  give  the 
books  to  the  students  who  were  attending  the  tri- 
ennial examinations  in  the  neighborhood  of  our 
chapel.  They  were  instructed  to  give  to  those 
who  wore  long  gowns.  The  short-coated  people 
did  not  like  this.  These  gathered  a  crowd  and 
charged  upon  them  and  took  their  books  away 
from  them.  People  are  more  likely  to  read  and 
appreciate  that  which  costs  them  something.  And 
those  who  can't  read  are  not  going  to  waste  their 
cash  for  tracts.  We  have  many  evidences  of  the 
value  of  this  work  in  interesting  and  in  saving 
many  people.  There  is  great  need  for  men  and 
women  with  gifts  for  writing  tracts  and  books  for 
use  in  this  work.  It  would  be  hard  to  over-esti- 
mate the  importance  of  producing  and  distribut- 
ing Christian  literature  in  China.  The  Chinese 
have  great  reverence  for  the  printed  page.  They 
are  a  reading  people.  Newspapers  and  periodicals 
are  increasing  very  rapidly  here.  I  cannot  think 
of  a  wider  field  of  usefulness  than  this  offers  to 
those  who  love  and  are  gifted  in  this  work. 


The  South  China  Mission.  57 

By  our  preaching  and  the  distribution  of 
Christian  literature  up  and  down  this  field,  we 
have  sown  the  good  seed  and  some  have  been  won 
to  Christ.  These  we  have  sought  to  cultivate  and 
develop.  Thus  following  the  lead  of  God's  provi- 
dence, we  have  opened  up  nearly  all  of  our  twenty- 
eight  churches  and  about  fifty  other  stations  where 
we  have  some  members  and  regular  preaching. 
Connected  with  these  we  have  about  4,000  mem- 
bers. One  preacher  often  has  charge  of  more  than 
one  station.  These  are  connected  with  some  cen- 
tral church. 

The  Chinese  live  in  cities,  towns  and  villages. 
This  is  favorable  to  the  evangelizing  of  these 
places,  and  as  we  gain  more  members  in  these 
places,  it  will  lend  itself  to  the  better  development 
of  these  Christians. 

Where  there  are  enough  members  in  a  locality, 
we  hold  occasionally  Bible  classes  for  a  week. 
Those  interested  and  the  inquirers  attend.  This 
is  our  best  way  to  teach  them  the  truths  of  the 
Bible  and  instruct  the  Christians  as  to  their  du- 
ties as  church  members  to  each  other  and  to  the 
unsaved.  We  usually  have  one  or  more  of  the 
pastors  or  preachers  to  help  in  teaching.  And 
much  attention  is  given  to  teaching  them  to  sing. 
The  young  learn  to  sing  very  well.  The  old  try, 
and  make  a  noise,  which  is  better  than  to  be  mum. 
This  class  work  gives  us  opportunities  to  study 
our  people  and  see  who  are  leaders  and  who  will 
do  to  become  preachers  and  should  go  to  the  Sem- 


58        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

inary   to    prepare   themselves   for   more  efficient 
work. 

As  our  numbers  increase,  we  must  give  more 
attention  to  education.  A  large  mass  of  unedu- 
cated and  untrained  members  is,  to  a  considerable 
extent,  a  dead  weight.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary 
for  the  missionaries  to  give  much  of  their  time  to 
this  work,  along  many  lines.  The  Theological 
Seminary  is  of  prime  importance.  The  Graves 
Theological  School  at  Canton  is  well  started  with 
three  foreign  teachers — Drs.  Graves,  Greene,  and 
Brother  Anderson — and  one  native  professor,  Ue 
Sui  Wan,  giving  all  their  time  to  teaching.  The 
Seminary  is  patterned  after  the  Seminary  in  Louis- 
ville. Special  attention  is  given  to  teaching  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments.  The  students  are  ex- 
pected to  do  much  preaching,  selling  of  tracts  and 
teaching  in  the  Sunday  schools.  On  the  first  day 
of  the  month,  "Missionary  Day,"  a  special  address 
is  given  by  some  one  not  connected  with  the  school 
on  subjects  that  will  instruct  in  general  missions 
in  the  world  and  at  the  same  time  stimulate  to 
more  practical  work.  Eeports  are  made  by  the 
students  of  their  work  for  the  month.  From  this 
institution  we  are  sending  out  some  strong  men 
for  the  pastorate  and  to  do  evangelistic  work. 
We  need  more  teachers,  another  building  to  cost 
about  six  thousand  dollars  (gold),  and  to  accom- 
modate sixty  more  students.  The  students  are 
coming  as  fast  as  we  can  house  them  and  teach 
them.     We  enrolled  sixty-one  students  this  year. 


The  South  China  Mission.  59 

The  Academy  at  Canton,  schools  at  Wuchow 
and  Yingtak,  are  preparing  young  men  for  all 
departments  of  our  work  and  different  avocations 
in  life.  The  Academy  at  Canton  is  well  housed, 
has  a  good  staff  of  teachers  and  over  one  hundred 
students.  This  school  is  doing  splendid  work. 
It  is  not  a  mission  school,  but  is  run  by  the  Bap- 
tist Chinese.  It  is  adjoining  our  Mission  Com- 
pound, and  is  carried  on  in  closest  sympathy  and 
the  heartiest  cooperation  with  our  missionaries. 
The  same  thing  is  true  with  the  schools  at  Wuchow 
and  Yingtak.  From  these  schools,  many  of  our 
brightest  and  most  promising  preachers,  doctors, 
merchants,  and  men  in  all  departments  of  life 
come. 

The  Girls'  and  Woman's  Boarding  Schools  at 
Canton,  Wuchow,  Yingtak  and  Shiu  Hing  are 
doing  a  very  fine  work  and  one  that  is  necessary 
for  the  permanency,  efficiency,  and  growth  of  our 
work.  Almost  any  number  of  our  women  could 
get  government  and  other  schools  to  teach  if  they 
were  prepared.  The  boarding  schools  are  prepar- 
ing these  girls  for  teachers,  to  be  wives  of  preach 
ers,  to  be  Christian  mothers,  to  be  Bible  women. 
The  schools  for  women  are  teaching  the  married 
women  to  read.  Many  of  these  women  are  the 
wives  of  our  preachers  and  leading  members.  It 
is  of  first  importance  that  our  preachers  have 
wives  that  can  help  them  in  their  work  instead  of 
being  a  hindrance.  It  is  rather  pathetic  as  well 
as  amusing  to  see  these  mothers  and  grandmothers 


60        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

learning  to  read,  with  their  little  ones  on  their 
backs  or  at  their  sides.  And  these  Woman's 
Schools  are  for  the  training  of  Bible  women,  too. 
Our  work  needs  many  more  Bible  women.  These 
schools  are  training  hundreds  of  girls  and  women 
for  the  openings  to  be  found  in  the  awrakened 
China.  It  is  difficult  to  realize  the  hardness,  the 
magnitude,  and  importance  of  this  work.  These 
schools  are  to  be  valued  and  fostered  for  the 
growth  and  bringing  in  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ. 

There  are  day  schools  for  boys  and  girls.  These 
are  to  be  increased  as  our  work  progresses.  These 
young  ones,  and  there  are  many  of  them,  must 
receive  their  primary  education  at  home.  This 
is  the  great  opening  for  many  more  teachers,  men 
and  women.  Every  church  and  station  should 
have  its  Christian  school.  We  cannot  afford  to 
have  our  children  go  to  heathen  schools.  The 
places  where  Christian  schools  should  be  started 
are  almost  without  number.  This  presents  a 
splendid  field  for  a  general  superintendent  of  such 
schools. 

The  importance  of  medical  work  has  been  so 
often  told  that  one  hardly  knows  how  to  tell  it  in  a 
way  that  will  not  be  commonplace.  There  is  the 
widest  field  in  the  world  for  this  Christ-like  work 
of  healing  the  sick.  I  know  of  no  kind  of  mission 
work  that  so  readily  wins  the  approval  of  all 
classes  of  people.  It  is  a  means  of  relieving  untold 
suffering,  saving  many  lives,  and  bringing  many 
into  the  kingdom.     By  the  healing  art,  much  prej- 


Tlie  South  China  Mission.  61 

udice  to  the  gospel  and  the  missionary  has  been 
broken  down  and  many  individual  hearts  have 
been  opened  to  the  truth  and  many  homes  opened 
to  Christ's  messenger  and  many  communities  are 
ready  to  hear  favorably  the  message  of  salvation. 

Something  Abou^t  Our  Field. 

This  comprises  nearly  all  of  the  Kwongtung 
Province  of  twenty  millions,  and  all  of  Kwongsi 
Province  of  nine  millions.  The  majority  of  these 
peoples  can  be  reached  by  steamers  and  passage 
boats  towed  by  steam  launches,  plying  up  and  down 
the  various  rivers,  canals,  and  waterways  of  these 
provinces.  Eailroads  are  being  constructed. 
Three  short  lines  are  in  operation.  One  of  these 
is  being  pushed  through  the  province  from  Canton 
north  to  Hankow  and  Peking. 

Our  three  main  stations  are  Canton,  Wuchow 
and  Yingtak.  Canton,  itself,  is  a  big  field.  A 
city  of  from  one  and  one-half  to  two  millions  of 
people.  There  are  probably  not  more  than  two 
thousand  resident  Christians  of  all  denominations. 
Of  these  about  five  hundred  are  Baptists.  And 
from  Canton,  as  a  center,  there  are  many  large 
cities  and  numerous  large  towns  and  villages  to  be 
evangelized.  Almost  half  of  the  province  is  to 
be  reached  from  Canton  as  a  center. 

The  Sz  Yap  field  is  worthy  of  special  mention. 
In  these  four  districts,  Sz  Yap  means  four  cities 
or  districts,  most  of  the  Chinese  in  America  have 


62        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

their  homes,  and  by  their  contact  with  Americans 
they  are  much  in  advance  of  other  parts  of  the 
country  as  to  Western  ideas  and  Christianity. 
There  are  to  be  found  Christians  in  most  of  the 
villages.  It  is  easy  to  do  mission  work  in  these 
places.  There  are  many  chapels — Presbyterian, 
Congregational,  and  Baptist — in  this  section.  Not 
all  that  have  joined  the  churches  in  America  and 
come  back  are  true  Christians,  but  many  are. 
Throughout  this  Sz  Yap  field  you  will  find  many 
people  wiio  can  speak  some  English.  They  have 
built  much  better  houses  and  live  better  and  are 
more  eager  to  send  their  children  to  school  than 
others.  A  good  proportion  of  the  boys  in  our 
Academy  are  from  the  Sz  Yap. 

For  the  Canton  station,  we  have  fifteen  mission- 
aries. We  need  double  this  number,  and  we  need 
very  much  a  physician  for  our  new  Compound  at 
Tung  Shan,  which  is  four  miles  from  the  foreign 
concession.  Here  we  have  the  Graves'  Theological 
Seminary,  Academy,  Girls'  Boarding  School,  the 
Woman's  Boarding  School.  The  China  Baptist 
Publication  Society  has  bought  property  and  will 
build  here  soon.  We  have  five  dwellings,  a  church 
that  will  seat  1,000,  an  orphanage,  and  home  for 
blind  girls.  The  head  offices  and  car  yards  of  the 
Canton  and  Kowloon  Kailroad  adjoin  us.  They 
have  seven  new  brick  dwellings  finished,  and  are 
building  others  and  putting  in  an  electric  plant. 
Our  place  is  high,  healthful,  and  desirable  to  live 
and  work  in  for  the  Master.     The  destitution  and 


The  South  China  Mission.  63 

opportunities  for  the  Canton  station  are  equally 
great. 

Wuehow  is  an  open  port  or  treaty  port,  and  is 
about  200  miles  west  of  Canton,  just  across  the 
border  in  the  Kwongsi  Province.  Wuehow  is 
the  commercial  distributing  center  for  the  prov- 
ince and  is  by  far  the  most  important  city  for 
our  work.  We  have  located  there  six  missionaries, 
a  church  of  364  members,  hospital  that  will  accom- 
modates 60  in-patients,  a  Boy's  Boarding  School,  a 
Girls'  and  a  Woman's  Boarding  School,  and  a  new 
church  house  just  finished  that  will  seat  550,  with 
Sunday  school  rooms  and  other  conveniences  for 
book-room  and  for  street  preaching. 

The  language  is  mainly  Cantonese  and  Man- 
darin in  their  variations.  The  topography  of  the 
country  is  made  up  of  river  valleys,  hills  and  moun- 
tains. It  is  rugged  and  picturesque.  The  people 
are  like  their  country — rough  and  turbulent.  Here 
is  a  fine  opportunity  for  strong  men  and  women, 
both  physically  and  spiritually,  full  of  faith  and 
the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  a  most  interesting  and 
promising  field.  We  have  five  churches  and 
twenty  stations,  with  1,101  members.  These 
stations  are  from  40  to  300  miles  west  and  north 
of  Wuehow.  A  large  proportion  of  our  minis- 
terial students  are  from  this  field.  For  some 
brethren  writh  evangelistic  gifts  and  the  ability  to 
lead  the  native  brethren  this  presents  a  fine  open- 
ing for  winning  souls  for  the  Master.  Who  will 
come  and  join  our  splendid  force  of  young  mis- 


64        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

sionaries  to  conquer  this  Kwongsi  Province  for 
Christ? 

Yingtak  is  the  center  for  our  Hakka  Mission. 
The  city  is  not  very  large,  only  about  20,000,  but  it 
is  the  distributing  center  for  this  field.  It  is  on  the 
North  Kiver,  and  about  ninety  miles  from  Canton, 
on  the  railroad — the  road  that  runs  from  Canton 
to  Hankow  and  Peking.  This  field  contains  five 
to  six  millions  of  people.  This  is  a  rough  and 
most  beautiful  country.  The  men  are  well  edu- 
cated. They  have  never  bound  the  feet  of  their 
girls.  They  are  not  so  wedded  to  idolatry  as 
the  Cantonese  are,  and  they  have  not  the  strong 
prejudices  against  foreigners  and  Christianity  that 
other  Chinese  have. 

The  Hakka  field  has  nine  churches  and  four 
stations,  and  1,433  members.  This  is  our  most 
compact  field,  and  gives  promise  of  rapid  growth 
and  development.  These  stations  are  from  30  to 
100  miles  east  and  northeast  from  Yingtak.  Here 
is  a  very  inviting  field  for  two  or  three  evangelistic 
leaders  from  the  homeland. 

At  Yingtak,  we  have  five  missionaries,  a  church 
of  82  members,  a  Boarding  School  for  girls  and 
women,  and  a  Boarding  School  for  boys.  These 
are  young  and  promising,  and  necessary  to  our 
work.  We  are  just  completing  a  new  church  that 
will  seat  about  450.  Here  we  have  a  dispensary 
and  shall  soon  have  a  hospital.  We  have  two 
good  dwellings  in  a  beautiful  compound,  well 
located. 


Mil! 


I  'zLrii 


^m^m:  'm^«;^m>*A 


Mayfield-Tyzzer  Hospital,  Laichow,  China  Hospital,  Yangchow,  China 

John  Stout  Memorial  Hospital,  Wuchow,  China 
Oxner  Hospital,  Pingtu,  China 

Warren  Memorial  Hospital,  Hwanghien,  China 


The  South  China  Mission.  65 

Shiu  Hing,  where  at  present  only  Miss  North 
lives,  is  a  very  inviting  field.  This  is  our  oldest 
country  station.  There  is  a  church  with  four  out- 
stations,  and  two  others  should  be  opened  at  once. 
There  is  a  school  for  girls  and  women  here.  Some 
of  these  are  boarders.  We  should  have  two  mission 
families  living  here. 

Our  Association,  which  is  made  up  of  the 
churches  of  the  two  provinces,  was  organized 
twenty-six  years  ago.  This  is  an  important  part 
of  our  work.  There  is  now  a  Home  Board  with 
a  general  secretary  and  five  missionaries.  The 
secretary  visits  the  churches  and  stations,  holds 
meetings,  helps  in  Bible  classes.  He  lays  special 
emphasis  on  aggressive  work  on  the  part  of  the 
members  to  win  souls  and  carry  the  gospel  to  those 
who  have  not  heard  it.  He  preaches  everywhere 
the  importance  of  self-support.  His  work  is  tell- 
ing for  the  better  organization  of  our  forces,  the 
spread  of  the  gospel  and  the  permanency  of  our 
work. 

The  five  missionaries  are  located  at  important 
centers.  Three  of  these  are  partially  supported 
by  their  churches.  The  other  two  are  beginning 
new  work.  It  is  the  policy  of  the  Association  to 
increase  the  number  of  missionaries  just  as  fast 
as  our  contributions  will  allow,  and  in  time  to 
take  the  work  that  the  missionary  has  been  doing 
and  move  him  on  to  new  fields.  The  burden  of 
evangelization  must  be  laid  on  the  shoulders  of  the 
native  Christians. 


66        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

The  China  Baptist  Publication  Society  is  the 
work  of  the  Baptists  of  China ;  but  being  located 
in  Canton,  should  have  a  place  in  the  story  of  the 
South  China  Mission.  It  was  organized  about 
eleven  years  ago.  The  growth  has  been  steady  and 
rapid  from  the  beginning.  We  believe  that  we 
have  only  made  a  beginning.  There  seems  to  be 
room  for  almost  unlimited  expansion.  The  powder 
and  far-reaching  influence  of  such  a  work  is  hard 
to  over-estimate. 

It  started  with  nothing  but  faith  and  opportu- 
nity. Now  it  has  assets  to  the  amount  of  $65,- 
846.35,  and  liabilities  to  the  amount  of  $22,652.15. 
Last  year  over  250,000  copies  of  books  and  tracts 
were  issued,  at  a  cost  of  about  $7,000.  More  than 
ten  million  pages  of  Christian  literature  were  sent 
out  to  the  millions  of  Chinese.  A  very  large  part 
of  the  work  of  the  Society  is  to  print  and  distrib- 
ute the  Word  of  God.  We  bespeak  your  prayers 
and  help  for  the  China  Baptist  Publication  So- 
ciety. The  Sunday  School  Board,  at  Nashville, 
Tenn.,  has  just  made  us  a  generous  grant  of  $5,000 
for  our  Bible  work. 

There  seems  to  be  an  idea  in  the  minds  of  some 
people  that  this  is  a  very  unhealthy  part  of  China. 
We  think  this  is  not  well  founded.  A  careful  com- 
parison of  our  three  mission  centers — Central, 
North,  and  South  China  Missions — shows  that  the 
term  of  service  is  longer,  health  is  better,  and  there 
are  fewer  nervous  breakdowns  here  than  in  the 
other  two  missions.     But  let  us  lay  aside  all  prej- 


The  South  China  Mission.  67 

udice  and  preconceived  notions,  and  remember  that 
God  made  this  part  of  China  as  well  as  other  parts, 
and  that  he  has  placed  a  very  large  number  of 
people  here.  These  are  intelligent,  thrifty,  and 
shrewd.  The  Cantonese  are  the  people  that  go 
abroad  to  America,  Europe,  Australia,  the  Straits 
settlements,  and  to  India.  This  emigration  has 
broadened  the  minds  and  enlarged  the  ideas  of  this 
people.  Educational  reform  and  Western  ideas  of 
civilization  have  met  with  a  readier  and  more  sym- 
pathetic acceptance  here  than  in  other  parts  of 
China.  The  Cantonese  are  largely  the  leading 
merchants  and  bankers  in  the  principal  cities,  and 
the  treaty  ports  in  China,  Japan,  the  Philippines, 
and  the  Straits  settlements.  As  to  trade,  they  are 
the  Jews  of  the  "Far  East."  All  of  these  things 
go  to  make  this  one  of  the  most  interesting  and 
promising  missions  in  China.  The  thing  for  every 
man  to  do  who  is  called  of  God  to  mission  work  is 
to  decide  where  he  can  accomplish  most  for  the 
glory  of  God  by  helping  to  bring  in  the  reign  of 
Christ,  thus  hastening  the  time  when  "He  shall 
take  to  himself  his  great  power  and  reign  from  the 
rivers  to  the  end  of  the  earth." 


The  South  China  Mission. 

1.  Main  Stations — 

(1)  Canton. 

(2)  Wuchow. 

(3)  Yingtak. 


68        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

2.  Church  Statistics — 

(1)  Churches,  28. 

(2)  Church  buildings,  70. 

(3)  Membership,  4,235. 

(4)  Out-stations,  61. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  52. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  1,817. 

3.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  41. 

(2)  Native,  180. 

4.  Schools — 

(1)  Day  schools,  36. 

(2)  Canton  Boys'  Academy. 

(3)  Canton  Girls'  Boarding  School. 

(4)  Training  School  for  Women  (Canton). 

(5)  Shiu  Hing  Woman's  Boarding  School. 

(6)  Wuchow  Boys'  Boarding  School. 

(7)  Wuchow  Woman's  and  Girls'  Boarding  School. 

(8)  Yingtak  Boys'  Boarding  School. 

(9)  Yingtak  Women's  Boarding  School. 

(10)  Graves  Theological  Seminary  (Canton). 

5.  Medical — 

(1)  Stout  Memorial  Hospital  (Wuchow). 

(2)  Dispensary  near  Wuchow. 

(3)  Dispensary  in  Yingtak. 

6.  General — 

(1)  Work  opened  1845. 

(2)  Residences  for  missionaries  owned  by  the  Board, 

(3)  Chinese  Baptist  Publication  Society   (Canton). 

(4)  Home  for  Blind  Girls  (Canton). 


CHAPTER  IV. 


THE  CENTRAL  CHINA  MISSION. 

It  will  perhaps  be  most  instructive  and  inter- 
esting to  let  the  missionaries  who  organized  the 
Central  China  Baptist  Mission  (formerly  known 
as  the  Shanghai  Baptist  Mission)  speak  for  them- 
selves. We  are  fortunate  in  having  full  records 
of  their  mission  meetings.  They  will  now  tell  us 
in  their  own  words  who  organized  the  Mission, 
when  and  where  it  was  organized,  and  show  us 
how  they  transacted  mission  business  in  those 
early  days : 

"Brethren  James,  Shuck,  Tobey  and  Yates,  hav- 
ing been  appointed  missionaries  to  the  Chinese 
Empire  by  the  Board  of  Foreign  Missions  of  the 
Southern  Baptist  Convention,  received  instruc- 
tions from  the  said  Board,  December  18,  1846,  to 
establish  a  mission  at  the  city  of  Shanghai. 

"Brethren  Shuck,  Tobey  and  Yates,  being  to- 
gether at  Hong  Kong,  and  aware  that  matters  of 
importance  demanded  their  immediate  attention, 
met  on  August  19,  1847,  at  the  house  of  Brother 
Shuck  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  the  said  Mis- 
sion. 

"Brother  Shuck,  by  request,  opened  the  meeting 
with  prayer.     The  choice  of  officers  for  the  meet- 


70        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

ing  resulted  in  the  election  of  Brother  Shuck  as 
Chairman  and  of  Brother  Yates  as  Treasurer." 

After  a  Constitution  had  been  adopted,  the  fol- 
lowing preamble  and  resolutions  were  presented 
and  adopted: 

"Whereas,  Funds  for  the  use  of  this  Mission 
were  placed  in  the  hands  of  Brother  Tobey,  and 
the  same  having  been  by  him  disbursed  according 
to  account  rendered  by  him, 

"Resolved,  That  the  Mission  sanction  Brother 
Tobey's  account,  and  that  he  be  requested  to  trans- 
fer the  remainder  of  the  funds  in  his  hands  to 
Brother  Yates,  our  present  Treasurer. 

"Also,  Resolved,  That  Yong  Seen  Sang  and  Mun 
Seen  Sang  be  appointed  as  native  preachers  to 
labor  in  the  city  of  Shanghai  and  vicinity,  in 
connection  with  this  Mission,  the  former  at  a 
salary  of  twelve  and  a  half  dollars  per  month,  the 
latter  at  a  salary  of  ten  dollars  a  month,  both 
commencing  August  1,  1847. 

"Also,  Resolved,  That  our  Treasurer,  Bev.  M.  T. 
Yates,  be  authorized  to  effect  a  loan  of  six  hundred 
dollars,  to  meet  the  expenses  of  this  Mission  until 
our  remittances  arrive." 

Let  us  now  look  in  on  one  of  their  Mission 
meetings : 

"Owing  to  various  circumstances,  the  usual 
business  meeting  for  the  month  of  October  did  not 
occur  until  the  evening  of  November  4,  1847. 
Present  were  Brethren  Shuck,  Tobey  and  Yates. 


The  Central  China  Mission.  71 

"The  meeting  was  opened  with  prayer  by 
Brother  Tobey.  The  journal  of  last  meeting  was 
then  read.  Brother  Tobey  presented  a  bill  for 
expenses  (Mrs.  Tobey's  illness  in  Hong  Kong;  also 
for  books,  Mission  Library).  Ordered  to  be  paid; 
amount,  $87. 

"The  Treasurer's  report  was  then  read  and  re- 
ceived. 

"Brother  Shuck  presented  a  bill  (Mrs.  Shuck's 
illness  in  Hong  Kong)  ( Yong  and  Mun  Seen  Sang's 
salary),  also  a  book  for  Mission  Library.  Ordered 
to  be  paid.     Amount,  $148.45. 

"Resolved,  That  our  Treasurer  be  authorized  to 
effect  such  a  loan,  in  such  amounts,  at  such  times, 
and  at  such  rates  of  interest,  as  in  his  own  judg- 
ment may  seem  best  for  the  Mission. 

"Also,  Resolved,  That  our  Treasurer  be  author- 
ized to  request  the  Board  in  Kichmond  to  pay  the 
rent  for  the  next  year  of  the  house  occupied  by 
Brethren  Yates  and  Shuck,  by  a  bill  on  England 
instead  of  sending  the  money  to  Shanghai; 
amount  of  rent,  $700. 

"Also,  Resolved,  That  the  members  of  this  Mis- 
sion meet  on  Saturday  evening,  November  6th,  for 
the  purpose  of  forming  a  Baptist  Church." 

Seed  Sowing— 1846-1866. 

The  first  work  of  the  missionaries  was  to  study 
the  language,  and  in  this  they  encountered  many 
difficulties,  because  at  that  time  no  books  had 


72        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

been  prepared  to  assist  new  missionaries  in  ac- 
quiring the  language.  Morrison's  was  the  only 
dictionary.  This  lack  of  books  forced  them  to 
mingle  with  the  people,  and  besides  helping  them 
to  become  good  speakers,  gave  them  many  oppor- 
tunities of  studying  the  people,  and  of  learning 
how  to  adapt  themselves  to  them.  They  were  able 
to  begin  preaching  after  the  first  year. 

Chinese  houses  were  rented,  repaired,  and 
adapted  for  street  chapel  use,  and  in  these  they 
held  daily  preaching  services.  One  missionary 
would  stand  out  on  the  street  and  invite  the  people 
in,  while  another  would  try  to  seat  them,  and  the 
third  would  preach  the  Gospel.  In  this  way 
thousands  of  sermons  were  preached  and  tens  of 
thousands  of  people  heard  something  of  the  way 
of  salvation. 

The  first  church  lot  was  purchased  inside  the 
old  city  in  the  midst  of  a  dense  population,  early 
in  1849,  and  the  first  church  building  erected  on  it. 
It  was  finished  and  opened  for  the  first  service  on 
the  first  Sunday  in  March,  1850.  It  was  burned 
down  on  May  28,  1862,  and  we  find  the  following 
in  the  minutes  of  the  mission  meeting  of  May  31, 
1862: 

"We  feel  deeply  the  loss  of  this  house,  the  first 
church  erected  within  the  walls  of  Shanghai,  but 
then  we  have  reason  to  thank  God  that  he  has  per- 
mitted his  servants  to  preach  the  Word  of  Life 
almost  daily  within  its  sacred  walls  for  a  period  of 


The  Central  China  Mission.  73 

more  than  ten  years,  and  it  is  supposed  that  more 
than  300,000  persons  have  heard  the  Gospel  from 
first  to  last  from  its  pulpit.  May  it  prove  as 
bread  cast  upon  waters  to  be  gathered  for  many 
days  hence." 

The  Civil  War  was  raging  at  home,  so  that  no 
money  could  be  secured  from  the  Board  to  rebuild 
the  house,  but  God  opened  the  hearts  of  the  foreign 
merchants  and  friends  in  Shanghai,  and  they  sub- 
scribed more  than  |5,000  to  replace  the  church. 
The  loss  proved  to  be  a  gain  in  many  ways. 

In  those  early  years  no  foreigners,  not  even 
missionaries,  were  allowed  to  travel  far  inland 
from  the  open  ports,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to 
do  much  work  outside  of  Shanghai,  but  our  mis- 
sionaries, as  early  as  1849,  had  an  outstation  at  Oo 
Kah  J  ah,  a  few  miles  from  Shanghai.  They  at 
first  rented  a  Chinese  house  for  a  street  chapel 
and  a  day  school.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that 
this  was  the  first  work  established  by  any  denom- 
ination in  the  interior  of  China,  and  that  the 
ladies  of  the  Mission  raised  money  in  Shanghai  to 
buy  a  lot  and  build  a  small  house  for  a  chapel  and 
the  day  school.  The  missionaries  soon  broke  over 
the  restrictions  of  travel,  and  visited  and  preached 
in  the  great  cities  in  this  part  of  China. 

Mrs.  Cabaniss  was  perhaps  the  first  foreign 
woman  to  enter  the  walls  of  Soochow  while  out  on 
a  preaching  tour  with  her  husband. 

The  missionaries   realized   the   importance   of 


74        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

preparing  and  using  Christian  literature  to  assist 
them  in  their  work  of  spreading  the  Gospel.  Kev. 
J.  L.  Shuck  had  spent  some  time  in  Canton,  and 
had  acquired  some  knowledge  of  the  written  lan- 
guage before  coming  to  Shanghai,  so  that  he  nat- 
urally took  the  lead  in  preparing  the  first  litera- 
ture. We  find  many  resolutions  about  literature 
in  the  minutes  of  the  early  mission  meetings.  We 
quote  one : 

"Resolved,  That  Brother  Shuck  be  requested  to 
draw  up  a  statement  of  the  objects  of  the  members 
of  this  Mission  in  coming  to  China,  accompanied 
by  an  abstract  of  the  Gospel  in  the  Chinese  lan- 
guage for  distribution  among  the  people  of 
Shanghai." 

Mr.  Shuck  produced  many  tracts  which  were 
most  helpful  in  enlightening  the  people  on  the 
subject  of  the  Gospel. 

The  missionaries  also  realized  the  importance 
of  doing  some  work  among  the  children,  of  sowing 
seed  in  the  tender  hearts  of  the  young  and  estab- 
lished day  schools  in  the  street  chapels.  The 
wives  of  missionaries  took  the  lead  in  this  work. 
We  might  call  it  mother-missionary  work.  They 
had  to  pay  the  children  a  cent  a  day  at  first  to 
induce  them  to  attend  school,  but  as  early  as  1853 
we  find  that  Key.  G.  Pearcy  established  a  day 
school  in  a  village,  and  the  villagers  agreed  to  pay 
a  part  of  the  expenses. 


The  Central  China  Mission.  75 

In  the  minutes  of  August  31,  1849,  we  find  the 
following  resolution: 

"Resolved,  That  we  herewith  submit  to  the 
Board  that  the  result  of  our  experience  during  this 
time  has  been  an  increased  conviction  of  the 
serious  importance  of  having  a  medical  missionary 
connected  with  us  as  soon  as  it  is  possibly  prac- 
ticable for  the  Board  to  secure  a  suitable  man." 

The  drowning  of  Dr.  James  before  reaching 
Shanghai  had  prevented  them  from  having  a  med- 
ical missionary  from  the  beginning.  Dr.  C.  W. 
Burton  came  in  1851.  The  Mission  not  having 
established  any  regular  medical  work  by  building 
and  equipping  a  hospital,  and  there  being  a  very 
great  demand  among  foreigners  for  a  physician 
in  Shanghai,  with  the  approval  of  the  Mission, 
he  ceased  to  be  a  missionary  supported  by  the 
Board  on  January  1,  1859. 

His  interest,  however,  in  mission  work  did  not 
abate,  for  he  continued  to  assist  the  Mission  both 
with  time  and  money.  During  the  Civil  War, 
when  the  Board  could  not  support  its  missionaries, 
he  was  a  liberal  contributor  to  their  needs. 

Some  of  the  results  of  this  period  are  seen  in  a 
statement  to  the  Board  made  by  Yates,  Crawford 
and  Hartwell  on  April  9,  1866,  at  their  last  meet- 
ing, after  which  time  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Yates  were  left 
alone  for  many  years : 

"Kegular  services  have  been  kept  up  at  Shanghai 
in  two  and  part  of  the  time  in  three  chapels.     The 


76        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

native  church  has  for  more  than  a  year  been  sup- 
porting a  native  preacher.  Baptized  since  1861, 
8 ;   lost  by  death,  2 ;   present  membership,  28. 

"At  Tengchow  regular  services  have  been  kept 
up  in  one  and  part  of  the  time  in  two  chapels. 
Baptized  since  1861,  20;  excluded,  3;  present 
membership,  23." 

The  number  of  Christians  baptized  and  churches 
established  do  not  by  any  means  represent  the  full 
results  of  the  labors  of  this  period.  It  was  a  time 
of  seed-sowing,  not  of  harvesting ;  a  time  of  foun- 
dation-laying, not  of  house-building;  a  time  of 
preparing  for  greater  things  in  the  future. 

The  Yates  Period— 1866-1888. 

We  saw  in  the  last  section  that  all  the  mission- 
aries had  left  Shanghai  except  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Yatest 
They  arrived  in  Shanghai,  September  2,  1847. 
They  were  truly  the  father  and  mother  of  the 
Mission,  who  laid  the  deep  and  broad  foundations 
upon  which  we  are  now  building.  Dr.  Tupper 
wrote  of  Dr.  Yates :  "The  reputation  of  Dr.  Yates 
is  as  broad  as  the  earth  and  no  broader  than  his 
character,"  and  Mrs.  Yates  was  in  every  sense 
broad  enough  to  be  his  companion  and  helpmeet. 
Though  dead,  they  still  live  in  their  works,  in 
many  loving  hearts,  and  in  their  daughter,  Mrs. 
J.  F.  Seaman,  who  has  given  many  thousand  dol- 
lars, much  time  and  thought  to  carry  on  the  work 
begun  by  her  father  and  mother. 

This  section  describes  a  time  that  is  peculiarly 


The  Central  China  Mission.  77 

a  "Yates  Period,"  and  its  history  can  best  be  told 
in  Dr.  Yates'  own  language : 

"As  I  am  alone,  there  have  been  no  mission 
meetings  during  the  year.  My  whole  time  has 
been  devoted  to  mission  work.  With  the  aid  of 
one  unpaid  assistant,  I  have  maintained  during  the 
year  seven  public  services  each  week  at  Sung  We 
Dong  and  Kiaw  Hwo  Dong.  During  the  summer 
I  preached  twice  each  month  at  Ling  Ka  Uyang 
Nyang,  in  the  country.  My  services  at  Kiaw  Hwo 
Dong  have  been  well  attended,  and  some  interest 
manifested.  I  have  baptized  one  "Voang  Sen 
Sang."  There  are  several  cases  of  interest.  O 
that  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  would  grant  a  bless- 
ing upon  my  labors  in  my  day."  (December  31, 
1866.) 

"No  record  has  been  made  for  sixteen  years, 
except  Treasurer's  account  and  Church  record, 
and  this  has  been  kept  in  Chinese.  During  all 
these  long  years  I  have  done  the  best  I  could  to 
hold  the  fort  alone.  The  church  has  had  a  steady 
growth,  and  several  years  ago  sent  out  a  colony  to 
form  a  church  at  Quinsan  (fifty  miles  from  Shang- 
hai), where  we  now  have  a  church  of  eighteen 
members,  with  a  native  pastor,  See  Sen  Sang, 
and  eighty-five  members  in  the  mother  church  at 
Shanghai.  In  addition  to  my  preaching  and  class 
work,  I  have  for  some  time  been  engaged  in  trans- 
lating into  the  Shanghai  dialect  the  Gospels  of 
Matthew,  John,  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  the 


78        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Epistle  to  the  Bomans,  in  order  that  my  churches 
might  have  the  Scriptures  in  the  language  in 
which  they  think  and  speak.  The  above  books 
have  been  published  and  are  in  use.  I  shall  con- 
tinue, if  the  Lord  permits,  till  the  whole  New 
Testament  is  completed. 

"Four  days  ago  the  U.  S.  Mail  brought  me  the 
long-prayed-for  colleague  in  the  person  of  Eev. 
W.  S.  Walker.  Also  the  Eev.  C.  W.  Pruitt,  for 
the  Tengchow  Mission  in  Shantung.  May  the 
Spirit  of  Truth  so  guide  them  that  they  may  be- 
come indefatigable  workers!"   (January  31,  1882.) 

"For  some  time  I  have  been  trying  to  find  a  suit- 
able place  for  a  chapel  in  the  great  city  of  Soo- 
chow.  I  am  happy  to  say  I  have  finally  succeeded 
in  purchasing  a  lot  directly — L  e.,  not  through  a 
Chinaman — on  Lonton  Street  at  Ping  Hwo  Djaw. 
My  title  deed  has  been  duly  authenticated  by  the 
local  authorities.  To  Tsun  Tang  as  Lontonloo  is 
one  of  the  principal  streets  of  the  city,  ours  is  con- 
sidered to  be  one  of  the  best  positions  in  the  city. 
May  the  Lord  of  the  Harvest  continue  to  prosper 
his  work  in  that  great  city,  which  has  for  so 
many  ages  been  given  up  to  idolatry  and  vice." 
(July,  1882.) 

"W.  J.  Hunnex,  who  was  formerly  connected 
with  the  China  Inland  Mission,  but  who,  after  his 
resignation  from  the  Inland  Mission,  has  been 
received  by  our  Board  as  an  assistant  missionary 
for  one  year,  moved  with  his  wife  to  Chinkiang  on 


The  Central  China  Mission.  79 

the  Yangtse  Kiver,  where  I  have  long  been  anxious 
to  start  a  mission  station."     (January,  1883.) 

"The  new  chapel  at  Soochow,  having  been  com- 
pleted, 35  x  23  feet,  with  two  small  offices  on  either 
side  of  the  great  door,  and  with  a  granite  baptistry 
in  the  open  court,  was,  on  Sunday,  the  10th  inst., 
duly  opened  by  appropriate  religious  services.  On 
my  way  up  I  called  at  Quinsan  and  took  with  me 
Brother  See  Sen  Sang  to  take  part  in  the  dedica- 
tion services. 

"The  chapel  was  crowded  to  its  utmost  capacity 
with  a  disorderly  and  noisy  crowd.  After  a  short 
delay,  they  were  ordered  to  sit  down,  when  I 
preached  to  them,  and  See  Sen  Sang  followed  me. 
At  three  p.m.  the  native  brethren,  Lee  and  Tsee 
Nyi  Shang  and  Tsung  Tsoang  Oh,  preached  in 
succession  to  large  audiences.  This  is  the  begin- 
ning of  our  work  in  the  Provincial  city.  May  the 
fruit  thereof  shake  like  Lebanon!"  (June  14, 
1883.) 

"Brother  and  Sister  Walker  (for  on  September 
19, 1883,  Mr.  Walker  and  Miss  Lillian  Ella  Mateer, 
of  Tengchow,  were  united  in  marriage)  and  I  have 
just  returned  from  Soochow.  While  there  on 
Sunday,  the  11th  inst,  we  and  Lee  T'ay  San,  of 
Quinsan,  organized  the  Baptist  Church  of  Christ 
in  Soochow,  consisting  of  seven  members — five 
male  and  two  female.  Immediately  after  the 
organization,  the  door  was  opened  for  the  recep- 
tion of  members,  when  two  males  presented  them- 


80        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

selves  and  were  received.  I  at  once  proceeded  to 
baptize  them  and  two  who  had  come  tip  from 
Quinsan  in  the  new  baptistry.  This  is  the  second 
colony  that  has  gone  out  of  the  mother  church  at 
Shanghai."     (November  14,  1883.) 

"You  telegraphed  me  from  the  Convention, 
'Build  your  chapel.'  I  am  happy  in  being  able  to 
inform  the  contributors  to  that  fund  that  the 
Tsing-way  dong  is  completed,  and  is  in  use  daily. 

"Bryan  will  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  take  the 
reins  and  drive  off.  But  that  will  be  enough  to 
occupy  his  whole  attention  and  skill.  The  train- 
ing of  a  yoke  of  young  oxen  or  a  team  of  young 
mules  is  nothing  to  the  labor  and  patience  required 
to  bring  into  subjection  to  Christ  a  team  of  stolid 
Chinese. 

"North  Carolina  is  doing  well,  having  six  repre- 
sentatives in  China,  and  another  at  Wake  Forest, 
who  will  soon  come  to  the  front  to  occupy  Soo- 
chow.  The  influence  of  my  alma  mater  will  go 
on  down  through  the  ages.  Her  endowment  ought 
to  be  doubled.  I'll  be  one  of  two  hundred  to  do  it 
within  five  years."  (November  8,  1885,  to  Eev. 
C.  T.  Bailey,  D.D.) 

"My  long-expected  reinforcement  arrived  on  the 
evening  of  the  13th.  I  had  been  down  at  the 
wharf  until  5  p.m.  Then  I  was  told  that  the 
steamer  would  not  come  in  till  the  next  morning, 
and  I  returned  home.  I  had  not  been  at  home  an 
hour  before  someone  pulled  my  front-door  bell.     I 


The  Central  China  Mission.  81 

opened  the  door  and  found  two  strangers  standing 
without  who  called  out,  'Herring  and  Bryan.1 
This  was  a  surprise.  By  nine  o'clock  we  had  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Herring  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bryan  with  us. 
Need  I  tell  you  that  there  was  joy  in  this  old 
house?  Thanks  be  to  God  for  all  his  mercies  to 
them  and  to  us.  We  have  now  seen  enough  of 
them  to  know  that  North  Carolina  has  sent  us  the 
right  men  and  women.  They  give  promise  to  be 
real  co-laborers  in  the  right  way,  and  seem  to  be 
ready  to  labor,  and,  if  necessary,  to  suffer  for 
Christ. 

"Brother  Herring  remains  with  me.  Brother 
Bryan  goes  to  Chinkiang.  Now,  we  want  two 
mountaineers  for  Soochow,  to  take  charge  of  the 
little  church  there  and  work  up  the  cities  on  the 
Grand  Canal.  This  is  a  great  field  and  a  great 
opportunity."     (January  19,  1886.) 

"For  many  years  I  have  made  special  prayer 
that  God  would  inspire  some  of  the  members  of  my 
church  with  the  will  and  courage  of  their  convic- 
tions to  come  out  of  the  rut  of  spiritual  medioc- 
rity. Thank  the  Lord,  this  prayer  has  been  an- 
swered in  the  person  of  my  deacon,  Wong,  who  has 
been  a  member  of  my  church  about  twenty-eight 
years.  Having  been  blessed  in  temporal  things, 
he  felt  he  ought  to  manifest  his  gratitude  to  the 
Giver  of  All.  This  he  has  done  by  building  on  his 
own  land  at  his  own  cost,  a  unique  place  of  worship 
for  the  Chinese;  and  it  is  dedicated  to  the  Lord 
forever. 

6 


82        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

"Wong  and  his  noble  act  are  an  inspiration  to 
all.  He  has  pointed  out  a  new  and  better  way. 
He  is  a  forerunner  in  ushering  in  the  self-support 
and  religious  spontaneity  so  desirable  in  China." 
(January  18,  1887.) 

"I  thank  the  Board  for  remembering  me.  I 
fear,  however,  that  the  release  came  too  late  to  be 
of  much  use  in  prolonging  life  and  usefulness. 
When  I  awoke  on  the  morning  of  June  30th,  I 
was  surprised  beyond  measure  to  find  that  some- 
thing serious  had  happened  to  me  during  my  sleep. 
I  could  not  get  up.  My  left  arm  and  leg  seemed 
to  have  lost  their  cunning.  I  managed  to  get  my 
feet  to  the  floor,  but  my  left  foot  could  not  bear 
my  weight,  and  gravitation  drew  me  to  the  floor. 
I  could  not  rise  without  much  help. 

"I  sent  for  Dr.  Douthwaite,  who,  after  examina- 
tion, told  me  that  I  had  decided  premonitory 
symptoms  of  paralysis.  He  cautioned  me  to  be 
very  careful,  and  expressed  the  opinion  that  in  a 
few  days  I  should  be  able  to  walk  again."  (Che- 
foo,  July  15,  1887.) 

Mrs.  Yates,  under  the  date  of  February  3,  1888, 
wrote : 

"My  husband  is  better,  and  walks  without  stum- 
bling, although  not  with  elasticity  and  endurance. 
He  looks  remarkably  well,  and  eats  and  sleeps  like 
a  laborer,  yet  he  is  not  like  his  old  self. 

"I  hope  that  the  Board  will  accept  his  offer  to 
give  up  his  salary.     It  is  not  a  new  thought  with 


The  Central  China  Mission.  83 

either  of  us.  It  has  been  my  heart's  desire,  these 
many  years,  to  be  self-supporting,  and  now,  as  we 
are  fully  able  to  be  so,  I  hope  that  you  will  appro- 
priate our  allowance  to  a  new  man  for  Chinkiang. 
"You  know  that  during  the  American  War  we 
were  thrown  upon  our  own  resources,  without 
much  expectation  of  being  again  connected  with 
a  Mission  Board.  My  husband  had  no  difficulty 
in  earning  more  than  enough  for  our  support. 
Those  savings,  added  to  a  small  inheritance  from 
my  father,  were  invested  in  building  lots.  These 
have  so  risen  in  value  that  the  income  from  them 
is  ample  for  all  our  wants." 

Kev.  K.  T.  Bryan  wrote  to  the  Recorder: 
"I  am  afraid  Dr.  Yates  overtaxed  himself  with 
the  new  house,  planning,  buying,  and  instructing 
me  and  the  carpenter.  Just  four  weeks  before  his 
death  he  came  up  here  again  to  help  me  about  the 
house.  He  arrived  about  midnight,  February  18th, 
and  seemed  very  tired. 

"The  next  morning  I  heard  a  heavy  fall,  and,  on 
running  into  his  room,  I  found  him  lying  on  the 
floor.  He  was  stunned  by  the  fall  and  was  unable 
to  see.  He  told  us  that  when  he  waked  up  he  felt 
that  the  bed  was  turning  over  with  him,  and  in  his 
efforts  to  stay  on,  he  fell  off.  The  side  of  his  head 
which  he  had  struck  in  falling  remained  paralyzed 
until  his  death.  He  remained  with  us  through 
the  week,  and  on  the  25th  he  returned  to  Shanghai. 
During  this  week  he  told  me  and  the  builder  many 
things  about  the  house. 


84        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

"After  another  week  I  went  down  to  see  him. 
It  was  evident  that  he  was  sinking.  One  day, 
while  rubbing  his  aching  foot,  I  looked  up  and 
saw  tears  running  down  his  cheeks;  then  he 
sobbed  a  few  times.  I  wiped  away  the  tears,  and 
he  said :  'So  much  work,  and  I  can't  do  any  of  it!' 
I  said,  'God  can  have  it  done.'  He  replied,  'But 
God  needs  men.'  Shall  these  tears  be  disre- 
garded ?" 

March  21,  1888,  Bev.  D.  W.  Herring  wrote  to 
the  Recorder: 

"Dr.  Yates  was  buried  on  the  afternoon  of 
March  19th.  The  services  were  conducted  by  Dr. 
Gulick,  Dr.  Thompson,  Pastor  Wong  and  myself. 
A  host  of  his  friends — and  no  man  here  had  more 
than  he— were  assembled  on  that  beautiful  spring 
day. 

"After  going  twice  around  the  world,  up  and 
down  this  great  Empire,  and  through  typhoons 
and  shipwrecks,  and  through  the  dangers  of  two 
wars,  he  has  left  his  body  to  lie  here  in  this  ceme- 
tery which  he,  more  than  any  other  man,  had  made 
a  place  of  beauty. 

"He  said  to  me  only  a  few  days  ago :  'The  people 
at  home  want  men  to  die  on  the  field,  and  I  am 
going  to  lay  the  foundation.' 

"There  has  been  only  One  who  could  say,  'It  is 
finished.'  But  there  have  been  few  men  who  have 
approached  more  nearly  to  the  completion  of  their 
life  work.     He  had  on  hand  his  translation  of  the 


The  Central  China  Mission.  85 

New  Testament  and  the  completion  of  the  house 
in  Chinkiang.  The  first  copies  of  the  former  were 
delivered  at  the  chapel  as  his  body  was  borne  from 
his  house.  The  latter  is  well  under  way,  and  he 
left  full  directions  for  its  completion." 

Pastor  Wong  Ping  San  wrote: 

"Our  believing  and  being  saved,  and  what  we 
have  been  able  to  do  for  Christ's  cause,  is  all 
through  Pastor  Yates'  instruction  and  exhorta- 
tion. The  time  since  his  arrival  in  Shanghai  is 
forty-one  years.  As  a  man  he  was  faithful  and 
true.  As  a  preacher  he  was  clear,  and  all  men 
delighted  to  hear  him.  He  treated  the  disciples 
as  his  children ;  therefore,  they  honored  him  as  a 
father.  He  toiled  for  the  Master,  and  spared  not 
his  own  money.  He  established  churches  at  Quin- 
san,  Soochow,  and  Chinkiang.  For  more  than  a 
decade  of  years  he  has  had  no  time  to  rest.  Laying 
here  the  foundations  of  the  Lord's  cause,  the  work 
has  fallen  on  him,  one  man.  His  years  being 
many,  his  strength  failed.  Last  year,  taking  his 
sickness  along  with  him,  he  proceeded  with  the 
translation  of  the  Scriptures,  forgetting  that  he 
was  sick. 

"Of  us,  the  members  of  this  church,  there  is  not 
one  who  is  not  wounded  and  grieved  at  heart.  His 
words  of  exhortation  and  prohibition,  always 
timely,  have  been  of  immense  benefit  to  us,  and  we 
cannot  forget  him." 

From  the  human  standpoint,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Yates 


86        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

were  left  largely  alone,  but  they  knew  that  they 
were  not  alone,  and  the  results  show  that  God  was 
with  them. 

At  the  close  of  this  period,  the  one  main  station 
had  become  two,  Shanghai  and  Chinkiang,  with 
two  out-stations,  Quinsan  and  Soochow.  The  one 
organized  church  of  28  members  had  become  four 
with  a  membership  of  125. 

It  is  encouraging  to  note  that  the  visible  results 
of  this  period  are  four  times  larger  than  that  of 
the  first  period.  That  was  a  time  of  seed-sowing, 
this  the  beginning  of  harvesting  and  a  preparation 
for  the  enlargement  of  the  next  period. 

Period  of  Enlargement — 1888-1909. 

One  of  Dr.  Yates'  dying  sayings  was,  "But  God 
needs  men."  Mrs.  Yates  was  spared  six  years  after 
his  death  to  see  the  beginning  of  the  supply  of  that 
need.  She  gave  up  her  salary  and  mission  home, 
and  lived  with  her  daughter,  Mrs.  J.  F.  Seaman, 
but  continued  to  be  the  good  shepherdess  of  the 
native  Christians  and  the  Mother  of  the  Mission- 
aries. 

She  believed  in  wise  enlargement.  On  one  occa- 
sion, while  some  young  missionaries  were  arguing 
with  her  for  enlargement  in  evangelistic  work,  she 
said :  "Why  are  you  arguing  with  me  ?  Go  and 
open  the  new  street  chapel,  and  I  will  pay  the 
expenses."  She  not  only  paid  the  opening  expenses, 
but  afterward  made  a  contribution  that  continued 


The  Central  China  Mission.  87 

to  support  this  new  work  about  a  year  after  her 
death. 

She  joined  her  husband  on  March  24,  1894,  to 
enjoy  with  him  the  rewards  of  a  long  life  of  loving 
service,  leaving  behind  a  host  of  sorrow-stricken 
hearts  to  mourn  the  loss  of  "Mother  Yates." 

The  number  of  missionaries  working  in  this 
period  is  so  large  that  we  cannot  even  introduce 
them.  It  would  be  a  pleasing  task  to  tell  some  of 
the  things  in  which  individuals  have  taken  a  lead- 
ing part,  and  what  they  are  now  doing,  but  the 
limits  of  this  sketch  will  not  permit  us. 

We  have  all  been  working  together  among  our- 
selves and  with  the  native  co-laborers  and  native 
Christians.  One  sows,  another  reaps,  and  we  all 
rejoice  together. 

During  this  period  the  number  of  missionaries 
has  been  greatly  increased,  the  whole  number 
having  reached  fifty-two.  Only  four  have  died 
during  the  twenty-one  years,  and  only  eight  have 
resigned,  leaving  forty  who  are  still  missionaries 
of  the  Board.  This  is  a  record  for  which  we  are 
devoutly  grateful  and  humbly  proud. 

The  number  of  workers  has  not  been  enlarged 
more  than  the  work  in  which  they  are  engaged. 

The  Chinkiang  Station  was  made  a  separate  Mis- 
sion in  1889.  There  was  a  riot  on  February  5, 
1889,  and  the  Mission  property  was  burned.  The 
Chinese  Government  promptly  paid  an  indemnity, 
and  God  moved  on  in  the  establishment  of  his 
Kingdom. 


88        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

The  Yangchow  Station  was  opened  on  December 
18,  1891,  and  the  Church  was  organized  with  four 
members,  two  foreigners  and  two  Chinese,  on  Feb- 
ruary 5, 1893.  It  was  difficult  at  first  even  to  rent 
a  place,  but  in  1896  land  was  bought  and  a  house 
built.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pierce  moved  into  the  first 
Mission-owned  house  on  September  25,  1896.  We 
now  have  five  dwelling  houses,  one  school  building, 
one  church  building,  one  hospital,  and  one  small 
building  for  woman's  work,  all  of  these  with  roomy 
grounds,  and  one  large  place  for  another  dwelling 
house.  The  church  has  grown  steadily,  and  now 
has  nearly  fifty  members. 

The  Chinkiang  Mission  reunited  with  the  Shang- 
hai Mission  on  January  14,  1897,  and  the  two 
became  the  Central  China  Baptist  Mission.  In 
union  there  has  been  not  only  strength,  but  en- 
largement on  all  lines. 

An  Association  of  the  churches  of  the  Shanghai 
Mission  had  been  organized  in  May,  1895.  The 
two  churches  of  the  Chinkiang  Mission  joined, 
and  rapid  enlargement  has  followed.  The  three 
churches  that  began  the  Association  have  now 
become  thirteen,  and  the  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
five  members  have  increased  to  more  than  seven 
hundred,  with  many  inquirers,  and  many  more 
who  are  not  far  from  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven. 

The  missionaries  have  not  given  so  large  a  pro- 
portion of  their  time  to  evangelistic  work,  but  this 
has  been  greatly  enlarged  by  the  increased  number 
of  native  evangelists.     There  are  now  quite  a  num- 


The  Central  China  Mission.  89 

ber  of  out-stations  occupied  by  our  native  co-labor- 
ers. The  church  members  also  are  adding  their 
contribution  by  personal  work,  and  the  Associa- 
tion has  its  Home  Mission  Board  that  employs  one 
native  evangelist. 

The  native  Bible  women  are  doing  a  great  work 
among  their  sisters.  Dear  old  Sister  Dzung  is 
constantly  preaching  the  Gospel  to  the  Chinese 
women. 

The  Mission  was  doing  almost  no  school  work  at 
the  beginning  of  this  period,  but  the  quality  and 
quantity  of  the  schools  have  been  very  greatly  in- 
creased. There  are  now  two  boarding  academies 
for  girls  and  two  for  boys,  and  one  each  for  girls 
and  boys  to  be  opened  soon.  Soochow  is  also 
planning  to  have  a  boarding  school  for  girls. 
There  are  a  number  of  day  schools.  This  host  of 
boys  and  girls,  many  of  whom  become  Christians, 
and  all  of  whom  learn  something  of  Christian 
truth,  means  much  for  the  future.  There  were  no 
training  schools  for  women ;  now  there  are  three, 
in  which  many  women  are  being  trained  to  work 
for  God. 

After  much  preliminary  consultation  and 
prayer,  a  union  in  higher  educational  work  was 
consummated  in  1905  between  the  Northern  and 
Southern  Boards.  Each  Board  has  contributed 
f 40,000,  TJ.  S.  gold  currency;  twenty-seven  and 
one-half  acres  of  land  have  been  purchased ;  seven 
buildings  have  been  erected;  a  Theological  Sem- 
inary of  forty  students  has  been  established;    a 


90        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

college  was  opened  last  year  and  has  about  fifty 
students;  other  buildings  are  being  planned  for 
the  near  future. 

The  enlargement  and  equipment  of  the  work  has 
kept  pace  with  the  increased  number  of  workers. 
God  has  prepared  us  for  a  great  harvest,  and  we 
are  praying  that  it  may  soon  come. 

The  sunset  is  beautiful  and  glorious,  but  it  does 
not  represent  the  outlook  of  this  Mission.  It  re- 
minds of  the  song,  "Work,  for  the  night  is  com- 
ing." The  sunrise  is  a  better  illustration  of  the 
future  prospects.  It  comes  to  tell  us  that  "the 
morning  light  is  breaking,  the  darkness  disap- 
pears." 

The  Central  China  Mission. 

1.  Main  Stations — 

(1)  Shanghai. 

(2)  Soochow. 

(3)  Chinkiang. 

(4)  Yangchow. 

2.  Church  Statistics — 

(1)  Churches,  16. 

(2)  Church  buildings,  6. 

(3)  Membership,  818. 

(4)  Out-stations,  16. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  14. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  705. 

3.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  33. 

(2)  Natives,  33. 


The  Central  China  Mission.  91 

4.  Schools — 

(1)  Day  schools,  11. 

(2)  Shanghai  Boys'  Academy. 

(3)  Eliza  Yates  Memorial  Girls'  School  (Shanghai). 

(4)  Cantonese  Girls'  School    (Shanghai). 

(5)  Smith  Bible  School  for  Women   (Shanghai). 

(6)  Boys'  School  (Soochow). 

(7)  Girls'  School  (Soochow). 

(8)  Girls'  Boarding  School   (Yangchow). 

(9)  Boys'  School   (Yangchow). 

(10)  Shanghai  Baptist  College  and  Seminary. 

5.  Medical — 

(1)  Yangchow  Hospital. 

(2)  Dispensary  near  Yangchow. 

6.  General — 

(1)  Work  opened  1847. 

(2)  Residences  for  missionaries  owned  by  the  Board, 

15. 


CHAPTER  V. 


THE  NORTH  CHINA  MISSION. 

The  North  China  Mission  occupies  two  prefect- 
ural  cities,  Tengchow  and  Laichow.  These  are 
sub-capitals,  with  officials  having  jurisdiction  over 
several  counties.  Another  station  is  at  Chefoo,  a 
treaty  port  where  international  trade  is  con 
ducted.  Our  other  tw^o  stations  are  inland,  and 
have  a  purely  Chinese  population.  They  are 
Hwanghien  and  Pingtu.  The  territory  we  influ- 
ence from  these  five  stations  is  reckoned  to  con- 
tain a  population  of  about  five  millions. 

Laying  the  Foundations — 1860-1880. 

Each  successive  war  with  a  foreign  power  has 
had  the  effect  of  opening  China  wider  to  the  gospel. 
Chefoo  was  opened  to  foreign  trade  and  to  mission- 
ary residence  when  peace  was  made  with  the 
French  and  English  in  the  autumn  of  1860.  Mr. 
J.  L.  Holmes,  a  man  of  fine  intellect  and  attractive 
personality,  was  the  first  to  enter  this  field.  The 
treaty  port  was  new,  the  field  was  new  and  very 
inviting.  But  Mr.  Holmes  was  destined  to  work 
in  it  less  than  a  year.  The  long-haired  rebels, 
with  whom  Mr.  Holmes  had  conferred  near  Shang- 

(92) 


The  North  China  Mission.  93 

hai  in  their  northward  movement,  affiliated  with 
the  roughs  in  Shantung,  who  were  of  a  different 
and  more  diabolic  temper.  Mr.  Holmes  went  out 
to  parley  with  these  over  the  safety  of  Chefoo  and 
was  cruelly  slain  by  them,  both  he  and  his  com- 
panion. Mrs.  Holmes  afterward  joined  the  Teng- 
chow  work,  thus  temporarily  closing  our  station 
in  Chefoo. 

Dr.  J.  B.  Hartwell,  with  his  family,  in  the  early 
months  of  1861,  with  the  true  spirit  of  a  pioneer, 
settled  in  Tengchow  and  began  a  great  work  for 
the  Lord.  The  early  years  in  Tengchow  were 
attended  with  such  difficulties  as  these :  a  strong 
prejudice  against  renting  houses  to  foreigners, 
the  fewness  of  the  workers,  country  overrun  by 
bandits,  cholera  epidemics,  frequent  invasions  of 
missionary  homes  by  death,  and  troubles  incident 
to  the  Civil  War  in  America,  all  of  which  the 
little  band  of  American  missionaries  surmounted 
with  a  genuine  heroism  sustained  by  a  sublime 
faith  in  their  cause. 

This  period  saw  the  organization  of  two 
churches,  both  in  Tengchow.  The  charter  mem- 
bers of  those  churches  have  largely  passed  to  their 
home  above,  but  a  very  few  still  remain,  among  the 
rest  the  man  whose  honor  it  was  to  be  the  first  in 
Shantung  to  be  baptized,  a  brother  Wang  of  Tso 
Shu  Tswang.  A  marked  characteristic  of  our 
work  in  China  has  always  been  the  slight  demark- 
ation  between  the  preachers  and  the  laymen.  In 
this  period  there  was  only  one  ordained  preacher, 


94        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

but  there  were  quite  a  number  of  men  whose  evan- 
gelistic gifts  were  noteworthy,  men  who  led  souls 
to  Christ.  Perhaps  of  these  the  principal  was 
Tsang  Yun  Te,  for  whose  baptism  the  ice  was  cut 
in  the  Hwanghien  moat,  but  whose  heart  was  so 
warm  that  he  led  a  multitude  of  his  relatives  and 
neighbors  to  the  Lord.  Although  a  plain  farmer, 
his  prayers  were  frequently  continued  to  the  small 
hours  of  the  night. 

The  schools  organized  in  this  period  had  some 
characteristics  which  have  largely  passed  away. 
They  were  less  self-supporting,  and  the  pupils  nec- 
essarily were  drawn  largely  or  almost  wholly  from 
non-Christian  families.  It  is  not  strange  that  the 
missionaries  felt  dissatisfied  with  their  efforts  in 
this  department.  But  even  about  those  schools 
there  is  one  thing  which  ought  to  be  indelibly 
burned  into  our  memories.  It  is  that  out  of  those 
schools  came  men  and  women  who  are  today  our 
best  workers  and  the  brightest  lights  in  our  Shan- 
tung Baptist  work. 

During  this  period,  Chefoo  was  again  occupied 
by  us  for  a  short  time.  The  family  residing  there 
was  again  compelled  to  leave  on  account  of  bad 
health. 

When  we  reflect  that  during  those  two  decades 
the  North  China  Mission  had  only  three  men,  one 
of  whom  lived  less  than  a  year  after  reaching  the 
field,  and  another  had  his  work  cut  short  by  sev- 
eral years  on  account  of  the  illness  of  his  wife ;  and 
six  women  whose  average  service  for  the  period  is 


The  North  China  Mission.  95 

only  nine  years,  we  are  constrained  to  say,  "What 
hath  God  wrought !"  At  the  close  of  the  period, 
we  find  that  hundreds  have  been  baptized,  scores 
have  taken  the  courses  in  schools,  six  or  seven 
chapels  for  frequent  evangelistic  services  have 
been  opened  in  as  many  centers,  that  two  churches 
have  been  organized,  that  Mr.  Hartwell  has  cov- 
ered an  enormous  part  of  the  country  in  his  horse- 
back itineraries,  and  that  his  name  is  a  household 
word ;  that  Mr.  Crawford,  in  addition  to  his  evan- 
gelistic work,  has  done  some  literary  work  of  real 
value,  many  of  his  translations  of  hymns  being  in 
use  to  the  present  day.  We  find  that  Mrs.  Craw- 
ford and  Mrs.  Holmes  have  taken  the  gospel  story 
into  hundreds  of  villages  and  thousands  of  homes, 
and  that  the  Misses  Moon  had  wrought  w^ell  in 
homes  and  schools.  Did  not  the  period  begin  with 
the  martyrdom  of  one  of  our  number?  Was  it 
not  further  sanctified  by  the  death  of  Mrs.  Hart- 
well  and  three  of  her  children,  and  by  the  suffer- 
ings and  loneliness  of  all  the  rest? 

Tearing  Up  the  Foundations — 1881-1889. 

Mission  methods  have  always  been  a  live  topic 
in  North  China.  The  missionaries  after  a  time 
grew  dissatisfied  with  their  schools  so  largely  sup- 
ported from  America.  They  came  also  to  doubt 
the  wisdom  of  supporting  evangelists  and  Bible 
women  from  mission  funds.  The  chief  argument 
against  these  was   whatever   ground   there   may 


96        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

have  been  for  the  taunt,  "rice  Christian/'  hurled 
at  us  by  Chinese  and  foreigner  alike.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  was  exceedingly  difficult  to  give  up 
these  practices  lest  the  work  should  be  injured, 
for  other  denominations  were  continuing  them. 
There  were  also  members  of  our  own  Mission  who 
did  not  feel  so  strongly.  The  revolutionists  finally 
had  their  way.  The  schools  were  disbanded,  and 
no  money  for  the  time  went  to  the  support  of  evan- 
gelistic work  when  done  by  Chinese. 

The  North  China  Mission  existed  for  almost  a 
quarter  of  a  century  with  scarcely  any  change  in 
its  personnel.  But  since  then,  great  changes  have 
come.  The  young  blood  of  our  home  churches  has 
been  poured  into  our  Mission  stations.  There 
have  been  since  our  Mission  was  first  organized  in 
1861,  fifty-nine  persons  appointed  to  work  in  it. 
Of  these,  nine  were  appointed  in  the  first  twenty 
years  and  fifty  have  been  appointed  in  the  remain- 
ing twenty-eight  years.  This  is  surely  very  en- 
couraging. A  goodly  proportion  of  these  rein- 
forcements came  within  the  second  period.  There 
were  the  Bosticks,  the  Joiners,  the  Davaults,  the 
Halcombs,  the  Pruitts,  the  Leagues,  and  others. 

With  the  coming  in  of  new  life,  there  came 
growth.  New  stations  were  occupied.  Hwanghien 
had  been  long  talked  of.  Tours  for  preaching 
brought  other  places  more  and  more  into  view. 
Gradually  Hwanghien  and  Pingtu  were  elected. 
Hwanghien  greatly  appealed  to  Dr.  Crawford,  be- 
cause of  its  wealth  and  because  many  of  his  mem- 


Yates  Hall,  Shanghai,  China  Yingtak  Baptist  Church 

Pagoda  Pagoda,  Yangchow, China 

Compound,  Canton,  China 
Carter  Girls'  School,  Hwanghien,  China. 


The  North  China  Mission.  97 

bers  lived  in  that  country.  The  struggles  to  get 
a  foothold  there  were  interesting.  Those  rich 
Hwanghien  men  bought  over  or  terrified  every 
man  that  offered  a  house.  And  when  at  last  the 
Mission  was  on  the  point  of  winning  success,  they 
tried  three  very  powerful  methods,  all  of  which  in 
this  case  failed.  They  had  the  middle  man  who 
negotiated  the  matter  thrown  into  prison  and 
severely  beaten;  they  raised  a  mob  to  intimidate 
or  kill  the  missionary,  but  fortunately  he  had  left 
before  the  mob  assembled ;  they  attempted  to  bribe 
the  viceroy,  Li  Hung  Chang,  who  is  reported  to  have 
told  them  they  were  acting  very  foolishly.  And  so 
the  house  was  rented.  The  first  missionaries  ap- 
pointed to  that  station,  Messrs.  N.  W.  Halcomb 
and  C.  W.  Pruitt,  both  lost  their  wives  before  they 
could  move.  Then  two  others  were  appointed 
who  went.  But  in  this  case,  too,  trial  was  in 
store.  One  of  them,  Mr.  E.  E.  Davault,  died 
shortly  afterward,  and  the  other,  Mr.  J.  M.  Joiner, 
broke  down  in  health  and  returned  to  America. 
But  the  Mission  was  able  to  keep  up  the  station. 
The  opening  of  the  Pingtu  station,  while  falling 
slightly  beyond  the  limit  assigned  to  this  period, 
belong  to  it  quite  truly.  To  a  lady  was  given 
the  honor  of  opening  that  very  prosperous  station, 
and  that  after  the  men  of  the  Mission  had  failed. 
The  Mission  realized  it  was  getting  a  prize  in 
Pingtu.  But  when  Miss  Moon  was  invited  to  go 
out  and  look  after  some  women  who  were  inter- 
ested, the  men  of  the  Mission  did  not  know  they 

7 


98        Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

were  giving  her  the  opportunity  of  accomplishing 
what  they  had  tried,  but  had  failed  to  do.  She 
walked  in  so  quietly,  so  unostentatiously,  so  smil- 
ingly, that  the  objectors  either  forgot  to  make 
objection  or  else  they  did  not  realize  what  she  was 
doing  till  it  was  done.  Truth  compels  that  there 
be  added  to  this  statement  the  fact  that  she  lived 
so  humbly  in  a  poor,  unfurnished,  hired  Chinese 
house  that  it  greatly  preyed  upon  her  health,  and 
for  a  long  time  anxiety  was  felt  about  her.  After 
this  heroic  opening,  the  Pingtu  station  has  been 
occupied  by  families,  first  by  Mr.  T.  J.  League, 
and  later  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Sears  and  others. 

The  discussion  of  methods  reached  its  climax 
when  the  missionaries  composing  the  North  China 
Mission,  in  1893,  mutually  agreed  to  separate  for 
the  highest  good  of  the  work.  The  extremists, 
about  twelve  in  number,  decided  to  locate  in 
Taianfu  and  other  places  in  the  west,  and  called 
themselves  "Gospel  Missioners."  Our  Mission  was 
left  in  peaceable  possession  of  all  the  old  territory. 
Thus  a  long  struggle  was  happily  ended.  Not 
that  we  never  expect  discussion  of  methods  any 
more.  We  shall  always  have  them.  But  happily 
such  sharp  divisions  are  not  always  necessary. 
The  Gospel  Missioners  pulling  out  left  the  North 
China  Mission  weak,  barely  able  to  maintain  the 
three  stations  then  on  our  hands. 

There  were  several  reasons  why  the  growth  of 
this  period  was  comparatively  not  equal  to  the 
growth  of  the  first  period.     Many  of  the  mission- 


The  North  China  Mission.  99 

aries  were  new  to  the  work,  and  most  of  their 
energies  were  devoted  to  learning  the  Chinese  lan- 
guage. Schools  and  native  helpers  had  been 
largely  given  up,  and  these  are  fruitful  agencies 
in  a  mission  work.  This  policy  naturally  some- 
what alienated  the  Chinese  brethren,  and  in  some 
cases,  actually  turned  their  energies  toward  build- 
ing up  other  denominations.  Then,  naturally,  too 
great  discussion  of  methods  defeats  its  own  end, 
too  much  energy  being  spent  in  discussion  and 
not  enough  in  aggressive  work.  But  in  spite  of 
these  reasons,  two  new  churches  were  organized — 
one  at  Hwanghien  and  one  at  Saling  in  Pingtu. 

Developing  Our  Plans— 1890-1900. 

Dr.  Hartwell,  after  several  years  work  among 
the  Chinese  in  the  United  States,  returned  to 
China  to  help  reorganize  our  Mission  after  the 
separation  of  the  Gospel  Missioners.  He  came 
back  to  us  ripe  in  experience  and  rich  in  spiritual 
life.  He  settled  in  Tengchow,  where  for  a  period 
of  years  he  was  a  tremendous  power  as  a  preacher. 
His  preaching  was  full  of  instruction,  of  good 
understanding  of  Chinese  life,  and  of  intense 
action  just  such  as  the  Chinese  enjoy.  Dr.  Hart- 
welPs  return  to  Shantung  marked  the  beginning 
of  our  third  period. 

It  is  astonishing  how  slowly  conviction  grows. 
It  was  a  long  time  after  the  Gospel  Mission  separa- 
tion before  the  Mission  took  up  its  true  policy  and 


100      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

started  schools  again.  The  old  arguments  must 
have  time  to  become  obscured  in  the  mind.  Our 
Chinese  were  widely  scattered  and  wholly  unfitted 
to  bring  their  children  together  in  school.  The 
missionaries  would  be  remiss  should  they  fail  in 
face  of  this  plain  opportunity.  For  the  children 
to  grow  up  in  ignorance  and  idolatry  would  be  a 
fatal  mistake,  and  one  from  which  the  mission- 
aries would  find  it  hard  indeed  to  shift  the  respons- 
ibility. Our  policy  gradually  grew  clear  and 
strong:  a  Christian  education,  at  least  to  the  ex- 
tent of  being  able  to  read  the  Bible,  for  every  boy 
and  girl  of  every  Christian  family  in  our  connec- 
tion. We  would  try  to  enlist  everyone,  parents 
and  others,  in  the  support  of  these  institutions. 
At  first  we  started  two  schools — the  one  for  boys 
at  Hwanghien  under  the  care  of  Mrs.  Pruitt,  and 
the  other  for  girls,  at  Tengchow,  under  the  care  of 
Mrs.  Hartwell. 

Medical  work  had  for  a  long  time  commended 
itself  to  the  missionaries.  We  prayed  for  a  man 
for  Pingtu.  We  believed  he  would  greatly  bless 
the  missionaries  there,  and  at  the  same  time  open 
wider  doors  of  usefulness.  We  hailed  it  as  a  good 
providence  when  Dr.  H.  A.  Eandle,  of  the  China 
Inland  Mission,  applied  for  appointment  to  that 
field.  Although  attached  to  the  Pingtu  station, 
Dr.  Eandle  was  a  decided  strength  to  all  our  sta- 
tions. Dr.  Handle's  business  ability  was  so  fine 
that  the  medical  work  under  his  care  was  more 
than  self-supporting. 


The  North  China  Mission.  101 

Mr.  John  W.  Lowe,  in  passing  Laichowfu  on  his 
way  from  Pingtu  to  Hwanghien,  felt  profoundly 
stirred  to  open  that  great  city  and  surrounding 
region  to  the  gospel.  Ever  since  its  opening 
shortly  afterward,  he  has  been  able  to  direct  a  tre- 
mendous amount  of  sanctified  energy  against  its 
bulwarks  of  heathenism.  Laichowfu  is  sixty 
miles  west  of  Hwanghien,  and  thirty-three  north 
of  Pingtu.  Like  these,  it  is  in  the  midst  of  a 
flourishing  agricultural  community.  The  situa- 
tion is  admirable  for  evangelistic  work.  The 
opening  of  Laichowfu  belongs  to  the  transition 
between  our  third  and  fourth  periods. 

The  New  Era— 1901-1909. 

We  now  reach  a  period  of  rapid  expansion.  This 
is  due  to  several  causes :  The  discussion  of  methods 
has  practically  subsided,  leaving  the  Mission  in  a 
state  of  aggressiveness  which  is  very  helpful.  The 
Boxer  uprising  has  just  passed,  and  its  terrific 
advance  either  drove  out  or  burned  up  much  that 
hindered.  All  this  synchronized  with  the  coming 
into  our  Mission  of  a  large  number  of  very  fine 
workers,  both  men  and  women.  These  consisted 
of  doctors,  nurses,  unmarried  women,  and  preach- 
ers. They  come  from  many  States  of  our  South- 
land, and  so  we  have  mingled  the  aggressiveness  of 
the  West  with  the  conservatism  of  the  East. 

The  Boxer  uprising  was  due  to  a  strange  blend- 
ing of  political  and  religious  causes.     The  Chinese 


102      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

are  not  nearly  so  much  disposed  to  persecution  on 
account  of  religion  as  are  some  other  people,  but 
the  fact  that  the  missionaries  had  for  nearly  a  cen- 
tury been  protected  by  treaty  had  created  a  suspi- 
cion that  our  mission  was  a  political  one  and  that 
we  were  the  forerunners  of  armies  of  aggression, 
and  that  the  Chinese  in  becoming  Christians  be- 
came apostate  to  their  own  country.  This  sus- 
picion seemed  confirmed  when,  on  the  murder  of 
a  German  Catholic  missionary  in  Shangtung,  the 
Germans  sieged  Tsingtau,  the  finest  port  on  our 
Shantung  coast.  This  was  followed  by  Kussia 
acquiring  Port  Arthur  and  Great  Britain  Wei- 
haiwei. 

The  Boxer  secret  societies  grew  with  remarkable 
rapidity  during  the  winter  of  1899-1900.  About 
them  there  were  two  remarkable  things :  one  was 
their  unalterable  opposition  to  everything  foreign 
— matches,  cloth,  religion,  and  all.  The  other  was 
their  fancy  that  faith  in  their  protecting  deity 
rendered  them  invulnerable  against  foreign  bul- 
lets and  swords.  The  movement  reached  such  a 
frenzy  by  the  spring  of  1900  that  it  looked  to  many 
as  if  it  must  sweep  everything  before  it.  Its  en- 
ergy was  cyclonic,  its  dread  was  paralyzing,  its 
influence  all  but  universal  in  the  Chinese  Empire. 
One  important  man,  Yuan  Shih  Kai,  was,  however, 
not  swept  off  his  feet,  and  coming,  as  he  did,  in 
the  midst  of  the  development  to  be  governor  of 
Shantung,  practically  saved  the  situation  there. 
It  was  he  who  changed  the  edict  from  the  throne, 


The  North  China  Mission.  103 

"Kill  all  foreigners/'  so  as  to  read,  "Protect  all 
foreigners,"  and  transmitted  it  so  to  all  the  officials 
under  him.  The  Shantung  missionaries  owe  their 
lives  to  him. 

All  our  North  China  missionaries  had  to  flee, 
some  taking  refuge  in  Tsingtau,  some  in  Chefoo, 
and  some  in  Japan,  while  one  family  whose  fur- 
lough was  at  hand,  returned  for  a  period  to  Amer- 
ica. Those  who  fled  to  Chefoo  suffered  most,  per- 
haps, on  account  of  the  crowded  condition  in  that 
port.  Thirty  or  forty  people  were  crowded  into 
Mrs.  Seaman's  summer  home  at  Chefoo.  The  men 
patrolled  the  streets  at  night  to  prevent  surprise, 
while  the  women  took  turns  superintending  the 
affairs  of  the  large  family.  Our  Chinese  brethren 
suffered  more.  Among  them  were  some  martyrs. 
A  number  of  others  were  imprisoned  and  re- 
peatedly beaten  to  induce  them  to  recant,  which 
they  all  refused  to  do.  The  mission  houses  at 
Pingtu  were  first  looted  and  then  torn  down. 

On  account  of  the  large  number  of  faithful  mar- 
tyrs on  their  list,  Chinese  Christians  have  ever 
since  had  a  higher  standing  in  the  world.  They 
have,  consequently,  been  more  aggressive.  The 
Chinese  government  has,  itself,  felt  the  effect  and 
determined  upon  reforms  of  the  most  wide-reach- 
ing importance.  Among  these  may  be  mentioned 
the  introduction  of  a  constitution,  with  attendant 
legislative  bodies  and  a  public  school  system  mod- 
eled on  that  of  the  West.  It  is  impossible  to  over- 
estimate the  importance  of  this  last  reform,  involv- 


104       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

ing,  as  it  does,  a  curriculum  as  wide  as  that  of  our 
own  schools,  to  replace  the  old,  narrow  curriculum 
which  was  hoary  with  age,  and  which  was  totally 
unsuited  to  the  needs  of  modern  life.  Already  we 
have  seen  some  tremendous  effects  of  this  reform 
upon  our  mission  work  in  Shantung.  The  mis- 
sionaries have  a  higher  standing  among  the  Chi- 
nese, and  are  frequently  sought  after  for  advice, 
and  bright  students  are  brought  for  instruction  in 
our  schools.  Another  very  delightful  result  of  the 
Boxer  struggle  is  that  missionaries  are  no  longer 
looked  upon  with  suspicion,  but  are  everywhere 
regarded  as  true  men.  This  grew  out  of  the  fact 
that  our  Western  governments  did  not  follow  up 
their  opportunity  and  divide  China,  as  the  Chinese 
supposed  they  would  do.  Indeed,  the  whole  atti- 
tude toward  Christianity  is  saner,  and  we  believe 
more  hopeful. 

We  are  hoping  to  have  a  well-equipped  school 
or  academy  for  each  sex  at  every  one  of  our  five 
stations.  We  have  these  schools  in  embryo  now. 
They  need  developing  and  furnishing.  The  three 
oldest  of  these  schools — the  Girls'  School  at  Teng- 
chow  and  the  Boys'  Schools  at  Hwanghien  and 
Pingtu — have  been  doing  fine  work  for  years,  The 
Pingtu  school  has  turned  out  a  noticeably  large 
number  of  finely-equipped  young  men.  The 
Hwanghien  school  has  graduated  fewer,  but  has 
some  very  fine  workers  among  those  who  have 
taken  its  courses.  We  almost  prize  more  the 
graduates  of  our  Girls'  School  in  Tengchow,  who 


The  North  China  Mission.  105 

are  invading  homes  and  doing  more  than  any  other 
class  to  break  down  the  superstition  of  ages.  In 
these  various  schools  there  is  great  hope  for 
trained  workers  for  the  future.  Among  our 
church  members  there  are  none  who  understand 
quite  so  well  the  difference  between  superstition 
and  true  religion  as  do  those  who  have  gone 
through  our  schools. 

For  a  long  time  our  Mission  had  realized  the 
necessity  of  special  training  for  our  constant 
workers.  It  was  in  May,  1903,  that  we  determined 
to  go  forward  with  that  work,  and  organize  the 
North  China  Training  School  for  Men.  During 
the  first  two  years,  1904  and  1905,  the  teaching 
was  done  in  Tengchow,  because  of  the  fact  that 
Hwanghien  had  no  suitable  buildings.  Two  of 
the  missionaries,  Drs.  J.  B.  Hartwell  and  C.  W. 
Pruitt,  gave  their  entire  time  to  this  work.  They 
were  greatly  pleased  at  the  progress  made  by  the 
students  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  several  of  them 
were  rather  advanced  in  life.  From  the  first,  it 
was  regarded  as  a  training-school,  and  the  stu- 
dents were  led  to  undertake  a  great  deal  of  prac- 
tical work  among  the  heathen  population.  No 
step  we  have  ever  taken  has  so  thoroughly  ap- 
pealed to  the  Chinese  brethren  as  the  establishment 
of  this  school.  They  see  in  it  the  possibility  of  the 
Chinese  getting  a  comprehensive  knowledge  of  the 
Christian  system  from  which  circumstances  had 
previously  excluded  them.  It  was  in  1905,  while 
working  still  in  Tengchow,  that  the  gladdening 


106      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

news  reached  us  that  Hon.  J.  C.  Bush,  of  Mobile, 
Ala.,  had  given  the  handsome  sum  of  ten  thousand 
dollars  for  the  buildings  to  be  erected  in  Hwang- 
hien,  and  that  the  name  of  the  institution  was  to 
be  henceforth  The  Bush  Theological  Seminary. 
Our  enthusiasm  knew  no  bounds.  We  saw  the 
hope  of  our  institution  living  and  blessing  future 
generations  of  Chinese  people.  The  Seminary  has 
now  turned  out  several  classes,  and  quite  a  number 
of  those  who  have  taken  the  course  are  powerful 
preachers  of  the  Word. 

The  Bible  Woman's  Training  School  at  Lai- 
chowfu  wras  scarcely  less  needed  than  our  Semi- 
nary. It  is  only  necessary  to  state  the  need  for 
Bible  Women  that  it  be  realized.  The  Chinese 
women  are  secluded,  shut  in,  kept  to  themselves, 
and  so  have  no  opportunity  of  hearing  of  our  Lord 
unless  the  herald  goes  within  the  seclusion  and 
there  tells  the  story.  Our  Bible  women,  because 
of  the  truth  having  made  them  free,  have  a  greater 
liberty,  and  move  among  the  homes  with  great 
power  and  love.  The  Training  School  is  to  meet 
the  needs  of  this  class.  It  was  organized  some- 
what later  than  the  Seminary,  and  has  fewer  stu- 
dents, but  its  drill  is  thorough  and  its  usefulness 
already  recognized.  Miss  Mary  E.  Willeford  has 
had  charge  of  the  Training  School  from  its  organi- 
zation. 

Dr.  T.  W.  Avers  was  the  first  medical  mission- 
ary to  settle  in  Hwanghien.  Shortly  afterward, 
the  First  Baptist  Church  in  Macon,  Ga.,  contrib- 


The  North  China  Mission.  107 

uted  money  for  the  hospital  at  Hwanghien,  to  be 
called  the  Warren  Memorial  Hospital,  in  memory 
of  Dr.  Warren,  who  was  for  many  years  the  be- 
loved pastor  of  that  church.  The  hospital  occu- 
pies a  sightly  spot  on  the  eastern  side  of  Hwang- 
hien  city.  Some  of  its  features  may  be  mentioned : 
It  has  in-patients  and  out-patients.  The  latter 
simply  sit  in  one  of  the  waiting  rooms  till  called 
for.  After  examination,  they  receive  their  med- 
icine, pay  the  fee,  and  take  their  departure,  to 
come  again  or  not  as  circumstances  may  require. 
The  in-patients  have  more  severe  diseases,  and  are 
assigned  a  place  in  one  of  the  rooms  of  the  hos- 
pital. The  room  is  the  only  thing  given  them 
except  in  the  case  of  charity  patients,  who  are  not 
very  numerous.  The  in-patients  supply  their  own 
food,  fuel,  bedding,  and  nurses,  if  they  require  any, 
and  pay  for  their  medicines  as  do  the  out-patients. 
In  addition  to  this,  the  wealthy  among  the  patients 
and  friends  of  the  hospital  make  contributions 
once  or  twice  a  year  towards  the  expenses  of  the 
institution.  The  waiting  rooms,  as  well  as  the 
wards,  are  the  scenes  of  very  active  and  constant 
evangelistic  effort.  Miss  J.  L.  Pettigrew,  a  trained 
nurse  of  great  ability,  has  charge  of  the  women's 
wards  of  this  institution. 

Dr.  Oxner  went  to  Pingtu  in  1903  and  entered 
upon  the  medical  work.  The  demands  were  large, 
the  equipment  almost  nil.  The  doctor  was  very 
conscientious  and  exceedingly  anxious  to  accom- 
plish all  he  possibly  could  in  his  work.     He  plead 


108       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

with  the  friends  at  home  for  equipment,  but  the 
means  were  insufficient.  The  burden  under  its 
trying  circumstances  was  too  much  for  him,  and 
in  April,  1907,  he  laid  it  down  to  join  those  who 
"rest  from  their  labors.''  His  appeal  was  not  in 
vain,  and  the  Oxner  Memorial  Hospital  is  being 
erected  as  an  outcome  in  the  city  where  he  died. 
"He  being  dead,  yet  speaketh." 

Dr.  and  Mrs.  Huckaby  came  in  1904.  That  their 
hearts  were  in  the  work  was  the  thorough  convic- 
tion of  every  member  of  the  Mission.  After  four 
short  years,  like  Dr.  Oxner,  they  both  passed  on  to 
be  with  Christ.  Another  very  pathetic  point  was 
that  Dr.  Huckaby  was  Mrs.  Oxner's  brother,  this 
making  her  affliction  a  treble  one. 

The  latest  addition  to  our  hospital  equipment  is 
the  Mayfield-Tyzzer  Hospital,  which  has  just  been 
completed  at  Laichowfu.  This  splendid  building 
was  contributed  by  Doctors  Mayfield  and  Tyzzer, 
of  St.  Louis,  Mo.  Blessings  be  on  these  two  gen- 
erous men ! 

Chefoo  was  occupied  the  third  time  in  1906.  Mr. 
Peyton  Stephens  led  in  this  occupation.  His  ex- 
perience in  China  peculiarly  fitted  him  to  under- 
take this  work.  In  it  he  was  joined  by  the  Mor- 
gans, and  together  they  have  built  up  a  very  pros- 
perous work. 

Problems  and  Progress. 

Ancestral  worship  is  more  alive  than  any  other 
part  of  the  Shantung  religion.      It  seems  to  be 


The  North  China  Mission.  109 

most  piously  observed.  In  many  cases  hundreds 
of  dollars'  worth  of  paper  is  burned  to  furnish  the 
dead  parents  with  money  and  other  things  neces- 
sary for  their  comfort  in  the  world  of  spirits. 
Yet  it  is  difficult  to  say  that  even  ancestral  wor- 
ship is  really  founded  on  faith.  These  burnings 
so  persistently  practiced  seem  to  have  their  motive 
in  two  sentiments — the  one  a  desire  to  preserve 
Chinese  institutions,  the  other  a  feeling  of  affec- 
tion for  the  departed.  There  is  little  evidence 
that  they  really  believe  the  paper  they  burn  is  con- 
verted into  spiritual  money,  furniture,  and  other 
needed  articles,  although  theoretically  they  hold 
that  doctrine. 

In  Shantung  there  are  no  separate  country  resi- 
dences, as  we  have  them  in  America.  Even 
country  people  all  live  in  villages,  and  from  there 
go  out  to  work  the  land  around  them.  These 
villages  vary  in  size,  the  population  ranging  any- 
where from  twenty  or  thirty  to  ten  thousand. 
There  are  to  them  several  advantages  of  living  in 
villages,  viz. :  mutual  protection  against  robbers ; 
less  outlay  for  stock  and  agricultural  implements, 
these  being  largely  used  in  common ;  greater  econ- 
omy of  land  in  buildings ;  and  greater  opportunity 
to  be  neighborly,  in  which  the  Chinese  excel.  In 
the  more  densely  populated  districts  these  villages 
dot  the  plains  in  a  most  charming  manner.  From 
some  eminence,  hundreds  may  often  be  counted 
without  shifting  one's  position. 

Notwithstanding  the  density  of  population,  in 


110      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Shantung,  our  more  than  two  thousand  members 
are  scattered  over  six  or  seven  counties.  In  num- 
bers of  cases  the  nearest  Christian  neighbor  is 
many  miles  away.  Our  Shantung  membership 
being  so  widely  scattered  is  one  of  the  reasons  why 
we  do  not  ordinarily  have  protracted  meetings,  as 
usually  held  in  America.  Our  membership  cannot 
easily  get  together.  In  lieu  of  the  protracted 
meeting,  we  have  evangelistic  and  educational 
classes,  in  which  a  number  of  people  come  together 
frequently  from  great  distances  and  study  the 
Bible  together  for  a  period  of  ten  or  twenty  days. 
Some  of  these  classes  are  for  inquirers  and  some 
for  new  Christians.  All  are  highly  used  of  the 
Lord  in  building  up  our  work. 

In  modes  of  travel,  the  Shantung  missionaries 
are  at  a  disadvantage  in  comparison  with  our 
Central  and  South  China  Missions.  The  Shen 
tsze,  or  mule  litter,  is  probably  the  most  comfort- 
able. But  even  this  is  fearfully  fatigueing  and 
nauseating  to  many.  This  is  due  to  its  being 
carried  on  the  backs  of  two  mules,  which  often  fail 
to  keep  step,  or  otherwise  walk  unevenly.  But  the 
Shentze  affords  good  capacity  for  taking  along 
the  necessary  bedding  and  other  necessary  equip- 
page  for  a  Shantung  journey.  Other  less  attract- 
ive modes  are  the  cart,  muleback,  donkeyback,  and 
on  foot.  Chinese  carts  are  clumsy,  over  fearfully 
uneven  roads,  and  travel  in  them  is  attended  with 
a  great  deal  of  danger. 

From  Chefoo  to  Pingtu,  taking  in  our  other 


The  North  China  Mission.  Ill 

stations  en  route,  is  only  one  hundred  and  seventy 
miles,  but  to  make  the  journey  requires  as  long  a 
time  as  it  would  take  you  in  a  Pullman  car  to  go 
from  New  York  to  San  Francisco,  and  you  must 
expend  about  five  times  the  energy  that  journey 
would  require.  So  it  turns  out  that  miles  are  not 
altogether  a  correct  measure  of  distance. 

In  spite  of  these  inconveniences,  many  mission- 
aries habitually  make  long  tours  for  preaching. 
The  motive  thereto  is  various :  to  sow  widely  thq 
gospel  seed,  to  look  up  people  who  are  known  to  be 
interested,  and  to  keep  in  touch  with  those  who 
have  been  baptized.  Frequently  weeks  are  spent 
in  this  kind  of  travel,  even  in  winter,  when  the 
mercury  coquettes  with  zero  and  when  the  mis- 
sionary never  sees  a  suggestion  of  fire  for  heating 
purposes  day  or  night. 

The  Shantung  people  hold  learning  in  high 
esteem.  They  almost  worship  the  printed  page. 
The  characters  which  look  so  repulsive  to  the  man 
of  the  West,  to  the  Chinaman  are  sacred.  Were 
they  not  wrought  out  by  Confucius?  Does  not 
their  use  mean  the  widespread  prevalence  of  his 
principles?  Our  missionaries  are  taking  advan- 
tage of  this  love  of  literature  to  circulate  the 
greatest  of  all  literature.  We  keep  a  considerable 
number  of  colporters  employed  all  the  time.  We 
are  trying  to  sow  down  the  whole  land  with  Chris- 
tian publications.  Our  China  Baptist  Publication 
Society  is  a  great  blessing  to  the  work  in  this 
respect, 


112       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

In  the  present  state  of  our  work,  there  is  a  dom- 
inant note  of  hopefulness.  Evangelism  is  decid- 
edly aggressive.  There  are  many  indications  of  a 
desire  on  the  part  of  the  Chinese  to  take  up  the 
work  for  themselves  and  push  it.  They  have  annu- 
ally from  one  to  three  associational  evangelists, 
the  present  number  being  three.  The  last  Asso- 
ciation was  held  in  April,  1909.  Nineteen  churches 
reported.  The  total  membership,  including  the 
Swedish  Baptist  work,  was  2,421.  Of  these,  581 
had  been  baptized  since  the  preceding  association, 
which,  however,  met  in  November,  1907.  With 
this  aggressive  band  of  devoted  workers,  and  with 
a  thorough  cooperation  on  the  part  of  our  Ameri- 
can churches,  we  have  a  large  hope  for  the  evan- 
gelization of  Shantung. 

The  North  China  Mission. 

1.  Main  Stations — 

(1)  Chefoo. 

(2)  Tengchow. 

(3)  Hwanghien. 

(4)  Laichowfu. 

(5)  Pingtu. 

2.  Church  Statistics— 

(1)  Churches,  17. 

(2)  Membership,  2,223. 

(3)  Church  buildings,  26. 

(4)  Out-stations,  49. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  44. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  1,770. 


The  North  China  Mission.  113 

3.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  45. 

(2)  Native,  80. 

4.  Schools — 

(1)  Day  schools,  58. 

(2)  Chefoo  Girls'  School. 

(3)  Tengchow  Girls'  Boarding  School. 

(4)  Hwanghien  Boys'  Academy. 

(5)  Carter  Girls'  School  (Hwanghien). 

(6)  Pingtu  Girls'  School. 

(7)  North  China  Institute  (Pingtu). 

(8)  Girls'  School  (Laichowfu). 

(9)  Boys'  School  (Laichowfu). 

(10)  Woman's  Training  School  (Laichowfu). 

(11)  Bush  Theological  Seminary  (Hwanghien). 

5.  Medical — 

(1)  Warren  Memorial  Hospital  (Hwanghien). 

(2)  Mayfield-Tyzzer  Hospital   (Laichowfu). 

(3)  Oxner  Memorial  Hospital  (Pingtu). 

6.  General — 

(1)  Work  opened  1860. 

(2)  Residences  for  missionaries  owned  by  the  Board, 

13. 

8 


CHAPTER  VI. 


THE  INTERIOR  CHINA  MISSION. 

A  little  child  of  five  years,  who  has  been  reason- 
ably healthy,  who  has  not  been  specially  bad,  and 
who  has  not  been  remarkably  good,  cannot  be  said 
to  have  much  history  which  is  of  interest  to  out- 
siders. It  is  intensely  interesting  to  the  parents, 
but  as  its  past  is  so  much  the  same  as  others,  under 
the  same  circumstances,  even  its  brothers  and  sis- 
ters care  little  to  hear  its  doings  rehearsed.  But 
this  much  may  be  said  for  the  child,  while  there 
has  scarcely  been  any  past,  or  history,  there  is  a 
present  which  is  daily  full  of  interest,  and  there  is 
beyond,  a  future,  possibly  most  glorious,  the 
visions  of  which  only  the  eye  of  God  has  caught  in 
its  perfectness,  the  fulfillment  of  which  he  will  be 
bringing  to  pass  as  the  child  is  able  to  bear  it. 
So  the  Interior  China  Mission  of  the  American 
Southern  Baptists  in  China  appears  to  us  who 
have  labored  in  it  during  the  five  years  of  its 
existence. 

In  different  places  and  at  different  times,  Mr. 
Sallee  and  Mr.  Lawton  felt  very  much  burdened 
for  the  great  mass  of  Chinese  in  the  far  interior. 
Not  that  our  fields  in  South,  Central,  and  North 
China  were  fully  manned,  not  that  the  work 
(ii4) 


The  Interior  China  Mission.  115 

already  begun  was  not  offering  wonderful  oppor- 
tunities for  service,  not  that  there  was  a  desire  to 
undertake  the  new  and  difficult  work,  and  not 
that  there  were  absolutely  no  missionaries  in  the 
interior,  but  for  the  fact  that  workers  in  the  inte- 
rior were  far  fewer  than  on  the  coast,  owing  prob- 
ably to  the  fact  that  the  coast  cities  have  been 
accessible  to  missionaries  for  about  one  hundred 
years.  Also  that  millions  interior  had  not  had 
the  opportunity  of  hearing  the  gospel  once  in  a 
lifetime.  Then,  too,  Honan,  as  many  provinces 
long  ago  have  done,  is  waking  up  to  the  fact  that 
she  must  have  Western  learning,  or  be  relegated  to 
the  background,  and  she  is  reaching  out  in  every 
direction  for  the  new.  If  she  is  not  given  Christ 
at  this  time,  we  must  look  for  a  Honan  not  Chris- 
tian, but  agnostic.  Sad  to  say,  she  is  not  asking 
for  true  religion,  and  to  all  appearance  does  not 
want  it,  "but  not  those  that  desire  Him  most,  but 
those  that  needed  Him  most,  appealed  most 
strongly  to  Jesus."  How  great  the  need  that  true 
Christians  live  and  teach  Christ  in  such  a  way  that 
they  must  say,  "I  want  what  you  have."  The 
greatest  and  most  compelling  reason  for  taking 
Christ  to  Interior  China  is  that  Christ  commanded 
his  disciples  to  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature.  We,  as  Southern 
Baptists,  want  to  take  Christ  to  all  China  as  much 
as  in  us  lies.  So  Mr.  Lawton  and  Mr.  Sallee  cov- 
eted that  our  Southern  Baptists  embrace  this 
opportunity  to  work  together  with  God  in  carry- 


116      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

ing  the  gospel  into  this  stronghold  of  Chinese 
heathenism. 

Mr.  Sallee  came  to  China  in  1903  and  found  Mr. 
Lawton  feeling  as  he  did  about  interior  mission 
work.  After  consultation  with  the  Central 
China  Mission,  they  started  on  an  extensive  trip 
in  the  interior  through  Hupeh,  Honan,  and  return- 
ing to  the  coast  through  Kwangtung.  They  trav- 
eled two  hundred  miles  on  foot  and  many  hundred 
by  small  native  boats.  They  were  escorted 
through  difficult  places  by  soldiers,  in  order  that 
no  harm  might  come  to  "Uncle  Sam's"  subjects  so 
far  interior.  Later  they  took  a  trip  into  Honan, 
and  were  directed  to  Chengchow,  which  is  the  very 
heart  of  the  Honan  province.  It  is  at  the  junction 
of  the  great  railroad  running  from  Peking  to  Han- 
kow, to  be  continued  to  Canton,  and  another  road 
to  run  from  the  east  coast  into  the  great  northwest, 
thus  making  the  one-time  little  city  of  Chengchow 
a  future  great  interior  city,  where  the  four  quar- 
ters of  China  meet  on  common  ground.  In  these 
five  years  since  the  coming  of  the  railroad  and  the 
missionaries,  a  strong  city  has  been  built  up  out- 
side the  west  gate.  This,  together  with  the  old 
city  and  the  densely  populated  villages,  offers  to 
our  Southern  Baptists  a  unique  vantage  ground 
from  which  to  influence  a  vast  section  of  Interior 
China. 

After  a  location  was  decided  upon,  the  next 
thing  was  to  rent  property.  A  few  years  ago  a 
foreigner  could  scarcely  enter  some  Honan  cities, 


The  Interior  China  Mission.  117 

much  less  rent  property,  but  God  seemed  to  pre- 
pare the  hearts  of  some  of  the  Mohammedans  to 
rent  property  to  our  missionaries,  and  the  task 
was  to  make  these  native  Chinese  houses  habitable 
for  Mrs.  Lawton  and  the  children.  After  a  partial 
preparation  was  made,  Mrs.  Lawton  came  from  a 
comfortable  foreign  house  to  live  in  a  native  house 
in  Chengchow.  Gladly  did  she  begin  this  new 
work,  not  thinking  of  personal  comfort,  wanting 
to  help  these  new  people  among  whom  she  had 
come  to  live. 

Besides  regular  preaching  services,  every  oppor- 
tunity was  used  to  make  the  people  understand 
the  "New  Doctrine."  As  in  the  beginning  of  the 
gospel,  the  common  people  heard  the  word  gladly. 
Strange  to  say,  among  those  who  heard  were  a 
number  of  Mohammedans.  It  is  generally  con- 
ceded that  the  Mohammedans  are  the  hardest 
people  in  the  world  to  be  reached  by  the  Gospel. 
The  Lord  seemed  to  do  a  work  in  the  hearts  of  a 
few,  and  in  a  short  while  there  were  two  Moham- 
medans asking  for  baptism.  They  received  in- 
structions for  many  months  before  they  were 
received  for  baptism.  It  was  a  happy  time  for  the 
foreigners  when  the  baptismal  waters  were  first 
troubled  in  Chengchow.  Since  this  others  have 
been  baptized,  and  a  church  of  twenty-eight  mem- 
bers has  been  organized. 

The  work  among  the  women  was  rather  slow, 
owing  to  the  fact  that  for  three  years  there  was  no 
woman  able  to  devote  her  entire  time  to  them, 


118      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

but  all  along  there  were  some  asking  the  way  and 
several  have  been  baptized.  One  of  these,  an  old 
woman,  gives  evidence  of  a  great  desire  to  see 
others  saved,  and  she  enjoys  telling  the  gospel  to 
her  lost  friends,  and  God  is  using  her  efforts.  O 
for  fifty  consecrated  Chinese  women  to  spread  the 
Gospel  News! 

There  have  been  two  Sunday  schools  kept  up  in 
Chengchow,  and  also  two  day  schools.  The  chief 
object  of  these  day  schools  is  to  teach  the  Bible, 
but  secular  books  are  also  taught.  Some  bright 
pupils  have  been  discovered  in  these  day  schools, 
and  it  is  hoped  that  we  may  be  able  to  increase  the 
number  of  the  day  schools,  making  them  feeders 
for  the  higher  schools. 

Five  regular  out-stations  have  been  opened,  and 
regular  visits  made  to  other  places,  which  seem 
ready  for  the  gospel.  These  latter  cannot  be 
opened,  as  there  are  no  available  native  evangelists 
to  station  there.  The  Interior  Mission  has  seven 
native  evangelists  engaged  in  the  work,  either  in 
the  hospital,  book-rooms,  or  out-stations.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Herring's  return  from  the  Gospel  Mission 
has  added  materially  to  the  evangelistic  force. 
Besides  doing  much  of  the  regular  preaching,  Mr. 
Herring  has  preached  in  scores  of  the  country  vil- 
lages. 

Dr.  Louthan  has  fitted  up  a  native  building  in 
Chengchow,  for  a  temporary  hospita1,  where  he 
can  accommodate  forty  patients.  He  has  opened 
three   of  the   five  out-stations  above  mentioned, 


The  Interior  China  Mission.  119 

where  he  is  regularly  preaching  and  healing.  The 
first  year  the  hospital  was  opened  he  had  about 
three  thousand  patients  and  preached  to  many 
more.  Only  God  can  tell  the  far-reaching  influ- 
ence of  a  missionary  doctor  as  he  goes  about  heal- 
ing diseases  and  ministering  to  sin-sick  souls. 

As  Chengchow  was  such  an  important  place  and 
not  occupied  by  any  other  mission,  it  was  decided 
to  settle  there  first,  but  with  the  view  of  pressing 
on  to  the  capital  city,  Kaifeng.  Feeling  that 
Kaifeng  was  the  place  to  locate  the  principal 
schools  of  the  mission,  and  that  the  time  was  ripe 
for  opening  such  work,  and  as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sallee 
had  been  set  apart  for  school  work  at  least  for 
some  years,  it  was  decided  that  they  move  to  Kai- 
feng, which  is  located  forty-five  miles  due  east 
from  Chengchow.  Not  only  the  mission  felt  that 
it  was  time  to  begin  such  work,  but  when  Dr. 
Willingham  visited  us  in  1907,  he  thought  it  a 
great  opportunity.  In  September,  1908,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Sallee  rented  a  native  house  in  Kaifeng  and 
moved  from  Chengchow,  where  their  first  friends 
among  the  Chinese  had  been  made,  and  their  first 
work  in  China  had  been  done. 

From  September  until  Chinese  New  Year  new 
friends  were  being  made ;  Mrs.  Sallee,  especially, 
was  being  looked  at  critically  by  the  natives  who 
were  not  used  to  foreign  women.  They  were  not 
quite  sure  but  that  she  would  scoop  out  their 
children's  eyes  for  medicine.  The  gospel  story 
was  being  told  to  the  multitude  for  the  first  time ; 


120      ^southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

and  arrangements  being  made  for  opening  the 
schools. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  Chinese  New  Year  the 
Academy  was  opened  with  nearly  thirty  boys  in 
attendance.  A  small  school  for  girls  was  opened 
in  the  crowded  quarters  of  Mrs.  Sallee's  own  court. 
Fear  that  the  foreigner  would  eat  the  children 
keeps  many  girls  out  of  the  Christian  schools. 
This  must  be  lived  down.  Our  girls'  schools  must 
look  to  the  Christians  of  the  homeland  for  support 
until  Honan  wakes  to  the  fact  that  her  daughters 
deserve  as  much  and  as  good  education  as  her  sons, 
and  that  there  is  no  more  likelihood  of  the  for- 
eigner eating  girls  than  boys.  We  were  success- 
ful in  renting  good  quarters  for  the  boys'  school, 
which  afforded  ample  room.  The  women  of  Texas 
agreed  to  raise  $3,000.00  for  the  erection  of  the 
first  girls'  school  for  the  Interior  China  Mission, 
to  be  known  as  the  "Annie  Jenkins  Bailee  School 
for  Girls."  The  Board  granted  permission,  and 
half  the  money  is  already  in  the  treasury  of  the 
Interior  Mission,  the  remainder  will  be  quickly 
coming,  and  we  hope  the  school  will  be  built  soon. 

The  Board  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention 
owns  ten  acres  of  land  outside  of  Chengchow  city, 
upon  which  two  comfortable  foreign  houses 
have  been  built,  a  hospital  compound,  upon 
which  the  building  is  to  be  erected  very  soon; 
land  for  three  more  foreign  residences,  together 
with  Mary  Lawton  Memorial  Woman's  Home, 
given  by  the  Lawton  brothers. 


The  Interior  China  Mission.  121 

A  field  of  ripened  grain  wasting  and  rotting,  be- 
cause the  gleaner  delays  his  coming,  attracts  every- 
one's pity,  if  not  sympathy ;  but  Honan  does  not 
present  such  a  scene;  no,  would  that  it  did! 
How  strongly  it  would  appeal  to  the  multitude  for 
help,  but  it  is  like  a  field  of  flint.  The  workman 
picks  away  through  the  long  hours  of  the  day,  and 
when  night  comes  how  much  has  he  accomplished  ? 
The  second  day?  the  third?  one  year?  two? 
Is  the  pick  dull?  Is  there  some  other  method? 
The  chips  are  very  few.  Why  is  it?  Because  it 
is  flint.  We  have  kept  back  the  gospel  so  long 
that  these  flinty  hearts  must  bear  the  gospel  many, 
many  times  before  it  seems  to  make  any  impres- 
sion. To  hear  that  there  is  a  true  God  who  sees 
and  cares  is  all  so  mysterious  that  it  must  be  told 
over  and  over  until  it  can  begin  to  enter  into  their 
thoughts  and  become  a  part  of  their  very  beings. 
Some  hear  once,  some  return  to  hear  again,  but 
many  never  get  beyond  the  first  truths.  Today  we 
need  men  and  women  who  are  willing  to  tell  over 
and  again  the  same  Old  Story,  but  in  His  power 
to  tell  it  with  newness  and  vigor. 

There  are  four  men  and  four  women  in  the  Inte- 
rior China  Mission.  Miss  Mclntyre,  who  has  been 
out  only  a  few  months,  is  devoting  her  time  to  the 
study  of  the  language,  and  rightly  so.  Mrs.  Her- 
ring a,nd  Mrs.  Lawton  have  interesting  families  of 
six  children  each.  God  has  given  them  a  great 
work  to  do  for  Him  in  rearing  these  in  a  special 
way  for  him.      But  their  hearts  are  fully  in  the 


122      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

work,  and  they  find  many  ways  of  helping  the 
Chinese,  both  by  their  examples  in  the  home  and 
by  leading  women's  and  children's  meetings  when 
possible.  This  leaves  only  five  to  give  their  entire 
time  to  the  millions  who  are  depending  upon  them 
for  Gospel  teaching. 

See  a  tract  of  land  about  the  size  of  the  State  of 
Missouri,  containing  the  population  of  Maryland, 
Virginia,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  North  Carolina, 
South  Carolina,  Florida,  Alabama,  Mississippi, 
Louisiana,  and  Texas,  and  you  will  be  able  to  gain 
some  conception  of  Honan  and  her  dense  popula- 
tion of  22,000,000  people,  then  think  of  three  or 
four  families  as  the  representatives  of  our  South- 
ern Baptist  Convention.  What  should  our  people 
do  about  this? 

In  one  of  the  great  power  houses  which  controls 
the  water  supply  of  Chicago  there  are  two  tremen- 
dous wheels,  twelve  or  fourteen  feet  in  diameter. 
These  wheels  almost  make  one  dizzy  with  their 
constant  whiz  and  with  the  number  of  other  wheels 
set  in  motion  by  them.  Underneath  all  this  great 
machinery  there  is  a  man  hidden  away,  a  man 
greasy  and  dirty,  but  from  this  place,  all  unno- 
ticed, he  commands  every  part  of  this  great  ma- 
chinery. So  in  Honan,  there  must  be  not  only  a 
man  underneath,  but  there  must  be  many  men 
and  women  who  are  willing  to  hide  themselves 
away  in  the  dark  interior  and  labor  unseen  and 
unsung  with  one  hand  holding  to  the  poor  heathen 
and  the  other  laying  hold  to  the  Throne  of  Power. 


The  Interior  China  Mission.  123 

"For  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it,  but 
whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake  and  the 
gospel's,  the  same  shall  save  it." 

The  Interior  China  Mission. 

1.  Main  Stations — 

(1)  Chengchow. 

(2)  Kaifeng. 

2.  Church  Statistics— 

(1)  Churches,  1. 

(2)  Members,  28. 

(3)  Out-stations,  5. 

(4)  Sunday  schools,  2. 

(5)  Sunday  school  scholars,  75. 

3.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  8. 

(2)  Native,  9. 

4.  Schools — 

(1)  Day  schools,  3. 

(2)  Boys'  School  (Kaifeng). 

(3)  Annie  Jenkins  Sallee  School  for  Girls  (Kaifeng). 

5.  Medical — Dispensary  at  Chengchow. 

6.  General — 

(1)  Work  opened  in  1904. 

(2)  Residences  of  missionaries  owned  by  the  Board,  2. 

(3)  Mary   Lawton  Memorial   Woman's  Home    (Chen- 

chow). 


CHAPTER  VII. 


THE  AFRICAN  MISSION. 


Country  and  People. 

Southern  Baptist  mission  work  is  conducted 
among  the  Yoruba  tribes  in  Nigeria,  West  Coast 
of  Africa.  Being  in  the  tropics,  the  climate  is 
always  warm,  but  nicely  tempered  by  sea  breezes. 
In  January  and  February,  however,  there  is  a 
dry,  cool  wind,  called  "Harmattan,"  blowing  from 
the  north,  filling  the  air  with  a  kind  of  mist,  or 
dust,  some  say,  from  the  desert,  which  is  very  dis- 
agreeable, and  to  the  natives,  cold.  The  usual 
range  of  temperature  is  between  70  and  95  de- 
grees. 

In  the  main  a  high  and  rolling  country,  with 
few  swamps,  except  on  the  coast,  one  would  ex- 
pect health,  yet  along  with  Sierra  Leone,  it  has 
been  long  known  as  the  white  man's  grave.  The 
percentage  of  mortality  and  break-downs  is  still 
very  great. 

The  people  are  pure  negroes,  but  as  negroes  they 
are  a  fine-looking  people.  They  are  all  shades  of 
black,  from  exceedingly  black  to  quite  light  color, 
mahogany  color,  yellow,  and  so  on.     There  are 

(124) 


The  African  Mission. 


125 


c^-jU 


A   .  F     R     I    c 


5AKMMGERIA 

IBACJAM  ^jj 

J  .  abeoi 
'^LAeosNJ 

■B0N050    ,r 

77* 


^. 


126      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

very  few  mixed  with  white  blood,  except  on  the 
coast,  and  in  the  railroad  towns.  Possibly  much 
of  the  light  color  we  see  among  the  pure  negroes 
is  of  Arabian  origin,  but  it  is  very  ancient.  Much 
more  of  it  is  seen  among  some  interior  tribes,  as 
among  the  Fulahs.  Many  people  think  that  the 
pure  negro  is  a  very  ugly  fellow,  and  that  our 
American  negro  is  a  great  improvement  on  the 
pure  African  negro.  But  this  is  a  mistake.  If 
there  is  a  difference,  the  African  negro  is  the 
better  looking  of  the  two.  They  are  frequently 
quite  delicate  of  form  and  feature,  and  are  a  nice 
looking  people,  with,  of  course,  the  negro  features. 
The  Brazil  negroes  are  called  Portuguese,  and 
speak  the  Portuguese  language  as  well  as  the 
Yoruba. 

It  is  estimated  that  there  are  about  four  million 
people  speaking  the  Yoruba  language.  They  live 
in  villages,  town,  and  cities.  There  are  cities 
from  ten  thousand  up  to  two  hundred  thousand 
inhabitants.  But  they  are  mere  collections  of 
native  houses,  and  not  streets  lined  with  business 
houses.  Business  is  transacted  in  large  markets 
held  in  the  open  or  under  trees  and  booths.  Then 
there  are  large  markets  held  at  certain  places 
every  five  or  seven  days,  where  people  from  all 
parts  of  the  country  gather  to  do  business.  Some 
come  several  hundred  miles  to  these  markets, 
making  one  or  two  trips  a  year.  Some  of  these 
markets  are  cities  of  booths,  uninhabited  except 


The  African  Mission.  127 

on  market  days.  Goods  from  every  part  of  the 
world  may  be  found  in  these  markets. 

The  houses  are  made  of  clay  built  into  the  walls 
while  soft,  and  allowed  to  dry  in  layers.  The 
walls  are  about  seven  or  eight  feet  high,  and  the 
rooms  seven  or  eight  feet  square.  A  series  of 
these  rooms  is  built  around  an  open  court,  the 
rooms  opening  into  a  piazza  which  opens  into  the 
court.  The  rooms  and  piazza  are  covered  with 
a  high,  steep  roof  of  poles  and  grass.  There  are 
no  windows,  and  only  small  doors.  The  floor  is 
of  beaten  earth,  which  is  washed  once  a  week  with 
a  native  composition  which  keeps  it  hard  and 
smooth.  Their  only  furniture  is  grass  mats  and 
skins  of  animals,  on  which  they  sit  or  sleep. 
Sometimes  they  have  small  stools,  not  to  mention 
gin  boxes  and  the  like.  In  these  days  the  lead- 
ing chiefs  have  a  few  chairs  which  are  furnished 
to  white  men  who  call  upon  them. 

They  are  an  industrial  people,  working  at  farm- 
ing and  many  trades.  There  are  cloth  weavers, 
mat,  basket,  pottery  makers,  cloth  dyers,  leather 
workers,  gourd  carvers,  blacksmiths,  wood  work- 
ers (making  hollowware,  doors,  carved  posts, 
tool  handles,  etc.),  tailors,  builders  (building 
house  walls  is  a  trade),  and  traders,  who  make 
trading  expeditions  to  their  large  markets  for 
trade.  Most  of  their  work  is  crude,  but  it  an- 
swers their  purposes.  Nearly  every  one  does 
some  farming,  whatever  else  he  does.  Their  ideas 
of  work  suitable  for  men  or  women  are  not  so  far 


128      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

different  from  our  own,  except  that  women  are 
burden  bearers.  Men  carry  burdens,  too,  and 
heavier  ones  than  women  can  carry  very  often, 
but  if  there  is  but  one  load  between  a  woman  and 
man,  the  woman  would  expect  to  carry  it,  though 
often  the  man  would  take  his  turn. 

In  honor,  the  man  is  always  preferred,  and  yet 
they  show  great  respect  for  their  women,  espe- 
cially the  younger  men  for  the  older  women,  and 
the  women  exercise  great  influence.  Showing  re- 
spect for  seniority  runs  all  through  the  family 
and  social  life  of  the  people.  All  sewing  and 
nearly  all  weaving  is  done  by  men,  though  women 
make  one  kind  of  cloth.  Most  of  the  selling  in 
the  markets,  but  not  all,  is  done  by  women.  With 
few  exceptions,  the  men  do  the  farming,  but  the 
women  help  to  gather  the  harvest  and  carry  it  to 
town.  Women  are  the  potters,  and  they  do  the 
cloth  coloring.  Women  are  seldom  idle,  partly 
because  the  most  of  their  work  is  at  home.  Men 
are  often  idle,  partly  because  when  at  home  in 
town  they  are  absent  from  their  work,  and  have 
nothing  special  to  do. 

Everything,  including  cats  and  dogs  and  field 
rats,  is  used  for  food.  All  food  except  fruits  is 
cooked,  and  their  cooking  is  quite  complicated 
and  extensive. 

They  are  pagans,  worshipping  a  great  many 
idols,  including  the  devil.  Not  very  many  are 
represented  by  images.  A  great  many  natural 
objects,  such  as  trees,  rocks,  rivers,  snakes,  etc., 


;  ;  ;    ::.:.; 


smm^ Mm,,.- 


'..:,,._  o  m^M^:£jMz  -rick-- 


Ml  A 


Training  School  at  Ogbomoso  C.  E.  smith 

Drummers  in  Africa 
Church  at  Lagos  Dr.  Green  in  Dispensary 


The  African  Mission.  129 

are  worshiped,  as  containing  the  spirit  of  the 
god  or  of  some  person  long  dead.  They  believe 
in  multitudes  of  spirits,  good  and  bad,  whose 
favor  must  be  obtained  or  anger  placated  by 
prayer  and  sacrifice.  They  also  often  worship  the 
spirts  of  their  ancestors.  The  rulers,  especially, 
once  a  year  offer  sacrifice  at  the  graves  of  all  their 
predecessors.  They  will  tell  us  that  the  visible 
object  worshiped  is  so  worshiped  only  as  contain- 
ing the  spirit  of  the  god  or  person,  and  they  use 
a  different  name  for  the  visible  object  and  the 
spirit,  but  these  are  often  confounded,  and  it  is 
doubtful  if  the  distinction  is  always  made  in 
their  thought.  Their  worship  consists  in  placing 
blood,  some  unused  portions  of  the  animal,  food 
and  money  (a  small  shell)  upon  the  object  wor- 
shiped or  place  of  worship,  and  in  genuflections 
and  forms  of  words  and  sometimes  dancing.  They 
observe  also  annual  feasts  to  individual  gods. 

The  country  is  under  English  rule,  but,  with 
few  exceptions,  the  native  rulers  are  left  in  con- 
trol with  certain  limitations,  and  always  subject 
to  the  English  officers. 

A  railroad  is  now  built  from  Lagos  to  Ilorin. 
about  300  miles,  and  will,  some  time,  be  extended 
to  the  far  interior.  Under  English  direction, 
roads  have  been  built  in  many  parts  of  the  coun- 
try, and  on  some  of  these  there  is  an  automobile 
service.  All  this  is  in  great  contrast  to  bush 
paths,  absence  of  all  convenience,  wars,  dangers 
to  life  and  property  of  twenty-five  years  ago. 

9 


130       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 
Our  Work  Previous  to  1875. 

Our  first  work  in  Africa  was  in  Liberia,  1,000 
miles  west  of  the  Yoruba  country,  and  was  carried 
on  by  colored  missionaries. 

In  1821  Lott  Carey  and  Colin  Teague,  of  Kicii- 
mond,  Va.,  were  sent  as  missionaries  to  the  negro 
colonists  in  Liberia  by  the  Old  Triennial  Conven- 
tion, and  began  their  work  in  Monrovia,  West 
Africa.  The  work  from  the  very  first  showed 
great  prosperity.  Carey  proved  himself  to  be 
a  great  leader,  and  the  Mission  to  Africa  was  a 
most  gratifying  success. 

As  soon  as  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention 
was  organized  the  eyes  of  the  Foreign  Mission 
Board  were  turned  toward  Africa.  A  report 
adopted  at  the  meeting  of  the  Southern  Baptist 
Convention  in  1846,  in  Bichmond,  Va.,  summa- 
rized the  progress  already  made. 

"Twenty-five  years  ago  a  little  church  of  only 
seven  members,  with  Lott  Carey  as  pastor,  was 
organized  in  an  upper  room  of  a  private  dwelling 
in  this  city.  That  church  is  now  the  first  Baptist 
Church  of  Monrovia.  It  has  become  the  mother 
of  some  seven  to  ten  churches,  and  also  of  the 
Providence  Baptist  Association  of  Liberia.  Since 
that  period,  hundreds  of  colored  Baptists  have 
emigrated  from  this  country,  and  settled  perma- 
nently in  the  land  of  their  forefathers.  They  will 
gladly  cooperate  with  the  Board  of  this  Conven- 
tion, and  particularly  with  the  vast  numbers  of 


The  African  Mission.  131 

their  colored  brethren  in  the  Southern  States,  in 
spreading  the  gospel  over  that  benighted  country." 

In  the  fall  of  this  same  year  the  Eev.  John  Day 
and  Eev.  A.  L.  Jones  were  appointed  as  mission- 
aries to  Liberia. 

Finally,  after  much  correspondence,  in  185G 
the  Northern  Board  transferred  its  Mission  in 
Liberia  to  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention,  and 
Southern  Baptists  watched  with  peculiar  interest 
the  progress  of  their  missionary  endeavors  in  the 
"dark  continent."  The  work  grew  so  rapidly  that 
in  1861  there  wTere  twenty-four  churches  with  a 
membership  of  1,258.  It  had  proved  to  be  one  of 
the  most  fruitful  fields  of  the  Convention. 

"In  these  fields,"  said  one  Board  report,  "more 
than  a  thousand  believers  have  been  baptized  by 
our  missionaries.  For  the  number  of  stations 
and  the  extent  of  the  field,  these  missions  have 
been  less  expensive,  and  in  the  number  of  acces- 
sions, more  remunerative,  than  any  under  our 
control." 

Then  the  war  came  on,  and  the  Board  was 
forced  to  withdraw  its  support,  and  the  native 
churches  were  thrown  upon  their  own  resources. 
The  missionaries  and  other  leaders  heroically  de- 
termined to  keep  up  the  work  as  far  as  possible, 
even  though  they  had  no  support  from  the  Board. 
Too  much  cannot  be  said  of  the  way  these  mis- 
sionaries sacrificed  during  that  trying  time,  and 
even  after  the  war,  when  the  Board  was  so  im- 


132      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

poverished  that  it  could  not  send  help  to  these 
needy  missionaries,  they  still  held  on. 

In  1871  the  Board  resumed  the  work  in  Africa, 
but  the  lack  of  funds  made  it  impossible  to  carry 
forward  the  work  in  a  very  adequate  way.  Fin- 
ally, in  1875,  because  the  Board  thought  that  it 
was  possible  to  enter  the  central  portion  of  Africa 
more  advantageously  through  the  Yoruba  coun- 
try, the  work  in  Liberia  was  abandoned,  and  thus 
was  closed  sadly  a  brilliant  chapter  in  our  mis- 
sionary history. 

About  1850  T.  J.  Bowen  and  Henry  Goodale 
entered  Liberia  with  a  view  to  starting  work  in 
the  far  interior,  perhaps  back  of  Yoruba  land. 
While  in  the  interior  of  Liberia  Goodale  died, 
and  Bowen  returned  to  the  coast  and  sailed  to 
Badagri,  the  then  English  port  of  the  Yoruba 
country.  Bowen  was  very  anxious  to  get  to  the 
far  interior  back  of  the  Yoruba  country,  where 
he  believed  there  were  healthy  highlands.  After 
a  great  many  hardships  and  difficulties,  and  be- 
ing prevented  by  native  chiefs  from  getting  be- 
yond the  Yoruba  country,  he  returned  to  America 
for  more  missionaries.  Beaching  Africa  again, 
he  established  work  at  Ijaiye,  Ogbomoso,  and 
later  at  Oyo,  all  interior  cities  of  the  Yoruba 
country,  and  where  there  were  no  others  working. 
Needing  communication  with  Lagos,  on  the  coast, 
the  missionaries  later  occupied  Abeokuta,  which 
was  already  occupied  by  others.  In  the  meantime, 
about    1850,    the    English    had    interfered    in    a 


The  African  Mission.  133 

native  quarrel  in  Lagos,  putting  an  anti-slave 
trade  claimant  on  the  throne,  and  after  some 
years,  Lagos  became  English  headquarters.  Our 
work  in  the  Yoruba  country  really  began  with 
the  settlement  of  Brethren  Bowen  and  co-laborers 
.  at  Ijaiye  in  1854.  The  time  previous  to  this  had 
been  spent  by  Bowen  in  finding  out  where  we 
could  work,  and  in  the  return  home  for  mission- 
aries. Ijaiye  was  one  of  the  largest  and  most  im- 
portant towns  of  the  country,  and  was  the  home 
of  the  then  chief  military  officer  of  the  whole 
country.  Work  was  opened  in  Ogbomoso  in  1855. 
This  also  was  one  of  the  larger  cities  of  the  coun- 
try. Soon  after  1855  we  had  eight  men  and  five 
women  on  the  field.  But  West  Africa  was  to 
prove  true  to  its  reputation  as  the  white  man's 
grave,  for  very  soon  six  of  these  were  in  African 
graves,  and  several  had  been  compelled  to  return 
home.  Yet  the  work  was  progressing.  Cheap 
mission  houses  and  chapels  were  built  at  our 
several  stations,  and  work  was  being  done  in  three 
cities  and  four  stations. 

In  1864  our  colored  missionary,  Harden,  who 
had  been  removed  from  our  Liberian  Mission  and 
stationed  at  Lagos,  died.  Mrs.  Keid  had  died  at 
Ogbomoso,  Mrs.  Philips  at  Ijaiye,  and  several 
others  at  other  points. 

In  1860-61  war  against  Ijaiye  by  the  rest  of 
the  Yoruba  country,  led  by  the  large  city  of  Iba- 
dan  (200,000  inhabitants),  resulted  in  the  de- 
struction of  the  city,  the  killing  or  capture  of 


134      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

large  numbers  of  its  inhabitants,  and  the  disper= 
sion  of  the  rest. 

Ten  thousand  or  more  of  these  settled  in  Abeo- 
kuta, which  was  not  a  Yoruba  city,  and  it  is 
among  these  in  that  city  our  chief  work  was  car- 
ried on  for  many  years.  Thus  our  main  work 
was  destroyed.  Brother  Stone,  who  had  been 
captured  by  the  Ibadans  in  the  beginning  of  the 
war,  and  had  made  his  escape,  brought  the  na- 
tive children  of  the  mission  to  Abeokuta,  where 
Philips  was  already  at  work.  During  this  time, 
Reid,  being  cut  off  from  all  communication  from 
the  outside,  was  shut  up  alone  in  Oyo  for  twenty- 
seven  months,  having  to  live  and  dress  as  do  the 
natives.  I  have  heard  some  of  the  native  Chris- 
tians, who  were  children  then,  tell  of  Reid's  sur- 
prising appearance  when  he  finally  got  away  and 
reached  Abeokuta.  Clark  had  been  located  at 
Ogbomoso,  but  in  1859-60  he  gave  up  the  work. 

About  1865  a  great  persecution  broke  out  in 
Abeokuta,  in  which  all  mission  property  and  prop- 
erty of  the  Christians  was  destroyed,  or  stolen, 
and  the  Christians  and  missionaries  were  driven 
out  and  greatly  mistreated.  Philips  was  one  of 
these.  All  escaped  to  Lagos,  the  missionaries  be- 
ing taken  by  force  by  the  natives,  and  greatly 
persecuted  on  the  way.  This  practically  des- 
troyed all  our  work  except  at  Lagos,  though  there 
were  still  a  few  unbaptized  converts  at  Ogbomoso 
and  Abeokuta.  Clark  had  left  a  very  good  house, 
nicely  furnished  and  a  fine  case  of  books  at  Ogbo- 


The  African  Mission.  135 

moso,  which  were  nearly  all  taken  by  the  natives. 
Even  the  marble  slab  at  Mrs.  Keid's  grave  was 
broken  up,  taken  away  and  sold  for  grinding 
stones.  In  1868  Philips  gave  up  the  work,  and  in 
1869  Stone's  health  completely  failed  so  that  he 
was  compelled  to  retire.  Thus  our  work  had 
practically  ceased  in  1869  except  the  few  converts 
left  principally  in  Lagos.  These,  M.  L.  Stone,  a 
boy  trained  by  missionary  Stone,  whose  name  he 
took,  held  together  until  we  again  had  a  mission- 
ary on  the  field. 

The  Mission  After  1875. 

A  little  before  1875  God  moved  upon  the  heart 
of  W.  J.  David,  of  Meridian,  Miss.,  to  offer  him 
self  for  our  work.  He  was  born  in  1850,  and 
did  a  great  work  in  Africa  for  fourteen  years. 
He  was  really  the  founder  of  our  present 
work,  having  no  advantage  over  the  mission- 
aries beginning  a  new  work,  except  that 
he  found  a  few  converts,  and  a  young  man 
reafly  at  hand  to  help  him.  David  and  Colley 
(a  colored  man  sent  by  the  colored  churches) 
sailed  in  January,  1875,  for  West  Africa.  By 
direction  of  the  Board,  David  closed  up  our  work 
in  Liberia,  and  before  the  close  of  the  year  he  and 
Oolley  had  begun  to  re-open  our  work  in  the 
Yoruba  country.  David  found  a  young  carpenter, 
M.  L.  Stone,  preaching  to  the  converts  in  Lagos, 
and  working  at  his  trade  for  a  living.  David  em- 
ployed him  as  a  mission  worker,  and  he  has  been 


136       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

the  very  first  of  our  native  preachers  ever  since. 
He  is  today  the  pastor  of  the  large  self-supporting 
church  at  Lagos. 

As  soon  as  possible  David  visited  Abeokuta  and 
Ogbomoso,  reorganizing  the  work.  Until  then, 
since  the  persecution  above  mentioned,  white  men 
had  not  been  allowed  to  enter  Abeokuta,  and 
traveling  was  still  dangerous.  David  found  a  few 
converts  at  each  place  and  baptized  a  number, 
whom  he  organized  into  churches.  Later  he  placed 
Stone  in  charge  at  Ogbomoso.  Most  of  the  con- 
verts he  found  at  Abeokuta  proved  worthless,  but 
those  at  Ogbomoso  had  kept  up  services  all  those 
years  under  a  large  tree  in  the  mission  yard,  and 
became  the  foundation  of  our  highly  successful 
work  there.  A  large  proportion  of  our  native 
workers  have  come  from  the  Ogbomoso  church. 

Colley,  our  colored  missionary,  retired  from  the 
work  in  1879.  In  the  meantime  David  had  re- 
turned home  in  broken  health.  Having  recovered 
his  health  and  married,  he  and  Mrs.  David  re- 
turned to  Africa  in  1879. 

In  1882  P.  A.  Eubank,  a  graduate  of  the  Semi- 
nary at  Louisville,  and  Mrs.  Eubank  sailed  for 
Africa.  In  their  first  year  they  had  a  very 
serious  time  with  the  African  fever.  They  under- 
took to  settle  at  Abeokuta,  and  did  for  a  time, 
but  so  uncomfortable  was  the  house,  and  so  un- 
sanitary the  surroundings,  their  health  became 
impaired,  and  they  were  compelled  to  return  to 
Lagos.     Later,   in  1884,  when  the  Davids  were 


The  African  Mission.  137 

compelled  to  return  home  to  recuperate  health, 
the  Eubanks  were  needed  to  take  charge  in  Lagos. 
In  those  days  it  was  necessary  that  we  have  a 
missionary  located  at  Lagos.    It  is  not  so  now. 

In  October,  1884,  W.  W.  Harvey  and  wife,  S. 
M.  Cook,  and  C.  E.  Smith  reached  Lagos  Decem- 
ber 15,  two  months  after  sailing  from  New  York. 

We  were  all  put  to  work  at  once  preaching,  but 
through  interpreters.  Nearly  all  missionaries 
then  of  all  societies  preached  through  interpre- 
ters. Most  of  them  had  not  been  in  the  work  long 
enough  to  use  the  language  in  public  speech. 

The  Davids  returned  to  Africa  in  March,  1885, 
in  such  an  exceedingly  small  sailing  ship  that  it 
was  a  wonder  to  me  they  could  cross  the  ocean  in 
it.  The  ship  carried  materials  for  the  new  church 
then  being  built  in  Lagos.  It  had  no  other  cargo, 
so  it  came  straight  to  Lagos.  Soon  after  this  the 
Harveys  and  the  writer  located  at  Abeokuta; 
Cook,  the  Davids,  and  Eubanks  remaining  in 
Lagos.  The  writer  was  very  much  troubled  with 
fever  for  the  first  year,  but  fared  better  the  rest 
of  his  stay  in  Africa.  Harvey  had  splendid  health 
the  first  year,  then  his  health  gave  way,  and  after 
struggling  on  for  awhile,  he  was  compelled  to  re- 
turn to  America,  and  after  a  few  years  he  died 
from  the  effects  of  the  African  climate.  After  a 
little  more  than  a  year,  Cook  returned  home,  but 
returned  to  Africa  several  times  to  look  after  the 
mission  work  which  he  carried  on  independently. 
On  a  recent  visit  he  died  of  the  dreaded  black  water 


138      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

fever  in  Ibadan,  where  a  church  house  has  been 
built  to  his  memory. 

Near  the  end  of  1885,  there  being  a  little  disturb- 
ance in  our  church  at  Ogbomoso,  and  it  having 
been  a  long  time  since  the  station  had  received  a 
visit  from  a  missionary,  I  made  that  city  a  visit. 
I  had  to  pay  a  chief  at  Abeokuta  |25.00  in  goods 
to  be  allowed  to  travel  twenty-five  miles  of  the 
journey  and  for  protection.  The  rest  of  the  two 
hundred  miles  was  free,  except  the  paying  of  tolls 
at  various  points.  At  the  little  town  of  Eruwa, 
surrounded  by  mountains,  I  was  met  by  Chris- 
tians from  Ogbomoso  who  had  come  to  guide  me 
and  carry  my  loads.  I  shall  never  forget  the 
cordial  welcome  they  gave  me,  saying  many  times, 
"Baraka,"  "Baraka,"  which  means  peace. 

On  the  morning  of  the  fourth  day,  after  meet- 
ing these  friends,  and  six  days  after  leaving  Abe- 
okuta, I  reached  Ogbomoso,  where  our  native 
brother,  Lewis  O.  Fadipe,  was  in  charge,  and  who 
gave  me  a  hearty  welcome.  I  had  had  a  hard 
journey,  and  had  been  sick  part  of  the  time,  and 
the  night  before  I  had  slept  in  a  hut  where  the 
water  from  a  hard  rain  poured  into  one  corner 
of  the  room  by  buckets  full.  Before  I  left 
Ogbomoso,  I  had  a  hard  siege  of  fever.  I  found 
at  Ogbomoso  a  little  church  of  twenty  members. 
I  preached  in  the  little  thatched  roof,  mud  wall 
chapel.  It  was  crowded  to  suffocation,  and  crowds 
stood  outside  at  the  windows  and  doors.  They 
were  not  used  to  the  white  man  then,  most  of 


The  African  Mission.  139 

them  having  never  seen  one.  Wherever  I  went 
crowds  were  at  my  heels.  I  could  not  eat  in 
private,  and  scarcely  sleep  in  private  for  the 
crowds  would  not  leave  me.  Times  have  quite 
changed  now,  and  a  white  man  is  scarcely  noticed. 
I  remained  one  month  and  baptized  twelve  con- 
verts. 

In  June,  1885,  Mrs.  David  was  taken  ill,  and  in 
an  effort  to  save  her  life,  Brother  David  started 
home  with  her.  In  a  few  days  she  fell  asleep  in 
Jesus,  and  her  remains  were  buried  in  the  ocean 
off  the  "Gold  Coast."  Her  last  words  to  the 
stricken  husband  were,  "Don't  give  up  Africa." 
Brother  David  proceeded  to  America,  bringing  his 
little  girl,  Nettie,  and  the  babe  a  few  weeks  old. 
Every  one  loved  Mrs.  David.  Hers  was  one  of 
the  most  beautiful  Christian  characters. 

In  March,  1886,  Miss  Cynthia  Elba  Morris,  of 
St.  Genevieve  County,  Mo.,  who  had  taken  lectures 
at  the  Seminary  in  Louisville  two  sessions,  came 
to  Africa,  and  was  married  to  the  writer. 

While  at  home,  David  married  and  returned 
with  his  bride  to  Africa.  Soon  afterward  my 
wife  and  I  located  at  Abeokuta,  where  we  labored 
for  two  years,  building  a  much  needed  church 
house,  establishing  a  day  school,  and  making  con- 
siderable progress  in  the  work.  It  was  soon  after 
locating  here,  and  twenty  months  after  entering 
the  country,  that  I  began  to  preach  in  the  native 
tongue. 

In  1887  the  condition  of  our  work  in  Ogbomoso 


140       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

was  such  as  to  require  a  missionary  to  be  located 
there,  and  I  was  asked  to  go.  Though  there  was 
a  war  of  many  years  standing  going  on,  and  the 
country  was  full  of  war  parties  and  robbers,  we 
undertook  the  journey.  There  was  no  decent 
house  to  live  in,  and  the  only  fairly  decent  room 
we  had  was  so  small  that  our  bed,  a  large  English 
one,  took  up  about  four-fifths  of  the  space.  Grass 
roof,  clay  walls  and  floor,  two  small  openings  for 
windows,  with  wooden  shutters,  and  a  clay  and 
stick  ceiling  made  up  our  palace.  Here  my  wife 
had  a  long  siege  of  fever.  And  to  add  to  our  har- 
rowing experiences,  people  were  brought  to  us, 
the  first  ones  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  cut  to 
pieces  by  war,  kidnapping  and  robber  parties,  for 
us  to  dress  their  wounds.  To  add  to  all  our  other 
difficulties  one  of  our  members  made  trouble  with 
our  native  evangelist  and  led  three-fourths  of  the 
members  away.  They  did  not  return  for  over  a 
year. 

Not  long  before  this  a  faction  had  occurred  in 
the  Lagos  church  which  took  away  three-fourths 
of  the  members  there.  These  were  dark  times, 
but  all  has  worked  out  to  the  furtherance  of  the 
cause.  We  had  scarcely  settled  at  Ogbomoso  and 
the  Eubanks  had  not  yet  gone  to  Abeokuta,  where 
they  expected  to  locate,  when  the  Davids  broke 
down  and  were  compelled  to  return  home.  The 
Eubanks  had  to  remain  in  Lagos,  and  Abeokuta 
was  again  left  alone.    We  had  so  few  trained  na- 


The  African  Mission.  141 

tive  workers  then  that  it  was  far  worse  for  these 
places  to  be  left  without  a  missionary  than  now. 

In  July,  1888,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.  C.  Newton  and 
three  of  their  children  (Miss  Newton  as  a  mis- 
sionary), and  W.  T.  Lumbley  and  wife  reached 
Lagos.  My  wife  and  I  went  to  Lagos  to  meet 
them,  and  to  bring  the  Lumbleys  with  us  to  Ogbo- 
moso.  Some  of  the  chiefs  gave  us  much  trouble 
on  the  way  down,  and  we  had  to  pay  considerable 
money  to  be  allowed  to  pass.  While  in  Lagos 
making  my  arrangements  to  return,  my  wife  was 
suddenly  stricken  with  "blackwater"  fever,  and 
died  the  third  day.  Soon  after  I  started  back  to 
Ogbomoso  by  way  of  Abeokuta,  taking  the  Lum- 
bleys with  me.  On  reaching  Abeokuta  the  chiefs 
would  not  allow  us  to  pass  beyond,  though  they 
had  promised  me  we  could  do  so,  and  I  had  paid 
them  for  the  privilege.  So,  leaving  the  Lumbleys 
with  the  Eubanks  at  Abeokuta,  I  returned  to 
Lagos  and  started  back  by  the  route  I  had  come 
down.  Again  I  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble  with 
the  chiefs,  and  had  to  pay  for  the  privilege  of 
passing.  Finally  I  reached  Ogbomoso  and  en- 
tered my  home,  a  home  full  of  sad  reminders. 

I  labored  on  alone  until  I  was  taken  danger- 
ously ill.  No  one  but  natives  were  near  me,  and 
all  communication  practically  cut  off  by  the  wars. 
After  a  long  time,  one  of  my  notes  passing  from 
hand  to  hand,  reached  Eubank  at  Abeokuta,  and 
by  paying  $25.00  for  the  privilege  he  was  allowed 
to  pass  under  special  restrictions,  and  came  to 


142      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

me.  In  the  meantime,  Brother  Pinnock,  then 
with  the  Wesleyans  at  Ibadan,  seventy  miles  from 
me,  had  come  and  spent  a  week  with  me.  I  was 
now  in  broken  health,  after  five  years  in  Africa, 
and  was  ordered  home. 

I  spent  eighteen  months  at  home,  and  before 
returning  (1891)  was  married  to  Miss  Lucy  Shen- 
stone.  About  1891  the  Eubanks  returned  home, 
and  having  no  home  in  which  to  place  their  child, 
they  resigned  the  work.  In  1892  the  Newtons 
took  a  vacation  in  America,  and  after  returning 
to  Africa,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newton  fell  victims  to 
the  blackwater  fever,  Brother  Newton  dying  at 
sea  in  the  beginning  of  1903.  A  few  years  after- 
ward, Miss  Newton,  then  Mrs.  SutcHffe,  died  in 
Lagos  of  the  same  fever. 

Some  time  in  1891  S.  G.  Pinnock  and  wife  came 
to  us  from  the  Wesleyans,  and  located  in  Oyo, 
Keid's  old  field. 

I  had  always  tried  to  do  some  training  work, 
but  a  few  years  ago  I  undertook  a  theological 
training  school  at  my  own  expense.  Later,  the 
Board  undertook  the  support  of  the  school,  and 
now  we  have  a  good  school,  and  fairly  good,  but 
inexpensive  buildings  at  Ogbomoso. 

After  I  had  been  in  Africa  twenty-two  years, 
and  my  wife  sixteen  years,  my  wife's  health 
failed,  and  we  were  compelled  to  return  to  this 
country.  Since  then  my  own  health  has  gone  so 
that  we  are  compelled  to-remain  here  indefinitely. 
In  1906  Brother  Lumbley,  who  had  labored  in 


The  African  Mission.  143 

Africa  nearly  twenty  years,  broke  down  in  health, 
and  returning  to  England  with  his  wife,  he  sud- 
denly passed  away.  Mrs.  Lumbley  is  still  labor- 
ing in  Africa  trying  to  carry  on  the  work  she  and 
her  husband  had  been  doing.  In  1901  L.  M.  Duval 
and  wife  came  to  our  work,  and  began  work  at 
Saki,  a  large  town  in  the  northwestern  part  of 
the  country,  where  they  are  still  working,  and  in 
conjunction  with  E.  G.  MacLean,  a  recent  addition 
to  our  forces,  are  carrying  on  an  industrial  school. 
In  1905  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Compere,  of  Arkansas,  came 
to  Africa  and  labored  at  Ogbomoso  in  the  train- 
ing school,  and  did  general  mission  work  until 
Mrs.  Compere's  health  failed  and  forced  them  to 
return  to  America  in  1909.  In  1907  Dr.  George 
Green  and  Mrs.  Green  went  to  Ogbomoso,  where 
they  have  given  special  attention  to  medical  work. 
The  latest  addition  to  our  work  was  Brother  and 
Sister  Ward,  who  returned  with  the  Comperes  in 
1908,  and  who  worked  in  the  training  school  at 
Ogbomoso.  After  a  service  of  a  little  more  than 
a  year,  Mrs.  Ward's  health  failed,  and  while  they 
were  on  their  way  to  the  United  States,  Ward 
was  stricken  with  smallpox,  and  died  in  England. 
Besides  the  school  and  general  mission  work, 
the  missionaries  have  always  done  a  considerable 
amount  of  medical  work  as  best  they  could,  ac- 
cording to  their  limited  training.  W.  M.  Perry, 
who  with  his  wife  had  to  return  after  a  little 
more  than  a  year  in  Africa,  gave  chief  attention 
to  this  work,  for  he  had  received  some  special 


144       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

training.  Dr.  George  Green,  a  thoroughly  trained 
physician,  has  taken  up  this  work  in  earnest,  and 
there  is  great  opportunity  for  it. 

We  have  at  present,  in  Lagos,  a  church  of  about 
300  members  under  their  own  pastor,  self-sup- 
porting and  owning  their  own  building.  There  is 
also  a  school  under  their  control,  but  partly  sup- 
ported by  the  mission.  There  are  two  other  Bap- 
tist churches  which  grew  out  of  our  work.  Lagos 
has  a  population  of  about  seventy-five  thousand. 
At  Abeokuta,  150,000  population,  we  have  three 
churches,  all  small,  but  far  from  each  other  in 
that  large  city,  under  native  evangelists,  all  own- 
ing their  own  buildings,  and  partly  self-support- 
ing. At  Oyo,  the  capital  of  the  Yoruba  country, 
60,000  population,  we  have  a  church  and  two  or 
three  out-stations,  with  two  or  three  evangelists, 
and  missionaries,  Pinnock  and  Mrs.  Pinnock,  in 
charge.  At  Ogbomoso,  in  the  central  north  border 
of  the  Yoruba  country,  75,000  population,  we  have 
three  churches,  a  day  school,  a  theological  train- 
ing school,  all  with  buildings.  At  Saki,  40,000 
inhabitants,  in  the  northwest  part  of  the  country 
among  the  mountains,  we  have  one  church,  a  day 
school,  and  an  industrial  school.  We  have  good 
mission  houses  for  the  missionaries  to  live  in  at 
all  these  places.  We  have  churches  under  native 
evangelists  at  Ede,  on  the  railroad,  40,000  in- 
habitants; at  Ejigbo,  10,000  inhabitants,  near 
Ogbomoso,  and  stations  at  a  number  of  other 
villages  and  towns. 


The  African  Mission.  145 

Our  policy  is  to  raise  up  self-supporting  and 
self-governing  native  churches,  owning  their  own 
buildings,  a  trained  native  working  force  of  or- 
dained preachers,  evangelists,  and  teachers.  We 
start  churches  to  doing  something  for  themselves 
as  soon  as  possible,  and  follow  a  plan  by  which 
they  assume  an  increasing  part  of  their  support 
each  year.  Missionaries  we  must  always  have, 
but  their  work  must  be  to  direct  and  teach  native 
churches,  train  native  workers,  start  new  work, 
and  have  a  general  oversight  over  the  churches, 
but  not  to  lord  it  over  them.  The  missionary  is 
often  of  assistance  to  them  against  persecution 
and  oppression.  He  has  an  influence  over  both 
white  and  black  people  which  cannot  well  be  dis- 
pensed with,  and  the  encouragement  his  presence 
gives  to  the  native  Christians  is  very  great.  Also 
the  medical  work  must  be  largely  in  his  hands. 

In  1884  we  had  166  members  in  the  whole  mis- 
sion. Now  there  are  over  1,000  members.  Then 
we  had  very  few  baptisms.  Twenty-live  baptisms 
in  a  year  filled  us  with  rapture.  Now  we  often 
have  over  two  hundred  baptisms  in  a  year.  I 
remember  that  in  1887  there  was  but  one  baptism. 
Now,  in  addition  to  our  own  work,  there  are  a 
good  many  Baptist  churches  in  Lagos,  Ibadan,  and 
elsewhere,  some  under  the  fostering  care  of  our 
Lagos  church,  and  some  under  the  fostering  care 
of  other  Baptist  churches  in  Lagos,  but  all  self- 
supporting.  There  are  four  or  five  ordained 
preachers  in  and  out  of  the  mission,  and  thirty 

10 


146       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

or  more  unordained  evangelists.  Our  missionary 
force  remains  nearly  the  same  with  the  passing 
years.  The  new  missionaries  only  about  make  up 
for  our  losses. 

We  are  thankful  for  what  has  been  accom- 
plished, but  wish  it  might  have  been  more.  Our 
present  success  could  not  have  been  attained  but 
for  the  foundation  work  done  by  faithful  mis- 
sionaries who  have  long  since  gone  to  their  re- 
ward, or  have  had  to  give  up  the  work. 

"Don't  give  up  Africa,"  said  the  sainted  Nannie 
David,  and  every  missionary  before  and  since  re- 
peats the  plea.  However,  Africa  may  compare 
with  other  nations  in  importance,  her  people 
surely  need  the  gospel,  and  need  it  badly.  How- 
ever great  the  cost  in  life,  health,  and  means,  far 
greater  than  in  most  other  countries.  "Don't 
give  up  Africa." 

The  African  Mission, 

1.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  11. 

(2)  Native,  45. 

2.  Church  Statistics— 

(1)  Churches,  21. 

(2)  Members,  1,098. 

(3)  Church  buildings,  27. 

(4)  Sunday  schools,  22. 

(5)  Sunday  school  scholars,  678. 

(6)  Out-stations,  20. 


The  African  Mission,  147 

3.  Schools — 

(1)  Day  schools,  6. 

(2)  Industrial  School  at  Saki. 

(3)  Theological    Training    School    at    Ogbonioso,    20 

students. 

4.  Medical — Dispensary  and  physician  at  Ogbomoso. 

5.  General — 

(1)  Work  opened  in  Liberia,  1846;  in  Yoruba,  1850. 

(2)  Residences  for  Missionaries  owned  by  the  Board,  7. 

(3)  Nine  self-supporting  churches. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


THE  ITALIAN  MISSION. 

It  seems  to  be  the  almost  universal  verdict  of 
those  who  live  in  Italy  that  the  Papacy  has  been 
"weighed  in  the  balances  and  found  wanting." 
Eomanism  is  incompatible  with  civil  and  religious 
liberty  or  with  intellectual  and  material  progress. 
Can  an  institution  be  divine  which  subverts  the 
primitive  doctrines  of  Christianity,  bitterly  perse- 
cutes His  followers,  substitutes  human  for  divine 
authority,  withholds  the  Word  of  God  from  mil- 
lions, enslaves  the  mind  and  conscience,  sells 
pardon  for  sin,  grants  indulgences,  worships  im- 
ages and  saints,  teaches  a  corrupt  system  of  mor- 
als, and  opposes  every  free  political  and  religious 
institution  in  the  world?  Moreover,  if  Baptist 
doctrines  are  needed  in  Protestant  America  and 
England,  where  there  is  an  open  Bible  and  free- 
dom of  speech,  what  shall  we  say  of  Italy,  where 
ignorance  and  superstition  are  denser,  persecution 
stronger,  and  error  more  pernicious? 

The  Gospel  in  Italy, 

Although  dominated  for  centuries  by  a  falsified 
form  of  Christianity,   Italy  has  had  many  who 

(148) 


The  Italian  Mission. 


149 


vMfy 


150      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

have  gloriously  upheld  the  truth  against  all  obsta- 
cles. As  we  emerge  from  the  darkness  of  the 
Middle  Ages  we  see,  here  and  there,  lights  shining 
in  the  spiritual  gloom  that  enveloped  the  whole 
peninsula.  Notable  among  them  were  Arnold 
of  Brescia,  Savonarola,  the  Duchess  Eenata,  Ver- 
gerio,  the  Marquis  of  Vico,  Bernardo  Occhino, 
Aonia  Paleario,  and  Vittoria  Colonna,  whose 
deeds  adorn  the  pages  of  church  history  and  add 
luster  to  the  otherwise  shameful  record  of  Italy's 
spiritual  degeneracy.  During  the  Eeformation, 
there  were  flourishing  congregations  of  evangel- 
icals in  Lucca,  Modena,  Florence,  Genoa,  Milan, 
Padua,  and  Turin.  In  Venice,  the  Bible  and  the 
writings  of  Luther  and  Melancthon  were  translated 
into  Italian  and  freely  circulated  until  thwarted 
by  the  Inquisition.  Naples  at  one  time  had  more 
than  1,000  Evangelicals  from  the  best  families, 
whose  conversion  was  due  to  Juan  Valdez,  a  high- 
born Spaniard  and  imperial  secretary  and  cham- 
berlain, who  retired  to  Naples  where  his  remark- 
able spirituality  and  piety  united  to  rare  graces 
of  mind  and  person,  gathered  an  elect  circle  of 
Christians  around  him,  afterward  dispersed  by  the 
Inquisition. 

More  recently,  even  before  modern  Italy  was 
made,  much  was  done  toward  "making  Italians" 
by  evangelizing  them.  To  the  Waldensians,  more 
than  to  any  other  church,  belongs  the  honor  of 
leading  in  this  work.     They  were  not  "Beform- 


The  Italian  Mission.  151 

ers  before  the  Keformation,"  as  some  claim,  but 
adopted  the  distinctive  theology  of  the  Beform- 
ers,  especially  that  of  Calvin.  It  is  nevertheless 
true  that  by  their  efforts,  not  always  successful, 
to  extricate  themselves  from  errors  which  in  the 
lapse  of  centuries  had  arisen  in  the  church  and 
especially  by  their  exhortations  to  a  diligent 
study  of  the  Bible,  they  became  a  shining  light 
in  a  dark  place,  and  thus  prepared  the  way  for 
those  who,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  labored  to 
deliver  their  fellow  countrymen  from  the  power 
of  their  spiritual  oppressors.  The  Waldensians, 
owing  to  their  long  existence  and  the  adhesion 
to  them  of  many  French  or  Swiss  protestant 
residents,  are  the  most  numerous  body  of  Evan 
gelicals,  having  churches  in  every  part  of  the 
peninsula.  Besides,  there  are  Methodists,  Bap- 
tists, Wesleyans,  and  Plymouth  brethren  at  work 
in  Italy.  The  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society 
and  the  Scotch  Bible  Society,  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  and 
the  Y.  W.  C.  A.,  as  well  as  the  Salvation  Army, 
contribute  to  the  evangelization  of  the  country. 
In  Eome,  especially,  one  sees  many  signs  of  the 
progress  of  the  gospel.  In  1870,  the  Evangelicals 
were  not  allowed  to  preach  nor  could  a  copy  of 
the  Bible  be  sold.  Now  there  are  between  fifteen 
and  twenty  churches  and  preaching  stations,  two 
theological  schools,  and  four  newspapers,  several 
schools  for  boys  and  girls,  an  orphanage,  two 
printing  presses,  several  book  stores,  colporteurs, 
Y.  M.  C.  A.  and  Y.  W.  C.  A.  buildings,  depot  of 


152       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society.  Outside 
of  the  city  there  are  many  agencies  for  the  promo- 
tion of  the  truth.  The  statistics  for  the  Evangel- 
ical work  (1897)  twelve  years  ago,  as  given  by  Dr. 
Taylor,  were  the  following :  Waldensians,  includ- 
ing their  native  protestants  in  the  Waldensian 
Valleys,  20,000;  the  Free  Church,  1,500;  Meth- 
odist Episcopal,  1,100;  Wesleyans,  1,400;  Bap- 
tists, 1,100;  and  Old  Catholics,  about  500.  Since 
that  date  till  present  (1909),  all  the  denominations 
have  made  gains  except  the  Free  Church,  which 
does  not  any  longer  exist.  It  died  for  lack  of 
financial  support,  and  has  been  absorbed  by  the 
two  branches  of  the  Methodist  Church.  All  these 
bodies  own  church  buildings  in  different  cities  of 
Italy,  and  some  of  them,  especially  the  Methodists, 
are  spending  considerable  sums  of  money  erecting 
churches  and  schools.  The  churches  are  all  small 
and  composed  of  poor  people,  and  of  those  with 
limited  resources.  There  is  not  much  prospect  of 
self-support  at  present,  though  the  principle  is 
recognized. 

American  Baptist  Work. 

As  early  as  1850,  the  Foreign  Mission  Board 
directed  its  attention  to  the  Roman  Catholic  popu- 
lations of  Europe,  but  for  lack  of  funds  nothing 
definite  was  attempted.  However,  in  1870,  the 
Board  decided  to  establish  a  mission  in  either 
France  or   Italy.      The  taking  of  Rome  by  the 


The  Italian  Mission.  153 

Italians  seemed  to  be  a  providential  indication  for 
our  Board  to  begin  work  there.  Dr.  Cote,  of  the 
Y.  M.  C.  A.  of  France,  was  chosen  first  missionary. 
He  settled  in  Rome.  With  him  were  associated 
three  Italian  evangelists  to  assist  in  the  work.  In 
a  short  time  churches  were  organized  at  Rome, 
Civita,  Vecchia,  Bologna,  Torre  Pellice,  and 
Venice. 

Before  giving  detailed  accounts  of  some  of  the 
churches  a  general  statement  will  not  be  amiss. 
Like  those  of  other  denominations,  they  are  gener- 
ally small,  there  not  being  any  with  more  than  one 
hundred  members.  For  the  most  part  we  worship 
and  evangelize  in  rented  halls,  as  church  build- 
ings here  are  costly  and  not  easily  obtained.  The 
halls  are  not  generally  in  the  best  streets,  as 
Catholic  proprietors  will  rarely  rent  them  even 
at  exorbitant  rates  for  protestant  services.  Dur- 
ing the  week,  besides  the  Sunday  school,  there  are 
usually  four  other  services.  The  one  on  Sunday 
morning  is  devoted  to  the  edification  of  the 
brethren;  the  other  meetings  are  for  the  evan- 
gelization of  Roman  Catholics  and  unbelievers. 
In  some  places,  a  night  is  set  apart  for  Bible  study, 
when  the  pastor  teaches  doctrines  and  instructs 
the  catechumens.  To  church  services  strangers 
come  and  go  at  pleasure.  Many  do  not  even  sit 
down,  and  often  someone  contradicts  what  the 
preacher  is  saying.  It  becomes  necessary,  occa- 
sionally, to  be  protected  by  a  policeman,  who  may 
be  had  on  request.     As  may  be  imagined,  our  mem- 


154      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

bers  are  poor,  some  very  poor,  and  consequently 
they  give  little  to  church  support,  perhaps  less 
than  the  same  class  in  America,  though  they  are 
ready  to  help  one  another  in  distress.  The  recent 
earthquake  in  Sicily  and  Calabria  proved  that 
Italians  are  generous  and  self-sacrificing.  In  all 
of  our  churches  the  members  are  required  to  pay 
all  local  expenses,  except  hall  rent,  and  contribute 
besides  to  the  general  evangelization  fund.  The 
pastor  is  sometimes  compelled  to  pay  most  of  the 
local  expenses  himself,  owing  to  the  poverty  of  the 
church.  His  position  is  by  no  means  easy,  as 
many  calls  come  to  him  for  help  from  members  and 
outsiders.  The  brethren  are  generally  zealous. 
Sometimes  house-to-house  prayer-meetings  are 
held  to  attract  Eomanists  who  would  not  come  to 
a  Protestant  hall.  Tracts,  portions  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, and  religious  newspapers  are  widely  used 
for  the  spread  of  the  truth.  In  the  smaller  cities 
and  villages,  the  pastor  usually  has  one  or  more 
out-stations  which  he  visits  periodically  for  evan- 
gelizing purposes.  Some  of  our  best  churches  were 
founded  in  this  way.  At  present  (1909),  we  have 
thirty-five  of  these  small  churches  and  eighty-five 
out-stations  to  be  found  in  every  part  of  the  penin- 
sula as  well  as  in  the  islands  of  Sicily  and  Sar- 
dinia and  in  North  Africa.  There  is  also  a  small 
group  of  believers  in  Trieste,  Austria,  Home, 
Carpi,  Naples,  Boscoreale,  and  Miglionico  have 
church  buildings  which  put  the  work  on  a  more 
solid  basis. 


The  Italian  Mission.  155 

Eome  was  the  first  church  organized.  Dr.  Cote 
constituted  it  in  January,  1871,  with  eight 
members,  all  of  whom  were  baptized,  and  before 
the  year  closed  twelve  others  were  added.  Dr. 
Broadus  was  present  at  its  organization,  and  was 
delighted  with  Italy  as  a  mission  field.  He  said 
that  he  would  vehemently  protest  against  any 
idea  of  abandoning  it.  Things  moved  on  well 
apparently  at  first — too  well.  Italians  entered 
the  church  without  a  clear  knowledge  of  what 
conversion  meant,  and  for  lowrer  ends,  many  mis- 
taking political  liberty  and  dislike  of  the  priest 
for  conversion;  reaction  and  trouble  set  in,  so 
that  when  Dr.  Taylor  came  out,  in  1873,  these 
original  members  had  disappeared,  or  disgraced 
themselves.  The  work  had  to  be  practically  be- 
gun afresh.  Afterward  greater  care  was  exer- 
cised in  admitting  new  members,  and  a  more 
genuine  class  of  people  drawn  in.  It  even  became 
necessary  to  refuse  as  candidates  for  baptism 
those  who  were  without  work  to  keep  out  im- 
posters. 

The  purchase  of  a  chapel  put  our  work  on  a 
firmer  footing.  It  cost  much  time,  anxiety,  and 
no  small  amount  of  money.  Dr.  Taylor  was  tor- 
mented by  several  lawsuits  and  endless  harass- 
ment on  the  part  of  the  neighboring  Catholic 
landlords.  When  the  chapel  was  opened  it  was 
referred  to  by  the  Catholic  organs  as  an  "infernal 
hall."    The  church  now  has  sixty  members  which 


156       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

would  be  a  much  larger  number  but  for  losses 
caused  by  emigration  and  persecution. 

Naples  was  taken  over  from  the  English  Bap- 
tists in  1899.  jU;  the  same  time  a  small  body  of 
members  and  their  hall  were  accepted  from  Count 
Papengouth,  who  had  conducted  an  independent 
work  and  was  leaving  the  city.  These  two  Bap- 
tist churches  in  Naples  united  in  1900,  and  have 
since  been  one,  though  perfect  peace  has  not  al- 
ways reigned.  The  church's  membership  reaches 
almost  one  hundred.  It  has  an  outstation  in  the 
city  where  many  outsiders  are  evangelized.  The 
church  building  is  owned  by  our  mission.  In  the 
garden  back  of  it  is  an  ideal  baptistry  whose 
waters  are  often  stirred  by  the  zealous  pastor, 
Signor  Scalera. 

Tunis  church  has  a  very  interesting  history. 
Signor  Barbera,  a  colporter  of  the  British  and 
Foreign  Bible  Society,  has  labored  there  for 
several  years,  not  only  for  his  society,  but  priv- 
ately to  propagate  Baptist  views.  He  was  emi- 
nently successful  in  leading  many  to  Christ.  An 
evangelist  was  sent  there  by  Dr.  Taylor,  in  1900, 
who  baptized  nine  converts,  among  whom  was 
Signor  Barbera.  Owing  to  lack  of  funds  this 
work  was  not  prosecuted  until  1904,  when  the 
writer  visited  the  place  and  baptized  twenty-one 
converts,  after  which  a  church  was  organized  with 
Signor  Barbera  in  charge.  He  is  a  man  of  won- 
derful energy,  and  a  typical  soul  winner.  His 
labors  have  been  much  blessed.    The  church  now 


The  Italian  Mission.  157 

has  eighty-one  members,  and  is  one  of  our  most 
promising,  and  the  work  seems  to  be  in  a  hopeful 
condition.  Most  of  the  members  are  able  to  con- 
tribute something  toward  local  expenses,  and 
there  is  quite  a  number  of  adherents.  The  city 
has  an  Italian  population  of  50,000,  and  owing 
to  their  distance  from  Italy  and  her  priests  they 
are  freer  to  accept  the  gospel. 

Matera,  a  city  in  the  Basilicata,  has  a  flourish- 
ing church  of  eighty-six  members.  The  pastor, 
Luigi  Loporfido,  a  follower  of  Tolstoi,  was  con- 
verted with  other  companions  and  baptized  by  a 
neighboring  pastor.  They  formerly  belonged  to  a 
"league"  for  mutual  protection.  This  work  is  an 
agricultural  district  among  the  peasants  entirely. 
Not  one  in  ten  of  the  adults  can  read  or  write. 
A  deposit  of  oil,  grain,  and  flour  is  kept  to  sell  to 
the  poorer  brethren  who  are  thus  insured  against 
the  monopolies  of  the  richer  proprietors.  Their 
children  have  a  night  school  taught  by  the  pastor. 
The  chapel  was  built  by  the  church  and  pastor. 
The  mission  contributed  less  than  |200  for  furni- 
ture. 

Miglionico,  in  the  same  province,  is  one  of  our 
largest  and  best  churches  which  has  been  served 
from  its  foundation  by  Sign  or  Carlo  Piccinni,  "a 
prophet  in  his  own  country."  He  was  educated 
in  the  Free  Church  School  at  Florence,  and  after 
conversion  to  Baptist  beliefs  went  at  once  to  his 
own  people  to  lead  them  to  Christ.  He  was 
severely    persecuted,    and    unusually    successful. 


158      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

The  members  contributed  work,  material,  and 
money  for  a  building,  which  was  soon  ready  for 
use,  but  not  until  a  harassing  lawsuit  instituted 
by  the  local  priests  had  been  gained  by  the  church 
and  pastor.  There  is  a  mutual  assistance  fund  to 
help  needy  brethren.  A  night  school  and  three 
outstations  are  under  the  care  of  this  faithful 
pastor.  The  members  are  all  more  or  less  inde- 
pendent, owning  their  own  little  farms.  This 
church,  besides  sustaining  local  expenses,  helps 
in  a  material  way  toward  propagating  the  gospel. 
The  Milan  church  has  some  members  who  are 
quite  generous.  They  have  in  the  last  few  years 
spent  several  hundred  dollars  for  an  organ  and 
church  furniture,  besides  making  regular  con- 
tributions to  the  evangelization  fund.  The  few 
brethren  at  Trieste,  with  the  help  of  outsiders, 
have  collected  more  than  two  hundred  dollars  for 
work  in  that  city.  There  is  a  similar  fund  at 
Cagliari,  in  Sardinia.  Ferrara,  for  two  years,  cul- 
tivated assiduously  by  Signor  Luginbuhl,  has 
borne  excellent  fruit.  Fourteen  were  recently 
baptized,  and  ten  others  accepted  as  catechumens. 
In  the  neighboring  town  of  Consandolo  there  is 
a  Sunday  school  of  156  children,  most  of  whom 
belong  to  Socialist  families.  The  town  is  a  Sodom 
in  morals.  The  Gravina  church  has  paid  its  hall 
rent  for  several  years,  but  the  burden  falls  on  one 
family  who  have  done  much  for  the  church.  The 
pastor,  through  the  influence  of  his  wife,  forfeits 
half  of  his  salary  for  the  benefit  of  the  mission. 


The  Italian  Mission.  159 

At  Boscotrecase  a  poor  deacon  has  bought  the 
organ  and  furniture  with  his  own  money.  He 
preaches  the  gospel  to  all  who  enter  his  little 
shop.  Noto,  in  Sicily,  has  a  flourishing  church, 
though  only  four  years  old.  There  are  now  thirty- 
three  members  and  a  goodly  number  of  catechu- 
mens. Five  were  baptized  a  few  days  ago.  Reg- 
gio  has  now  160  children  in  the  Kindergarten 
held  in  a  wooden  building  erected  since  the  earth- 
quake. Material  assistance  is  now  given  these 
poor  wretches.  The  church  at  Messina  has  been 
temporarily  blotted  out,  the  surviving  members 
being  widely  scattered. 

At  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention  which  met 
in  1901  at  New  Orleans,  the  Board  was  author- 
ized to  establish  a  theological  school  in  Rome. 
The  Board  sent  out  the  writer  to  take  charge  of 
this  school.  It  had  long  been  Dr.  Taylor's  desire 
to  see  such  a  work  started,  and  it  was  his  pleasure 
to  lead  in  its  organization  and  do  some  effective 
teaching  till  his  death.  From  the  very  beginning 
it  has  been  the  aim  of  the  founders  to  insist  on 
a  high  standard  of  work.  The  course  of  study  is 
modeled,  as  far  as  possible,  after  that  at  Louis- 
ville, but  some  changes  were  necessary,  owing  to 
local  conditions.  The  Bible  is  the  foundation  and 
center  of  our  teaching  which  is  expounded  not 
only  in  Italian,  but  in  Hebrew  and  Greek.  The 
branches  taught  are  historical,  exegetical,  sys- 
tematic, and  practical  theology.  The  full  course 
is  three  years.    Two  years  are  given  to  Old  and 


160       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

New  Testament,  Church  History,  and  Apologetics, 
while  one  year  is  devoted  to  other  branches.  The 
school  from  the  beginning  has  attracted  attention 
by  its  seriousness,  and  has  won  praise.  Students 
of  other  denominations,  notably  Wesleyans,  attend 
our  theological  school,  which  is  now  the  largest  in 
Italy,  surpassing  in  numbers  the  Waldensian  at 
Florence.  Our  professors  compare  well  with  any 
other  school,  being  graduates  of  Eome,  London, 
and  Cambridge  (England)  Universities,  and  the 
Southern  Baptist  Theological  Seminary.  Our 
students  usually  come  from  the  churches,  but  some 
come  directly  from  Eomanism.  There  are  at  pres 
ent  two  ex-priests  and  two  ex-friars  among  our 
students.  Sometimes  we  get  unworthy  men  who 
must  be  dismissed,  but  on  the  whole,  they  give  sat- 
isfaction. Within  a  few  years  we  trust  we  shall 
see  good  results  of  our  work.  At  present,  ex-stu- 
dents are  pastors  at  Naples,  Florence,  Genoa, 
Consandolo,  Carpi,  Altamura,  Gravina,  Ave! lino, 
Avezzano,  and  Pescopagano — ten  of  our  thirty-five 
churches  are  in  their  hands. 

As  early  as  1876,  Dr.  Taylor  began  the  publica- 
tion of  II  Seminatore  (the  Tower),  a  monthly 
journal  which  contained  articles  on  denomina- 
tional tenets,  Baptist  history  and  questions  of 
church  life,  evangelization  and  other  practical 
questions.  It  served  to  clear  away  many  preju- 
dices, especially  in  the  eyes  of  the  Waldensians, 
who  do  not  always  view  us  with  a  friendly  eye. 
This  journal   was   succeeded  by   the   Testimonio 


Church  at  Reggio  Church  in  Naples 

SIG.  G.  FASULO.  PASTOR,  NOTO 

Theological  School,  Rome 


The  Italian  Mission.  161 

(The  Witness),  which  appeared  in  1884.  It  has 
since  become  the  organ  of  the  Union  (of  the  Ameri- 
can and  English  Baptist  Missions),  and  continues 
to  be  so.  Lately  it  has  become  bi-monthly,  and  is 
entirely  self-supporting.  In  connection  with  it,  is 
published  now  a  smaller  sheet  called  II  Seminatore 
(continuing  the  name  of  the  old  paper),  which 
costs  only  one  mill  per  copy  and  is  widely  circu- 
lated, having  from  8,000  to  10,000  copies  printed 
every  two  weeks.  It  is  adapted  to  the  simpler 
minded  and  poorer  classes.  It  is  also  self-support- 
ing, and  no  evangelical  paper  in  Italy  has  a  wider 
circulation. 

Workers  must  be  treated  under  two  heads,  for- 
eign and  native. 

Dr.  Cote,  after  two  years  of  service,  severed  his 
connection  with  the  Board,  though  from  no  charge 
affecting  his  moral  character  nor  his  capacity  as 
a  missionary. 

Dr.  George  B.  Taylor  and  his  wife  deserve  a 
more  lengthy  notice,  owing  to  their  long  and  inti- 
mate connection  with  the  Mission.  His  appoint- 
ment to  succeed  Dr.  Cote  was  made  in  March, 
1873.  It  was  no  easy  task  to  quiet  troubles  in 
Borne,  meet  the  peculiarly  strong  prejudices 
against  a  Baptist  and  a  Southerner,  train  native 
preachers,  organize  undisciplined  churches,  foster 
work  begun  and  press  forward  in  new  fields,  and 
all  under  financial  uncertainty  when  the  Board 
was  going  through  straits  and  stress.  Dr.  Taylor 
proved  to  be  well  adapted  for  the  eminent  place 
11 


162       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

assigned  him.  While  retaining  to  the  last  a 
youthful  spirit  of  initiative  and  enterprise,  he  was 
aptly  termed  like  the  old  English  divine,  Hooker, 
"the  judicious  Taylor,"  avoiding  those  headlong 
words  and  actions  which  in  a  field  so  delicate  and 
complicated  as  Italy,  take  years  for  men  of  less 
supreme  self-control  to  redeem  and  remedy.  His 
wisdom,  piety,  administrative  abilities,  tact  and 
learning  were  recognized  by  all.  It  may  not  be 
amiss  to  insert  here  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Augustus 
Strong,  written  in  this  year  (1909)  to  one  of  his 
daughters.  "I  have  just  finished  reading  your 
father's  life,  and  have  been  deeply  moved  by  the 
story,  and  I  cannot  help  telling  you  so.  I  have 
now  ordered  a  copy  for  our  Seminary  library. 
Your  father's  life  was  a  truly  heroic  one.  He  was 
a  genuine  missionary  and  a  real  disciple  of  Christ. 
It  must  be  a  great  comfort  to  you  to  know  that 
you  were  permitted  to  minister  so  lovingly  to  so 
noble  a  servant  of  our  Lord."  Dr.  Taylor  not  only 
represented  the  University  of  Virginia  at  the 
800th  centenary  of  the  Bologna  University,  and 
represented  the  Baptists  at  the  Waldensian  Cen- 
tenary and  on  many  other  occasions,  but  also 
wrote  a  book  of  general  interest  on  "Italy  and  the 
Italians,"  a  manual  in  Italian  on  Systematic  The- 
ology, innumerable  tracts  and  articles  for  Italian 
and  American  papers,  and  when  he  died  was  at 
work  on  a  book  for  the  use  of  young  Italian  min- 
isters. Loved  by  everyone,  irrespective  of  creed, 
he  laid  down  his  life,  September  28,  1907,  and  his 


The  Italian  Mission.  163 

body  rests  in  the  beautiful  Protestant  cemetery  in 
Koine  by  the  side  of  his  faithful  wife,  who  went  to 
her  reward  twenty -three  years  before  his  departure 
— March  7,  1884.  She  was  beloved  by  all  who 
came  under  the  influence  of  her  gracious  Christian 
spirit.  Many  nationalities  and  creeds  were  among 
her  friends.  The  eleven  years  of  her  life  in  Italy 
were  full  of  care  and  sunny  self-sacrifice,  not  only 
for  her  family,  but  for  the  struggling  Mission. 

In  1880,  Dr.  John  H.  Eager  and  his  wife  were 
appointed  missionaries  to  Italy.  He  remained  in 
Eome  as  colleague  to  Dr.  Taylor  for  ten  years,  and 
helped  in  many  ways,  learning  the  language  unusu- 
ally well  and  gaining  the  affection  and  esteem  of 
our  Italian  brethren.  While  Dr.  Taylor  was  ab- 
sent in  America  for  two  years,  he  was  left  in  charge 
of  the  work.  In  1890  he  and  Mrs.  Eager  removed 
to  Florence,  where,  with  the  help  of  a  native  evan- 
gelist, Signor  Galassi,  he  built  up  one  of  our 
churches  in  connection  with  which  he  cultivated 
other  fields.  In  1896,  he  felt  it  his  duty  for  the 
sake  of  his  children's  education  and  future,  to 
leave  Italy,  and  resign  his  connection  with  our 
Board.  He  and  his  excellent  wife  were  sincerely 
missed  by  the  little  evangelical  world  in  Italy, 
and  he  left  a  useful  book  on  "Bomanism  in  Its 
Home,"  which  missionaries  to  papal  fields  will  do 
well  to  read. 

Kev.  C.  J.  F.  Anderson  and  wife  came  over  in 
November,  1900,  but  remained  only  three  and  one- 
half  years  on  the  field.     The  writer,  as  mentioned 


164      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

before,  was  appointed  to  the  charge  of  the  theolog- 
ical school  in  April,  1901,  and  since  January,  1904, 
he  has  also  had  the  general  direction  of  the  Mis- 
sion, but  was  ably  assisted  by  Dr.  Taylor  until  his 
death. 

Dr.  Everette  Gill  and  family  came  to  Italy  in 
1904,  but  owing  to  much  ill-health  in  his  family, 
due  to  malarial  fever,  he  was  compelled  to  return 
to  America  in  1907,  leaving  many  sympathetic 
friends  and  a  precious  child's  grave  in  Koine. 

Eev.  J.  P.  Stewart  and  family  came  out  in  No- 
vember, 1908,  and  have  ever  since  given  themselves 
to  the  serious  study  of  this  really  diff  cult  language. 
He  is  making  progress  in  it,  and  hopes  soon  to  be 
able  to  begin  active  service.  They  have  made 
friends  on  all  sides,  and  seem  to  be  getting  readily 
adjusted  to  the  new  order  of  things.  May  God 
make  him  and  his  a  blessing  to  our  work. 

A  few  words  about  our  native  ministry  will  now 
be  opportune,  though  no  detailed  account  of  them 
will  be  given. 

Among  the  Italian  evangelists  who  have  served 
the  Mission  since  its  foundation,  some  have  dis- 
tinguished themselves  for  piety,  zeal,  learning,  and 
perseverance  in  the  midst  of  discouragements  and 
persecutions.  The  lack  of  a  regular  theological 
school,  until  recently,  has  rendered  a  thorough 
preparation  for  the  ministry  difficult.  However, 
the  evangelists  deserve  credit  for  what  they  have 
accomplished  in  the  face  of  such  tremendous  obsta- 
cles.    The  history  of  some  of  the  conversions  and 


The  Italian  Mission.  165 

subsequent  careers  would  be  interesting,  but  space 
forbids  their  narration.  Sig.  Gaetano  Fasulo, 
almost  eighty  years  old,  has  founded  seven 
churches  in  his  long  career  as  an  evangelist,  two  of 
them  while  a  Waldensian  evangelist.  Sig.  Teubel, 
an  ex-student,  now  pastor,  speaks  four  languages 
well.  He  represented  Italian  Missions  at  the 
Berlin  Baptist  Congress  last  year. 

Prof.  Henry  Paschetto,  who  recently  died,  was 
the  finest  Semitic  scholar  among  evangelicals  in 
Italy.  He  left  a  Hebrew  Grammar  in  manuscript. 
He  was  professor  of  Old  Testament  in  our  theolog- 
ical school  and  a  man  of  rare  integrity  and  purity 
of  character.  His  son,  Ludovico  Paschetto,  now 
a  minister  and  professor  in  the  theological  school, 
won  the  prize  of  the  Pontificial  Archaeological 
Academy  of  Eome  for  his  learned  work  entitled, 
"Storia  e  Monumenti  di  Ostia."  The  prize  of  a 
1,000  lire  in  gold  and  all  the  expenses  of  publica- 
tion was  a  bequest  of  Pope  Leo  XIII,  and  we 
learned  from  a  reliable  source  that  when  the  pres- 
ent pope  heard  that  the  award  had  gone  to  an 
evangelical  minister  he  was  much  chagrined. 
Another  minister,  Sig.  L.  M.  Galassi,  a  self-edu- 
cated man,  is  reputed  to  be  the  most  popular 
tract  writer  in  Italy.  Prof.  Giovanni  Aebanasich, 
of  Genoa,  has  translated  the  Gospel  of  Luke  into 
the  Sard  dialect,  and  several  hymns  from  English 
into  Italian.  One  evangelist  has  distinguished 
himself  as  a  historian  and  hymn-writer,  while  two 


166      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

others  are  graduates  of  the  University  of  Home, 
another  of  Milan,  and  a  third  of  Florence. 


Special  Difficulties  of  Evangelization  in  Italy. 

Why  is  it  that  Italy  has  thus  far  yielded  little 
visible  fruit?  The  result  cannot  be  due  to  the 
policy  pursued  by  the  American  missionaries  in 
Italy,  for  the  Baptists,  in  proportion  to  the  means 
employed,  have  succeeded  as  well  as  the  five  other 
denominations.  The  causes  of  the  slow  progress 
may  be  found  in  local  conditions,  which  will  now 
be  referred  to,  not  mentioning  all  the  causes  that 
impede  our  progress,  but  only  those  that  seem 
peculiar  to  Italy.  All  missionaries  have  to  con- 
tend more  or  less  with  ignorance,  superstition,  in- 
difference, and  persecution  in  its  various  forms, 
but  it  is  doubtful  if  any  mission  suffers  as  much 
from  persecution  and  atheistic  socialism  as  Italy. 
Let  us  pass  on  to  the  consideration  of  these  special 
difficulties. 

In  the  first  place,  Italy  has  been  the  home  of 
the  papacy  for  more  than  a  thousand  years.  To 
every  other  nation  it  is  a  foreign  power,  but  not  so 
to  the  Italian.  While  thousands  have  lost  interest 
in  the  Eoman  Church  as  a  religious  institution, 
there  are  multitudes  who  defend  it  on  purely 
national  and  patriotic  grounds.  No  other  nation 
has  a  St.  Peter's  or  a  Vatican,  with  its  invaluable 
library  and  unrivalled  art  collection.  These,  with 
other  considerations,  make  it  doubly  hard  for  the 


The  Italian  Mission.  167 

Italians  to  turn  from  a  religion  to  which  they 
have  been  bound  for  more  than  a  thousand  years. 
The  fact  that  200,000,000  people  look  to  Eome  for 
spiritual  guidance  and  salvation  is  a  matter  of 
deep  pride  to  the  nation. 

Another  cause  of  special  difficulty  is  the  exist- 
ence of  great  cathedrals  and  churches  among  us. 
With  their  altars  of  silver,  gold,  and  precious 
stones,  with  paintings  and  sculptures  by  great 
masters,  with  magnificent  music  and  everything 
that  appeals  to  the  love  of  the  beautiful,  they  form 
a  striking  and  almost  shocking  contrast  to  our 
modest  and  scantily  furnished  halls  in  undesirable 
quarters.  Certainly  no  country  has  churches  like 
St.  Peter's  and  St.  Paul's  at  Koine,  nor  like  the 
cathedrals  at  Milan,  Venice,  Pisa,  Siena,  Orvieto, 
Perugia,  Assisi,  Florence,  and  Palermo.  These 
have  received  and  still  receive  thousands  into 
their  bosoms  and  have  become  for  many  a  synonym 
for  Christianity.  And  in  considering  this,  it  must 
be  remembered  that  Latins  are  an  aesthetic  and 
materialistic  race,  far  more  affected  by  visible, 
tangible  beauty  than  we  are.  The  long  undis- 
turbed existence  of  their  beautiful  churches  is  also 
an  argument  in  their  favor — an  argument  easily 
rebutted,  it  is  true,  by  an  appeal  to  the  New  Testa- 
ment. The  Eeformation  in  the  sixteenth  century 
shook  to  the  foundation  in  some  countries,  and  in 
others  almost  destroyed  the  Eoman  Church,  but 
Italy  felt  very  slightly  that  mighty  intellectual 
and  religious  movement.     So,  many  have  come  to 


168      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

look  upon  the  Mother  Church  as  enduring  as  the 
Colisseum  or  Eome  itself. 

Emigration  represents  for  us  another  great  ob- 
stacle. About  500,000  Italians  leave  the  mother 
country  every  year,  most  of  whom  go  to  America, 
the  poor  man's  paradise.  Not  long  before  his 
death,  Prime  Minister  Zanardelli,  on  visiting  a 
town  in  the  Basilicata,  was  welcomed  by  the  mayor 
with  the  following  words :  "Honorable  Zanardelli, 
I  welcome  you  in  the  name  of  the  5,000  inhabitants 
of  our  town,  2,000  of  whom  are  in  America,  and 
the  other  3,000  preparing  to  go."  This  is,  of 
course,  an  exaggerated  case,  but  there  are  towns 
and  communities  which  have  lost  almost  half  their 
population.  The  result  of  this  yearly  loss  tells 
fearfully  on  our  statistics.  It  is  with  great  diffi- 
culty that  net  gains  are  made.  A  church  in  Mas- 
sachusetts, U.  S.  A.,  was  founded  by  members  from 
our  Calitri  Church,  in  the  Province  of  Avellino. 
The  Miglionico  church  has  twenty-seven  members 
in  America.  Gravina  loses  five  or  six  every  year, 
while  the  church  at  Tunis  suffers  even  more.  The 
extreme  poverty  of  the  brethren  and  the  loss  con- 
stantly sustained  by  emigration  renders  the  prob- 
lem of  self-support  in  Italy  quite  discouraging. 

There  is  also  the  lack  of  a  firm,  solid  foundation 
on  which  to  build  a  Christian  character  which  is, 
to  a  large  extent,  wanting  in  Italy.  To  use  a 
vulgar  expression,  "the  bottom  has  been  knocked 
out"  of  the  Italian  character.  This  is  no  fault  of 
the  people,  for  they  have  some  shining  virtues 


The  Italian  Mission.  169 

which  other  nations  would  do  well  to  imitate,  but 
it  is  a  result  of  the  system  of  religion  to  which 
they  have  been  accustomed  for  long  centuries. 
Those  ideas  of  truth  and  integrity  with  which 
Anglo-Saxons  are  almost  born — the  heinousness 
and  sin  of  a  lie — are  almost  unrecognized  by  the 
average  individual.  The  question  as  to  whether  a 
lie  is  right  or  wrong  depends  with  them  entirely 
on  the  point  whether  it  will  be  advantageous  or 
not.  The  virtues  of  chastity  and  conjugal  fidelity 
are  rare  in  the  towns,  and  especially  among  men  of 
the  upper  and  middle  class.  It  is  rare  that  men 
are  faithful  to  their  marriage  vows,  and  how  can 
it  be  otherwise  when  the  nation  has  had  such  an 
awful  example  set  before  them  by  their  priesthood, 
the  religious  teachers  of  the  nation  ? 

Immersion  constitutes  a  great  difficulty.  Infant 
baptism  is  an  element  of  great  power  in  the  Romish 
Church.  The  child's  name  is  indissolubly  asso- 
ciated with  it,  and  by  it  he  is  made  a  Christian. 
It  is  so  instilled  into  the  Italian  mind  that  his 
christening  is  what  makes  the  child  differ  from  the 
lower  order  of  creatures,  that  if  you  ask  an  Italian 
the  question,  which  to  an  Anglo-Saxon  is  serious 
and  searching,  "Are  you  a  Christian?"  he  replies 
lightly,  "The  devil !  of  course  I  am ;  do  you  take 
me  for  a  dog?"  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  persuade 
some  of  our  converts  that  they  have  never  been 
properly  baptized  nor  are  others  impressed  with 
its  importance.  There  is  a  strong  prejudice 
among  the  people  against  cold  water.     Our  bap- 


170      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

tisms  are  usually  performed  in  the  milder 
months,  and  the  water  is  usually  tempered,  accord- 
ing to  the  desire  of  the  candidate.  The  additions 
to  our  churches  would  be  doubled  each  year  if 
members  could  be  accepted  without  immersion. 

Hopes  and  Encouragements. 

There  are  at  least  three  things  that  encourage  us 
to  go  forward  in  the  work  into  which  we  were 
evidently  led  by  Providence.  In  the  first  place, 
must  be  mentioned  the  work  already  accomplished. 
Forty-five  years  ago  there  were  no  Baptists  nor 
Baptist  work  in  Italy.  Now  there  are  sixty 
churches,  more  than  one  hundred  out-stations, 
forty-seven  evangelists,  eight  colporters,  1,615 
members,  1,694  Sunday  school  scholars,  98  Sunday 
school  teachers,  a  theological  school  with  five  pro- 
fessors and  eighteen  students,  two  newspapers, 
several  medical  dispensaries,  an  orphanage,  several 
day  schools,  kindergartens,  night  schools,  Bible 
women,  and  fourteen  houses  of  worship  (these 
figures  include  the  English  Baptists^  who  have 
fewer  churches  and  fewer  communicants  than  our 
Mission  has). 

The  "modernist  movement,"  while  fraught  with 
dangers  to  "orthodoxy,"  will  doubtless  prove  to 
be  one  of  our  allies  against  the  common  adversary. 
The  "modernists"  may  be  roughly  divided  into 
three  classes.  Some,  like  Loisy,  have  wandered 
away  from  orthodoxy  in  the  criticism  and  inter- 


The  Italian  Mission.  171 

pretation  of  the  Bible.  Others,  like  the  famous 
ex-priest,  Don  Komola  Murri,  demand  liberty  of 
action  in  politics  and  refuse  longer  to  be  minions 
of  the  clerical  party,  while  there  is  a  third  class 
that  desires  radical  reforms  in  both  dogma  and 
morals.  All  these  have  been  the  object  of  severe 
criticism  and  repressive  measures  on  the  part  of 
Pius  X,  but  many  of  them  refuse  to  submit.  They 
have  even  begun  in  the  "modernist"  propaganda 
the  publication  of  tracts,  newspapers,  and  several 
valuable  reviews,  which  circulate  freely  among  the 
priesthood,  especially  the  student  class.  The 
most  recent  critical  works  of  German,  English 
and  American  Protestants  on  modern  Biblical 
thought  are  on  sale  in  the  leading  bookstores  of 
Eome.  Will  the  Pope  be  able  to  stop  this  rising 
tide?  We  hope  not.  Baptists  who  have  no  fear 
of  truth,  from  whatever  source  it  may  come,  have 
much  to  gain  and  little  to  lose  in  this  struggle 
between  the  Pope  and  his  subordinates. 

The  strategic  position  of  our  field  is  another 
ground  for  encouragement.  The  Japanese  spent 
millions  of  money  and  thousands  of  lives  to  take 
Port  Arthur,  Kussia's  stronghold  in  the  East,  but 
it  proved  to  be  a  wise  investment,  as  the  fortunes 
of  the  war  largely  depended  on  that  one  place. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  Italy.  It  is  the  Port 
Arthur  of  Koman  Catholicism.  If  we  can  take  it, 
which  will  require  time,  money,  and  workers,  the 
victory  will  be  won  more  easily  elsewhere.  If 
Luther  and  the  Keformers  had  taken  Eome  and 


172      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Italy,  the  work  of  the  Eeformation  would  have 
been  complete.  The  importance  of  saving  Italy 
cannot  be  overestimated.  No  city  since  the  fall 
of  Jerusalem  has  influenced  the  religious  world  so 
much  as  Eome  has,  and  she  still  continues  to  do 
so.  From  her  went  forth  the  gospel  in  the  early 
Christian  centuries  to  every  part  of  Europe,  and 
even  before  Paul  visited  the  "Eternal  City,"  the 
Eoman  Christians'  faith  was  spoken  of  throughout 
the  world.  Today  millions  from  every  country 
look  to  Eome  for  salvation  from  sin,  but  what  a 
contrast  between  the  Christian  influence  which 
proceeded  from  Eome  in  Paul's  day  and  that 
which  emanates  from  the  Vatican  today !  Let  us, 
therefore,  evangelize  the  Italians  in  their  home 
that  they  may  carry  the  good  seed  of  the  Kingdom 
into  other  countries.  It  would  also  seem  that  the 
preaching  of  a  pure  gospel  in  Italy  must  modify 
the  Papacy  itself,  so  far  as  the  doctrine  of  infalli- 
bility will  permit.  The  Catholic  Church  has 
already  established  Sunday  schools,  adopting 
methods  from  American  and  English  Protestants. 
Almanacs  for  family  and  popular  reading  have 
not  only  taken  leaves  from  our  own  publications, 
but  have  imitated  the  adornments  of  cover  and 
title  page.  The  Saint  Jerome  Society  at  Eome 
has  issued  a  popular  translation  of  the  Gospels 
and  Acts,  which  is  circulated  freely.  Even  the 
Latin  Bible  is  being  revised.  This  is  done  in  order 
to  imitate  the  work  of  the  British  and  Foreign 
Bible    Society.       May    not    these    new    methods 


The  Italian  Mission.  173 


adopted  by  the  Papacy  be  attributed  to  the  subtle 
change  in  the  religious  atmosphere  of  Italy,  since 
Protestant  Missions  have  been  planted  in  her 
midst? 

The  Italian  Mission. 

1.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  4. 

(2)  Native,  36. 

2.  Fields— 

(1)  Northern  Italy — 13  churches,  267  members, 

(2)  Central  Italy — 1  church,  58  members. 

(3)  Southern  Italy — 15  churches,  468  members. 

(4)  Sicily — 3  churches,  59  members. 

(5)  Sardinia — 2  churches,  40  members. 

(6)  North  Africa — 1  church,  83  members. 

3.  Church  Statistics — 

(1)  Churches,  34. 

(2)  Church  buildings,  5. 

(3)  Members,  993. 

(4)  Out-stations,  80. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  32. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  744. 

4.  Schools — 

(1)  Day  schools,  3, 

(2)  Theological  Seminary  at  Rome. 

5.  "Ill  Testimonio"   (monthly  paper). 

6.  Work  opened  1870. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


THE  BRAZILIAN  MISSION. 

The  opportunities  for  mission  work  in  Brazil 
are  vast.  The  country  itself  is  immense.  It  is 
useless  to  compare  Brazil  with  other  countries — 
it  is  incomparable.  Travel  for  days,  for  weeks, 
for  months  within  it,  and  yet  its  limits  are  not 
touched.  Its  people  are  great,  both  in  numbers 
and  possibilities.  Thousands  of  Germans,  Ital- 
ians, Spaniards,  Syrians,  Portuguese,  and  British 
are  entering  her  gates  and  forming  with  the  Bra- 
zilian native  a  new  race,  a  new  nation.  This 
nation  is  destined  to  play  a  large  part  in  the 
future  councils  of  the  nations.  What  shall  her 
influence  be?  We  believe  that  her  future  attitude 
depends  more  upon  the  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God 
than  anything  else.  Another  item  in  the  count  is 
that  the  Boman  Church  is  unequal  to  the  task  of 
giving  the  gospel  to  these  people.  After  the  best 
has  been  said  for  her,  the  fact  remains  that  she  has 
subjugated  a  noble  nation  to  the  evil  effects  of 
idolatry  and  the  practices  of  astute  and  often  im- 
moral priests.  Idolatry  always  debases  a  nation 
for  misery  and  ruin  follows  in  its  wake.  Instead 
of  crosses,  Brazil  needs  the  preaching  of  the  Cross, 
which  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation. 

(174) 


The  Brazilian  Mission. 


175 


176      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 
Foundation  Work. 

In  1881,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  B.  Bagby,  of  Texas, 
arrived  in  Brazil.  In  the  following  year  they 
were  joined  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Z.  0.  Taylor,  from  the 
same  State.  After  a  year,  both  couples  were  able 
to  make  themselves  sufficiently  understood  to 
enter  upon  the  great  work  of  preaching  the  Glad 
Tidings.  Those  who  have  had  dealings  with  Eome 
and  with  its  intolerant  priesthood  will  be  able  to 
form  some  little  idea  of  what  this  meant.  To  this 
day  it  is  no  child's  play,  but  what  must  it  have 
been  in  those  days  before  the  ground  was  broken ! 

The  wisdom  of  choosing  Bahia,  the  seat  of  the 
Boman  hierarchy  in  this  country,  and  later  Bio 
de  Janeiro,  the  seat  of  the  central  government, 
cannot  be  doubted.  In  this  our  men  acted  like 
statesmen,  realizing,  as  they  did,  the  necessity  of 
establishing  strong  bases  in  the  large  centers 
before  extending  their  operations.  They  pursued 
this  policy,  undaunted  by  opposition,  until  a 
quarter  of  a  century  having  barely  passed,  they 
have  both  had  the  joy  of  seeing  their  labors 
crowned  with  success  and  the  pathway  then  indi- 
cated to  them  demonstrated  to  have  been  the 
choice  of  God.  Today  both  Bahia  and  Bio  de 
Janeiro  are  important  centers  of  the  work,  the 
former  having  five  churches,  with  over  five  hun- 
dred members,  in  addition  to  the  churches  in  the 
surrounding  country,  whereas  the  church  was 
founded  in  1882  with  five  members!     The  latter 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  Ill 

place,  in  which  a  church  was  organized  in  1884 
with  four  members,  now  has  four  strong  churches, 
with  500  to  600  members,  besides  the  extensions 
all  over  the  country  round  about. 

In  all  places,  much  depends  upon  the  quality  of 
the  material  gathered  in  during  the  early  years  of 
the  work.  It  is  significant  that  in  the  two  places 
mentioned,  the  firstfruits  to  Christ  were  men  and 
women  of  high  spiritual  discernment.  Of  course, 
there  were  exceptions,  tares  amidst  the  wheat,  but 
it  seems  that  the  Lord  had  a  good  many  who  had 
never  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal,  and  who  were  long- 
ing for  something  higher  and  holier.  In  Bahia, 
one  of  the  first  to  join  was  the  ex-priest,  Teixeira 
de  Albuquerque,  who  for  some  time  continued  as 
the  mouthpiece  of  the  work,  editing  a  paper  and 
publishing  tracts  and  leaflets,  one  of  which, 
"Three  Eeasons  Why  I  Left  the  Church  of  Borne," 
has  been  instrumental  in  saving  hundreds  if  not 
thousands  of  souls.  We  may  say  of  him  that, 
"He  being  dead,  yet  speaketh."  Then  there  was 
a  Joao  Baptista,  a  courageous  and  faithful  evan- 
gelist, who,  though  passing  through  great  trials, 
temptations  and  persecutions,  remained  faithful 
unto  death.  He  was  instrumental  in  bringing 
many  souls  out  of  darkness  into  God's  marvelous 
light,  and  in  spreading  the  news  far  and  wide 
over  the  State  of  Bahia  as  well  as  over  some  of  the 
neighboring  States.  We  may  also  mention  one, 
Francisco  Borges,  a  faithful,  intelligent,  and  con- 
secrated colporteur,  who,   while  his  health  held 

12 


178      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

out,  did  valiant  service  for  the  Lord.  He  had  a 
remarkable  voice  for  singing,  and  by  this  means 
drew  many  into  the  Kingdom. 

The  first  converts  in  Rio  were  more  or  less  of 
the  same  type.  One  day  there  entered  into  the 
hall  a  young  man,  at  first  troubled  by  the  gospel, 
and  then  entering  into  its  wonderful  peace,  mak- 
ing soon  afterwards  public  confession  of  his  faith. 
He  then  called  his  fellow  clerk  in  the  office  where 
he  was  employed,  and  he,  too,  accepted  Christ  as 
his  Saviour  and  Lord.  A  third  was  brought  in 
by  his  laundress,  a  consecrated  church  member, 
who  had  no  rest  until  she  saw  him  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus.  Today  the  first  is  the  consecrated  pastor 
of  the  First  Baptist  Church  in  Rio,  the  Rev.  F.  F. 
Soren,  who  has  done  and  is  doing  a  noble  work 
for  the  Master  in  the  great  capital  of  Brazil ;  the 
second  is  Brother  Theodoro  R.  Teixeira,  our 
Brother  Entzminger's  right-hand  man  in  the  Pub- 
lication Department;  and  the  third  is  Brother 
Thomas  L.  Costa,  one  of  the  mainstays  of  the 
cause  in  Brazil,  a  layman  full  of  power  and  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

Not  content  with  the  proclamation  of  the  gos- 
pel, both  our  missionaries  began  to  multiply  their 
efforts  in  numerous  ways.  In  Rio,  Brother  Bagby 
began  publishing  an  eight-page  monthly  paper 
that  lasted  for  over  a  year.  About  the  same 
time,  a  few  excellent  tracts  were  issued.  Mean- 
while, Z.  C.  Taylor  secured  a  little  press,  and 
with  the  help  of  Mrs.  Osborn,  of  the  "Baptist 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  179 

Basket/'  furnished  it  with  a  few  boxes  of  type 
and  began  to  fill  the  land  with  tracts  and  papers. 
About  the  same  time,  Z.  C.  Taylor  translated  Dr. 
Ford's  Short  Baptist  History,  adding  to  it  a  trans- 
lation of  the  Philadelphia  "Declaration  of  Faith/' 
and  a  short  statement  as  to  the  mode  of  governing 
Baptist  churches.  We  have  no  doubt  that  to  this 
book  the  cause  in  Brazil  owes  a  great  deal  of  its 
present  state  and  progress.  It  is  still  regarded 
as  a  standard  manual  all  over  Brazil.  Besides 
this  book,  brother  Taylor  published  a  monthly 
paper  called  The  Echo  of  Truth.  About  that  time, 
also,  he  managed  to  buy  from  the  Eoman  hierarchy 
the  old  Jesuit  prison,  turning  it  into  a  center  for 
gospel  preaching.  Situated  in  the  very  heart  of 
the  city,  it  has  done,  and  is  doing,  splendid  service 
for  the  cause  of  Christ  in  the  midst  of  300,000 
souls. 

Looking  back  over  the  past,  we  who  came  later 
to  the  field  and  seek  to  build  upon  the  foundation 
already  laid,  realize  that  the  work  was  well  done. 
Both  missionary  couples  did  their  best.  We,  the 
younger  ones,  cannot  but  admire  the  veterans  who 
have  gone  before  us,  preparing  the  way.  We 
praise  God  for  men  and  women  such  as  our  first 
two  missionaries  and  their  wives. 

How  the  Work  Progressed. 

It  was  not  long  before  Brother  Taylor  was 
pushing  out  into  the  interior.     At  times,  a  family 


180       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

would  move  into  a  neighboring  city  or  village, 
and  the  missionary  would  then  follow  up  the 
testimony  given  by  that  family,  not  only  to  cheer 
the  little  group  of  believers,  but  also  to  spread 
still  further  the  "Good  News."  At  times,  a  tract 
or  a  gospel  would  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  person 
in  the  interior,  and  upon  a  request  for  more  light 
and  instruction,  the  missionary  would  start  off 
upon  a  visit  to  that  district,  sometimes  finding  on 
his  arrival  whole  families  or  groups  ready  to  "hear 
the  Word  of  God."  Thus  the  light  of  the  gospel 
penetrated  into  the  interior  of  the  State  of  Bahia, 
the  great  plateau  land  of  the  Sao  Francisco  Eiver 
and  into  the  adjacent  States  of  Alagoas,  Pernam- 
buco,  and  Espirito  Santo.  Space  does  not  permit 
of  our  narrating  many  incidents  connected  with 
the  opening  of  the  various  stations.  One  or  two 
will  serve  as  examples  for  the  rest. 

At  the  invitation  of  two  gentlemen  who  had 
found  our  address  on  a  tract  that  had  fallen  into 
their  hands,  we  were  speeding  along  the  railroad 
to  a  place  called  Ama.  This  wras  in  1892.  On  the 
way  thither,  every  book  and  tract  had  been  either 
sold  or  given  away.  There  remained  but  one 
Bible  that  we  were  keeping  for  use  upon  our 
arrival.  A  young  man,  seated  in  another  com- 
partment, attracted  our  attention,  and  wre  felt 
moved  to  offer  him  this  Bible,  which  he  reluctantly 
bought  at  half  the  usual  price.  That  night  he  was 
present  at  the  place  where  we  preached,  and,  for 
the  first  time,  heard  the  truth  about  the  blood  of 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  181 

Jesus  Christ  that  cleanses  from  all  sin.  The  fol- 
lowing day  he  continued  his  journey  to  his  home, 
and  there  gave  the  Bible  to  his  brother,  explaining 
what  had  happened.  That  brother,  touched  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  read  the  Bible,  destroyed  his 
idols,  and  sacrificing  all,  began  to  preach  and  to 
teach  to  his  own  people  the  things  he  had  learned. 
He  was  persecuted,  hated,  and  calumniated;  his 
own  people  did  all  they  could  to  do  away  with  him, 
including  the  brother  who  had  given  him  the 
Bible.  But  far  from  being  turned  aside,  he  con- 
tinued firm  in  the  faith,  and  saw  his  faithfulness 
crowned  with  success.  Today,  as  a  result  of  that 
one  Bible,  and  the  efforts  of  that  self-sacrificing 
and  faithful  brother,  there  are  in  that  district 
alone,  twelve  or  more  organized  churches,  and 
perhaps  as  many  as  one  hundred  preaching  places. 
The  work  is  spreading  rapidly,  to  the  glory  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

The  work  in  the  State  of  Alagoas  began  through 
the  instrumentality  of  the  ex-priest,  Teixeira  de 
Albuquerque.  Anxious  to  preach  to  his  own 
people,  and  especially  to  those  whom  he  had  for- 
merly led  into  idolatry  and  sin,  he  went  on  a 
preaching  tour  among  them.  The  Lord  blessed  his 
efforts,  and  soon  his  relatives  and  friends  em- 
braced the  gospel  and  were  ready  to  follow  Jesus. 
A  missionary  was  called  for,  who  gladly  went, 
finding  a  number  of  people  ready  to  follow 
the  Lord  in  baptism  and  be  organized  into  a 
church.      The   work   has   developed    remarkably, 


182      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

passing  through  various  stages  of  progress  and 
today  stands  firm  in  unity  and  peace.  After 
Brother  Taylor's  visit,  the  work  was  carried  on  by 
Brothers  Entzminger  and  J.  E.  Hamilton.  At 
present,  this  work  is  under  the  care  of  Brother 
Pettigrew.  Besides  a  stron  church  at  Macieo, 
the  capital,  they  have  a  good  work  in  the  cities  of 
Pilar,  Atalaia,  Bio  Largo,  and  Penedo,  this  last 
place  being  the  key  to  the  S.  Francisco  valley. 

A  convert  from  the  Alagoas  field  moved  to  Per- 
nambuco,  preached  the  Word,  gathered  a  group  of 
believers  around  him,  who  soon  called  for  the 
missionary  to  baptize  and  organize  them  into  a 
church.  Brother  Taylor  hastened  to  answer  the 
call,  and,  accomplishing  the  work,  returned,  leav- 
ing a  native  brother  in  charge.  This  work,  on 
account  of  the  lack  of  spiritual  culture  and  atten- 
tion, was  disbanded,  and  when,  in  1892,  Brother 
Entzminger  moved  to  that  city,  it  was  organized 
anew  with  twelve  believers  who  had  remained 
faithful.  Since  that  time  the  work  has  grown 
steadily.  In  1900,  Brother  Entzminger,  on 
account  of  his  wife's  health,  had  to  move  to  the 
South,  and  Brother  Ginsburg  was  asked  to  take  up 
the  work,  especially  as  the  church  was  then  passing 
through  a  crisis  of  persecution.  In  June,  1900, 
we  moved  into  Pernambuco.  We  gave  ourselves 
to  the  building  of  the  First  Church.  With  the 
money  Mrs.  Entzminger  had  raised,  through  the 
ladies  of  South  Carolina,  in  memory  of  her  father, 
Dr.   Griffith;    and  in   Pernambuco,   through   the 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  183 

ladies'  society,  we  bought  a  splendid  plot  of  ground 
in  the  heart  of  the  city.  We  began  to  build  with 
money  raised  almost  entirely  on  the  spot,  together 
with  a  little  from  a  few  other  churches  in  Brazil. 
The  First  Baptist  Church  building  in  Pernambuco 
is  the  largest  gospel  preaching  place  in  the  city, 
and  though  not  yet  complete,  is  certainly  the  best 
one  in  town.  Its  membership  is  nearly  400  strong. 
It  is  self-supporting,  and  has  no  doubt  the  best 
Sunday  school  in  Brazil.  While  working  up  the 
First  Church,  the  suburbs  were  not  neglected,  and 
today  there  are  four  other  churches  in  the  capital. 
All  over  the  interior  the  work  is  progressing.  In 
1902  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cannada  arrived,  and  after 
overcoming  the  difficulties  of  the  language,  gave 
themselves  with  marvelous  success  to  the  building 
up  of  the  boys'  school  and  theological  class  which, 
just  now,  under  the  care  of  Brothers  Muirhead  and 
Hamilton,  are  doing  excellent  work,  not  merely 
educating  the  sons  of  some  of  the  best  families  in 
the  state,  but  also  preparing  a  splendid  staff  of 
ministers  for  the  evangelizing  of  the  great  and 
neglected  North  of  Brazil. 

From  Pernambuco,  the  work  spread  further 
North,  into  the  Amazon  region.  In  1891  Brother 
Nelson,  a  self-supporting  missionary,  arrived  in 
Para,  and  in  1893  his  bride  joined  him,  they  being 
married  at  the  American  consulate.  In  1897  we 
obtained  a  few  months  vacation,  and  instead  of 
going  south,  answered  Brother  Nelson's  earnest 
appeal  to  give  them*  a  visit  in  the  North  on  the 


184 


Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 


equator.  We  shall  never  forget  those  ten  days; 
the  hall,  with  kerosene  boxes  for  seats ;  the  room 
beyond,  divided  into  three  parts — one  corner,  the 
visitor's  sleeping  place;  another,  the  dining 
place,  and  another,  the  kitchen.  No  wonder  Mrs. 
Nelson  had  the  yellow  fever  twice.  But  what 
filled  us  with  joy  was  to  see  the  enthusiasm  of  the 
young  people  and  the  young  converts.  On  Febru- 
ary 2nd,  the  young  converts  were  baptized,  and  a 
church  was  organized.  Brother  Nelson  was 
chosen  pastor,  and  a  few  weeks  afterward,  in  Per- 
nambuco,  with  Brother  Entzmingers  help,  was 
separated  to  the  pastorate  of  the  First  Baptist 
Church  in  the  great  Amazon  valley. 

What  the  Lord  has  accomplished  ever  since 
through  the  instrumentality  of  Brother  Nelson,  as 
well  as  through  the  precious  though  very  short 
stay  of  J.  E.  Hamilton,  it  is  impossible  to  relate  in 
the  space  at  our  disposal.  Brother  Nelson,  ever 
pushing  forward,  soon  organized  a  work  in 
Manaos,  capital  of  the  State  of  Amazonas,  from 
whence  the  gospel  is  rapidly  spreading  into  the 
immense  unexplored  territories  of  the  interior. 
From  the  Amazon,  some  families  moved  into  the 
States  of  Maranhao,  Ceara,  and  Piauhy,  and 
Brother  Nelson,  faithful  to  his  flock,  followed 
these  families  and  organized  churches  in  all  these 
places.  Still  the  work  is  spreading,  and  if  Brother 
Nelson  only  had  sufficient  helpers,  how  this  region 
might  be  prepared  for  Christ  and  his  truth ! 

From  Bahia  the  work  also  spread  to  the  South. 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  185 

Calls  began  to  come  to  Brother  Taylor  to  visit 
that  field.  It  was  not  until  1903  that  a  worker 
was  able  to  go  down  to  this  district  and  organize 
a  church.  A  year  later,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reno  ar- 
rived, making  Victoria  their  headquarters.  They 
have  worked  faithfully  and  have  accomplished 
much  in  spite  of  many  difficulties.  Brother  Reno 
is  untiring  in  his  efforts,  and  is  blessed  with  an 
excellent  partner  in  Mrs.  Reno,  the  latter  proving 
of  the  greatest  help  to  him  personally  and  also  to 
the  outside  work.  From  Victoria,  the  work  has 
spread  into  the  interior  and  along  the  coast, 
churches  springing  up  in  the  wake  of  the  glorious 
gospel  all  over  that  State. 

As  soon  as  the  work  in  Rio  was  more  or  less 
established,  the  missionaries  began  to  cast  around 
for  further  openings,  and  these  were  by  no  means 
lacking. 

A  vast  and  immensely  rich  state,  connected 
with  Rio  by  one  of  the  best  railroads  in  Brazil, 
lay  northwest  of  them.  Before  long  a  work  was 
inaugurated  and  a  church  organized  in  Juiz  de 
Fora,  one  of  the  most  important  cities  of  that 
state.  Here  Brothers  Daniel,  Soper,  Downing, 
S.  J.  Porter,  and  J.  J.  Taylor  labored.  The  two 
first  named  afterward  moved  to  Campos.  Brother 
Porter,  who  arrived  in  Brazil  in  1893  and  went  to 
Juiz  de  Fora  to  get  hold  of  the  Portuguese  lan- 
guage, got  hold  of  the  people  as  well  as  the  lan- 
guage. When  Brother  J.  J.  Taylor  (who,  on 
account    of   the   dread    yellow   fever,   exchanged 


186      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

fields  with  Brother  Porter),  took  over  the  work, 
he  found  a  strong  little  church  and  about  fifteen 
converts  ready  for  baptism.  The  work  was  pros- 
pering, but  local  conditions  obliged  them  to  move 
to  Bello  Horizonte,  the  new  capital  of  the  state, 
where,  with  the  help  of  Misses  Stenger  and  Wil- 
cox, he  established  a  school.  Unfortunately  the 
prosperity  of  the  city  did  not  last,  having  been 
artificially  boomed.  With  the  decline  of  the  city 
the  work  also  declined,  and  the  missionaries 
moved  to  Sao  Paulo.  There  is  a  great  door  open 
for  the  gospel  in  this  state.  There  is  still  a 
small,  struggling  group  of  believers  in  Bello  Hori- 
zonte, and  a  few  churches  in  the  northeastern 
corner  belonging  to  the  Victoria  and  Campos  mis- 
sions. But  the  great  opportunity  for  the  moment 
lies  up  on  the  vast  coal  and  mining  highlands, 
near  the  headquarters  of  the  Sao  Francisco. 

The  city  of  Campos,  situated  in  the  northeastern 
part  of  the  State  of  Kio,  is  called  the  Queen  of  the 
Parahyba  do  Sul  Kiver,  and  is  the  most  important 
city  in  that  state,  even  more  so  than  Mchteroy, 
the  state  capital.  In  1891  Mr.  Bagby  visited  the 
place,  preached  the  gospel,  baptized  believers, 
organized  a  church,  rented  and  furnished  a  hall, 
leaving  a  native  helper  to  carry  on  the  good  work 
thus  started.  From  the  very  beginning  the  work 
was  a  success.  Brethren  Soper  and  Downing 
resolved  to  move  their  headquarters  from  Juiz  de 
Fora  to  Campos,  and  during  the  two  years  spent 
there   laid   firm   foundations.       Sickness   obliged 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  187 

Brother  Soper  to  leave  for  England,  where  he  soon 
passed  into  the  more  immediate  presence  of  his 
Master.  Soon  after,  the  ill  health  of  Mrs.  Down- 
ing obliged  the  Downings  also  to  return  home, 
leaving  the  work  in  the  hands  of  the  native  helper. 
In  1893  the  Naval  Eevolution  broke  out  in  Kio, 
obliging  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ginsburg,  who  were  then 
stationed  in  Nichteroy,  to  move  to  Campos.  Car- 
rying out  our  usual  plan  of  establishing  a  strong 
base,  we  first  fortified  Campos,  the  strategic  point 
of  the  mission  field,  where  a  splendid  plot  of 
ground  was  bought,  right  opposite  the  market, 
and  a  commodious  and  comfortable  building  was 
erected.  Here  also  Mrs.  Ginsburg  started  a  day 
school,  which  lack  of  help  obliged  her  to  abandon. 
Here,  also,  our  Baptist  Publication  House  was 
established,  and  the  Boas  Novas  (Good  News) 
was  published  for  over  six  years. 

From  Campos,  we  launched  out  to  S.  Fidelis, 
rented  a  hall  and  began  preaching,  being  subse- 
quently arrested  on  a  trumped-up  charge  and  sent 
to  prison  in  Mchteroy.  Gaining  our  release,  we 
returned  to  the  place,  and  organized  a  church  with 
four  members.  Soon  the  cause  of  Christ  began  to 
spread,  and  it  today  is  one  of  the  most  prosperous 
districts  in  the  Campos  Mission. 

After  organizing  the  work  in  S.  Fidelis,  we 
turned  to  the  next  most  important  center,  Macah6, 
where  we  had  to  fight  for  every  inch  of  ground,  the 
priest  and  his  superstitious  followers  uniting  with 
the  aristocrats  and  political  leaders,  who  did  not 


188      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

deem  it  beneath  them  to  publish  the  most  atro- 
cious falsehoods  about  the  work  and  the  workers. 
But  the  Lord  prevailed,  and  today  not  merely  the 
city,  but  the  whole  district  is  permeated  with  the 
faithful  followers  of  the  Lamb. 

Before  leaving  for  Pernambuco,  we  were  just 
beginning  to  work  up  the  Friburgo  district,  where 
the  Lord  has  so  remarkably  blessed  the  labors  of 
Brother  Crosland.  In  1902  Brother  Dunstan 
arrived  and  took  charge  of  the  field,  which  was 
then  passing  through  great  difficulties,  but  out  of 
which  the  work  issued,  purified  and  stronger  than 
ever.  When,  in  1905,  Brother  Crosland  joined 
this  Mission,  he  was  able  to  lead  on  the  work  to  a 
wonderful  degree  of  prosperity.  Today  the 
Campos  Mission  is  not  only  very  prosperous,  but 
almost  entirely  self-supporting. 

Unable  to  bear  the  great  heat  of  the  lowlands 
of  Bio,  Mr.  Bagby  was  forced  to  move  further 
South  and  higher  up  into  the  mountains.  He 
finally  decided  on  settling — or  rather  on  re- 
settling— in  Sao  Paulo,  wiiere,  in  1881,  he  had 
first  gone  to  learn  the  language  and  preach  to  the 
American  Colony.  With  Mr.  Bagby  went  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  J.  J.  Taylor,  the  Misses  Stenger  and  Wil- 
cox, who  gave  up  their  work  in  Minas  Geraes,  and 
later  on,  Dr.  J.  L.  Downing  and  Mr.  A.  B.  Deter. 
The  work  began  splendidly  and  has  progressed 
ever  since  in  all  departments.  From  the  capital, 
the  work  has  spread  into  the  interior,  where,  in 
spite  of  bitter  opposition,  it  is  growing  and  devel- 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  189 

oping.  One  great  element  of  help  is  the  Stundist 
immigration — right  strong  Eussian  Baptists  who, 
having  been  through  the  fires  of  persecution  before, 
have  learned  the  secret  of  continuance.  It  does 
one  good  to  hear  them  sing  in  their  deep,  well- 
trained  voices.  They  are  a  great  power  for  right 
eousness  in  this  land  of  open  sin  and  shame,  and 
the  Sao  Paulo  Mission,  in  keeping  a  hold  on  them, 
is  doing  a  great  service  to  Christ  in  Brazil. 

There  are  hundreds  of  Baptists — Germans,  Bus- 
sians,  and  Brazilians — in  the  states  to  the  south 
of  Sao  Paulo.  Eepeated  petitions  have  reached 
us,  begging  us  to  go  there  to  organize  churches, 
and  baptize  converts,  but  lack  of  time,  lack  of 
means,  and  above  all,  lack  of  men  to  look  after  the 
churches  once  organized,  has  prevented  us  from 
doing  so.  Something  ought  to  be  done,  and  that 
soon.  Let  us  pray  that  the  Lord  will  send  the 
man  for  that  most  important  field. 

Solidifying  the  Work. 

After  laying  the  foundation,  the  next  step  is  the 
building  up  of  the  converts.  Fortunately,  the 
missionaries  laboring  in  Brazil,  though  each  one 
is  doing  his  utmost  to  develop  the  particular  part 
of  the  field  entrusted  to  his  care,  will  readily  com- 
bine for  work  that  affects  the  whole  mission  field. 
With  this  spirit  prevailing,  our  cause  is  marching- 
forward  in  a  unity  and  strength  upheld  by  the 
Spirit  of  God. 


190       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

It  was  this  Spirit  that  brought  about  our  first 
General  Convention  in  Bahia,  in  June,  1907,  just 
twenty-five  years  after  the  organization  of  the 
first  Brazilian  Baptist  church.  It  was  a  glorious 
and  memorable  scene  when,  on  June  24,  1907, 
nearly  all  the  missionaries  in  Brazil  presented 
themselves  in  the  large  hall  of  the  First  Baptist 
church,  the  former  Jesuit  prison,  and  publicly 
pledged  themselves  to  stand  by  the  general  Bap- 
tist cause  in  Brazil,  signing,  together  with  the 
native  pastors  and  representatives  from  nearly  the 
whole  field,  the  constitution  of  the  Brazilian  Bap* 
tist  Convention,  which  is  almost  a  literal  trans- 
lation of  the  one  adopted  by  the  Southern  Baptist 
Convention.  Of  course,  we  are  still  struggling, 
still  learning.  We  are  not  yet  perfect,  and  fric- 
tions will  crop  out  here  and  there,  but  we  are 
moving  forward  slowly  but  steadily,  to  a  more 
perfect  understanding  of  the  will  of  God  and  the 
work  of  the  Master  whom  we  love  and  serve.  The 
following  are  a  few  of  the  branches  that  we  are 
seeking  to  develop  in  Brazil : 

The  schools  form  our  first  and  greatest  problem. 
A  thoroughly  equipped  academy  for  every  impor- 
tant mission  center,  and  a  good  school  attached  to 
every  church  in  Brazil,  are  our  ambitions.  This 
is  slow,  hard  work,  needing  patience  and  an  unlim- 
ited supply  of  tact,  but  this  is  being  gradually 
accomplished. 

The  school  in  Bahia  has  done  a  great  work, 
and    is     still     carrying     out     the     purpose     for 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  191 

which  it  was  established  by  Mrs.  Z.  C.  Taylor, 
who,  having  devoted  her  life  to  the  work,  is  now 
forced,  on  account  of  ill-health,  to  give  up.  To 
fully  realize  this  purpose  a  strong  staff  of  efficient 
teachers  should  be  sent  out  at  once.  The  oppor- 
tunity is  unique  in  this  mission  field. 

In  Pernambuco  the  school  is  a  power  for  good 
and  a  great  blessing  to  the  cause,  reaching  those 
that  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  touch  by 
the  usual  evangelistic  methods.  Miss  Voorheis 
not  only  gains  the  hearts  of  the  little  ones  and 
leads  them  to  Jesus,  but  also  the  confidence  of  the 
families  whom  she  visits  and  to  whom  she  has 
often  taken  the  message  of  light  and  life  in  her 
own  sweet,  gentle  way.  Brother  Hamilton  is 
training  a  band  of  young  men,  whose  ministry 
will  tell  for  time  and  for  eternity. 

In  Sao  Paulo,  Mrs.  Bagby  is  accomplishing  a 
great  work  in  her  school,  which  is  drawing  hun- 
dreds of  students  from  all  over  the  state,  and  the 
Misses  Boxy  and  Grove  are  training  kindergarten 
teachers  that  will  fill  a  gap  of  long  standing  in 
our  work* 

A  new  school  was  recently  opened,  in  Friburgo, 
and  we  feel  sure  that  it  will  be  a  blessing  to  the 
great  Campos  Mission. 

One  school,  however,  upon  which  our  hopes  are 
centered  more  than  any  other  is  the  Bio  de  Janeiro 
Baptist  College  and  Seminary.  It  is  under  the 
able  direction  of  Brother  Shepard,  whose  whole 
life  and  being  are  consecrated  to  the  work  of  build- 


192       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

ing  up  a  first-class  high  school  and  seminary  for 
Brazil.  It  is  a  big  undertaking,  and  will  need  all 
the  endurance  and  patience  imaginable;  but  we 
believe  that  Shepard  is  the  man  for  this  particular 
work,  and  that  he  will  see  it  through.  From  that 
institution  we  hope  to  supply  the  greatly  felt  need 
of  preachers,  teachers,  lawyers,  and  doctors.  Oh 
for  a  body  of  men  that  will  sway  the  country  for 
Christ !  For  this  we  work  and  sacrifice  ourselves 
on  behalf  of  our  institution  in  Eio  de  Janeiro. 

Brother  Entzminger  moved  to  Bio  and  began 
the  publication  of  the  Journal  Baptist  a  on  Jan- 
uary 10,  1900.  He  has  proved  himself  to  be  an 
able  writer  and  has  served  the  cause  in  this  capac- 
ity in  a  way  that  few  could  have  done.  He  is  in 
great  need  of  a  business  manager  to  look  after  the 
business  side  of  this  work.  Here  is  a  wonderful 
opportunity  for  a  good  man.  There  is  the  Sunday 
school  literature  that,  well  developed,  ought  to  be 
a  source  of  considerable  income;  there  is  the 
"Cantor  Christao,"  our  Baptist  humnbook,  that 
well  utilized  ought  to  bring  in  great  results.  Our 
B.  Y.  P.  U.  organizations,  our  colleges,  our  sem- 
inaries, our  mission  Boards;  our  churches  need 
tracts  and  other  printed  matter.  Oh,  what  an 
opportunity  to  build  up  an  enterprise  that  will 
be  a  powerful  lever  in  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

We  believe  in  missionary  churches,  and  from 
the  start  we  emphasize  to  the  young  converts  the 
duty  of  giving  the  gospel  to  others.  For  more 
effective  work,  the  Convention  appointed  Home 


Seabra  St.  Baptist  Church,  Bahia,  Brazil         Baptist  Church  at  Rosario,  Argentina 

First  Baptist  Churgh,  Pernambuco.  Brazil 

Rio  Baptist  College  and  Seminary 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  193 

and  Foreign  Mission  Boards.  Both  of  these  are 
already  at  work ;  the  former  in  the  extreme  North, 
supplying  a  man  for  the  newly  opened  territory, 
the  Acre  district,  where  he  is  accomplishing  splen- 
did results.  The  latter  is  supporting  two  men  in 
Chili  and  helping  the  cause  in  Portugal.  Most 
churches  contribute  regularly  and  gladly  to  both 
Boards  at  the  rate  of  about  thirty  cents  a  year 
per  member.  Of  course,  these  are  only  beginnings, 
but  we  are  working  with  an  eye  to  the  future, 
when  we  hope  that  the  natives  will  take  charge 
of  this  work  themselves. 

The  Outlook. 

There  are  many  signs  of  encouragement. 
Slowly  but  surely  the  God-ordained  principles  of 
the  separation  of  the  church  from  the  State  and 
other  human  organizations;  the  supreme  author- 
ity of  the  Holy  Scriptures;  the  regeneration  of 
the  soul  before  church  membership,  etc.,  are  be- 
coming better  known  and  accepted.  As  these 
principles  are  being  drilled  into  the  hearts  and 
minds  of  the  people,  Home,  with  the  principles 
upon  which  it  is  founded,  is  slowly  decaying.  The 
"Truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus"  is  preached  and  practiced 
in  our  churches  and  is  drawing  the  multitudes. 
"Greater  works  than  these  shall  ye  do,  because  I 
go  unto  the  Father." 

Enthusiasm  is  overcoming  difficulties.  We 
have  known  men  to  walk  fifty,  sixty,  and  even  one 

13 


194       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

hundred  miles  to  carry  the  gospel  to  their  parents 
or  relatives.  Men  absent  themselves  from  their 
homes  and  families  for  weeks,  and  even  months, 
just  to  let  their  own  people  hear  the  gospel.  Dif- 
ficulties, trials,  and  dangers  seem  to  offer  no 
obstacles.  They  know  that  they  will  be  stoned, 
maltreated,  and  even  assassinated,  but  they  fear 
nothing.  Their  one  desire  is  to  proclaim  the  love 
of  Jesus  and  his  power  to  save.  A  few  days  ago, 
a  lady  giving  her  testimony  as  to  her  conversion 
told  us  that  when  she  heard  her  mother  had  ac- 
cepted this  religion,  she  rode  360  miles  to  take  it 
out  of  her  heart — and  unfortunately  succeeded. 
But  as  soon  as  she  found  that  she  was  mistaken 
herself,  she  rode  those  360  miles  once  more,  and 
not  succeeding  then  in  winning  her  mother  back, 
she  brought  her  to  her  own  home  and  there,  with 
prayers,  tears,  and  entreaties,  led  her  finally  to 
the  feet  of  Jesus.  With  such  men  and  women, 
the  cause  of  Christ  must  prevail.  Glory  to  His 
Name!  These  are  not  isolated  instances,  for  the 
number  of  such  occurrences  is  not  only  great,  but 
growing. 

We  find  open  doors  everywhere.  There  are  to- 
day but  few  places  where  the  gospel  preacher  is 
not  tolerated,  and  in  the  majority  of  places  he  is 
welcomed.  This,  of  course,  refers  to  the  people 
and  not  to  the  emissaries  of  Home;  the  latter 
would  hardly  be  expected  to  receive  us  with  open 
arms.  A  few  months  ago,  one  of  our  native  pas- 
tors visited  an  important  city  on  the  banks  of  the 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  195 

S.  Francisco  Elver,  and  after  preaching  there  for 
a  few  days,  the  people,  en  masse,  begged  him  to 
make  that  his  place  of  residence,  and  the  business 
men  offered  to  set  him  up  in  business  if  he  would 
stay.  We  could  give  numberless  instances  of  this 
spirit.     Brazil  is  the  "open  door"  today. 

We  daily  meet  with  open  hearts  in  all  classes 
of  society,  hearts  yearning  for  the  true  light  and 
life,  "as  it  is  in  Jesus."  An  influential  judge,  from 
the  State  of  Piauhy,  has  been  spending  a  few  days 
in  our  house.  He  begged  us  to  visit  that  state, 
whose  population,  abandoning  Eome,  is  drifting 
into  materialism  for  the  lack  of  someone  to  tell 
them  of  the  riches  of  grace  that  are  in  Christ 
Jesus.  This  appeal  deeply  touched  our  heart, 
unable  as  we  are,  at  present,  to  respond  to  it. 

The  Call. 

We  need  Spirit-filled,  consecrated  men  and 
women  for  evangelistic  work  at  all  the  mission 
stations;  teachers  are  needed  in  the  schools,  and 
especially  ladies  for  the  kindergarten  and  primary 
work. 

There  is  one  feature  of  mission  work  that  is 
deplorably  overlooked.  We  refer  to  the  coming 
out  of  self-supporting  missionaries;  men  who  at 
home  are  filling  positions  in  offices,  warehouses? 
public  works,  and  who,  at  home,  are  proving  their 
faith  by  their  works,  both  in  their  so-called  "sec- 
ular" employment,  and  also  in  "missionary"  en- 


196      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

deavor.  Are  not  these  also  called  to  "Go  into  all 
the  world."  Was  it  not  by  such,  scattered  by  the 
persecution,  that  the  gospel  was  carried  into  "the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  world?"  Does  not  the 
Brazilian  also  need  the  example  referred  to  in  Acts 
20 :  34-36,  of  men  "working  out"  their  salvation, 
supporting  the  weak,  living  the  ordinary  life  and 
yet  governed  by  an  extraordinary  Spirit?  This 
is  a  country  of  almost  unlimited  possibilities,  as 
the  nations  in  the  old  countries  are  not  slow  to 
perceive.  How  great  the  need  of  truly  converted 
men  to  step  forward  and  take  a  place  among  the 
rest,  for  the  Master's  sake.  Among  the  thousands 
of  mechanics,  engineers,  railroad  men,  bank  clerks, 
bookkeepers,  at  home,  are  there  none  who  will 
respond  to  the  Master's  call,  come  to  Brazil  and 
still  "abide  in  the  calling"  wherein  they  were 
called? 

You  are  needed.  It  may  be  at  home,  in  serving 
by  stirring  up  interest,  in  intercession  on  behalf 
of  the  work;  it  may  be  here  on  the  field  itself. 
The  call  has  come  as  a  surprise  to  many,  once 
they  have  been  awakened  to  listen  for  it.  If  you 
cannot  go  yourself,  it  is  possible,  perhaps,  to  send 
a  substitute. 

With  eyes  and  ears  and  hearts  wide  open,  the 
multitudes  of  Brazil  await  the  gospel.  What  have 
you  done  to  give  it  to  them  ?  What  have  you  done 
to  satisfy  the  heart-hunger  of  this  people,  this 
longing  for  a  better  life,  a  better  hope,  and  a  better 
knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God  ? 


The  Brazilian  Mission.  197 

The  Brazilian  Mission. 

1.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  43. 

(2)  Native,  76. 

2.  Church  Statistics — 

(1)  Churches,  109. 

(2)  Members,  7,085. 

(3)  Church  buildings,  42. 

(4)  Out-stations,  200. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  89. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  3,230. 

3.  Schools — 

(1)  Day  schools,  16. 

(2)  Girls'  School  in    Bahia. 

(3)  Boys'  School  in  Pernambuco. 

(4)  Girls'  School  in  Sao  Paulo. 

(5)  Theological  Training  School  in  Pernambuco. 

(6)  Baptist  College  and  Seminary  in  Rio. 

4.  Literary— 

(1)  Publishing  House  in  Rio. 

(2)  ■  "O  Jornal  Baptista"  (weekly  paper). 

(3)  Sunday  school  literature,  books  and  tracts. 

5.  Work  opened  1879. 


CHAPTER  X. 


THE  MEXICAN  MISSIONS. 

About  16,000,000  people  live  in  Mexico,  one- 
fourth  of  whom  are  Indians,  or  pure  Mexicans, 
representing  the  tribes  found  here  by  Cortez.. 
The  other  three-fourths  are  a  mixed  race.  Among 
the  foreigners  are  found  French,  German,  English, 
and  Americans,  the  latter  predominating. 

Eoman  Catholicism  was  brought  into  this  coun- 
try by  the  Spaniards  at  the  time  of  the  conquest 
and  is  still  the  religion  of  the  majority  of  the 
people.  Naturally,  the  customs,  civil  and  social, 
have  been  molded  by  the  religion  of  the  people — 
the  priest  and  the  church  being  the  center  of 
everything.  The  Lord's  day  is  a  holiday  instead 
of  a  holy  day,  a  day  of  revelry,  of  bull  fights,  the- 
aters, circuses,  and  army  maneuvers.  State  and 
federal  elections  are  held  on  Sunday. 

Hernando  Cortez  landed  in  Mexico  on  March  20, 
1519.  On  setting  out  from  Cuba,  he  raised  the 
flag  of  conquest — a  black  ensign  emblazoned  with 
the  arms  of  Charles  V,  it  being  a  cross  borne  in 
clouds  with  the  motto :  "Friends,  let  us  follow 
the  cross,  and  if  we  have  faith  we  shall  conquer." 
With  the  landing  of  Cortez  began  a  reign  of 
bloodshed  and  plunder  that  resulted  in  the  subju- 

(198) 


The  Mexican  Missions. 


199 


MEXICO 

OUR      PRINCIPAL.     MISSION 
/STATIONS    ARE     UNDERLlTTED 
)NLV    CHIEF    RAILWAVS    ARE   GIVEN 


UNITED   STATER 


GULF 


C     QCEA*4 


200       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

gation  of  all  the  Indian  tribes,  the  possession  of 
their  lands  by  the  Spaniards,  and  the  establish- 
ment of  Eoman  Catholicism  as  the  religion  of  the 
people.  For  three  centuries  Spain  ruled  in  this 
goodly  land  and  Eomanism  flourished  like  a  green 
bay  tree.  Not  until  1810  was  the  cry  of  Independ- 
ence raised  by  the  patriot  priest,  Hidalgo.  He 
was  at  once  excommunicated,  and  when  he  was 
captured,  was  shot,  then  decapitated,  his  head 
being  carried  to  the  city  of  Guanajuato,  where  it 
was  hung  high  up  on  the  walls  of  the  castle  of 
Granaditas.  In  1821  a  quasi  liberty  was  declared, 
and  while  it  was  not  much  in  fact,  it  was  a  proph- 
ecy of  what  was  to  be.  Mexico  had  felt  the  thrill 
of  a  new  life;  she  had  beheld  the  signs  of  the 
dawn  of  a  better  day.  The  fires  kindled  on  that 
memorable  September  night  by  the  old  patriot, 
Hidalgo,  were  kept  burning  by  a  few  faithful 
souls.  The  desire  for  liberty  spread  from  breast 
to  breast,  from  one  community  to  another,  until 
the  adoption  of  the  new  Constitution  in  1857. 
The  laws  against  the  clergy  were  then  enforced, 
and  liberty  of  conscience  became  a  fact  for  the 
first  time  in  the  history  of  Mexico. 

According  to  the  best  authority,  Kev.  James 
Hickey  was  the  first  to  begin  mission  work  on  the 
northern  frontier,  and  the  First  Baptist  Church  of 
Monterey,  which  was  organized  by  him,  is  the 
oldest  church  in  the  Republic.  He  was  born  in 
Ireland  on  September  28,  1800,  and  was  educated 
for   the   priesthood.      He   abandoned   Romanism 


The  Mexican  Missions.  201 

and  became  a  Protestant  preacher.  He  emigrated 
to  America,  spent  several  years  in  the  Eastern 
states,  and  having  become  an  agent  of  the  Ameri- 
can Tract  Society,  came  South  about  the  opening 
of  the  Civil  War,  and  crossing  the  border  at 
Brownsville,  Texas,  began  work  at  Matamoras. 
While  here,  he  received  an  invitation  from 
Thomas  W.  Westrup  to  come  to  Monterey.  West- 
rup,  at  this  time,  was  not  a  believer,  and  sent  for 
Hickey  to  come  and  teach  him  the  way  of  the  Lord. 
In  answer  to  Westrup's  invitation,  Hickey  came 
to  Monterey,  arriving  in  November,  1862,  and  at 
once  set  about  his  Master's  business.  On  January 
13,  1864,  just  outside  the  city  of  Monterey,  in  a 
ditch,  Hickey  baptized  Thomas  Westrup,  Jose  M. 
Uranga,  and  the  latter's  brother,  and  that  same 
night,  in  Hickey's  house,  a  church  was  organized 
with  five  constituent  members — Hickey,  his  wife, 
and  the  three  baptized  that  afternoon.  Soon 
after  the  death  of  Hickey,  Thomas  Westrup  was 
appointed  agent  of  the  American  Bible  Society 
and  began  his  work  as  such,  March  1,  1867. 

In  the  summer  of  1869,  having  heard  that  there 
was  a  large  number  of  Baptists  in  and  around 
Monterey,  Dr.  Backus,  who  was  at  that  time  the 
Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Home  Mission 
Society  of  New  York,  wrote  a  letter  of  inquiry  to 
Westrup,  and  soon  after  invited  him  to  New  York 
to  confer  with  the  Society.  In  the  fall  of  1871, 
Westrup  accepted  this  invitation,  and  returned  to 
Mexico  as  the  first  missionary  of  the  Home  Mis- 


202      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

sion  Society.  The  day  after  his  arrival  from  New 
York,  eleven  members  of  the  church  waited  on  him 
for  a  conference,  and  after  going  over  the  whole 
matter  carefully,  it  was  decided  to  reorganize  the 
church.  This  was  done  on  July  4,  1871,  when  the 
church  formally  assumed  the  name,  "Baptist 
Church  of  Monterey."  There  was  no  change  either 
1  in  character  or  doctrine.  It  was  simply  a  reor- 
ganization to  rid  themselves  of  the  irregularities 
that  had  crept  in. 


WORK  BEGUN  BY  SOUTHERN  BAPTISTS. 

On  account  of  continued  revolutions  on  the  fron- 
tier, the  Home  Mission  Society  withdrew  from 
the  field  in  1876,  and  it  was  not  until  1881  that 
it  returned  to  take  up  the  work  anew.  In  the 
meantime,  the  Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the 
Southern  Baptist  Convention  began  work  in 
Mexico  by  appointing  John  O.  Westrup,  a  brother 
of  Thomas,  and  through  whose  labors  he  was  con- 
verted from  Komanism,  as  its  first  missionary. 
He  lived  in  the  town  of  Muzquiz,  State  of  Coa- 
huila,  where  a  church  had  been  organized  in  1877. 
The  field  assigned  him  was  the  entire  State  of 
Coahuila.  For  some  months  he  had  been  sup- 
ported by  the  State  Mission  Board  of  Texas.  The 
field,  in  which  there  were  at  that  time  four 
churches,  was  turned  over  to  the  Eichmond  Board. 
A  few  months  after  being  appointed  by  our  Board, 


The  Mexican  Missions.  203 

he,  together  with  a  Mexican  companion,  was  mur- 
dered by  Indian  bandits  on  December  21, 
1880,  about  fifteen  miles  west  of  Progresso,  in  the 
State  of  Coahuila.  The  assassination  of  Westrup 
served  to  awaken  the  Baptists  at  home,  both  North 
and  South.  The  Home  Mission  Society  hastened 
to  take  up  the  work  laid  down  five  years  before, 
and  the  Eichmond  Board  appointed  W.  M.  Flour- 
noy  to  succeed  the  lamented  Westrup.  Through 
the  influence  of  General  A.  T.  Hawthorn,  who  at 
that  time  was  Secretary  of  the  "Texas  State  Board 
of  Missions,"  Eev.  O.  C.  Pope  and  Bev.  W.  D. 
Powell  came  to  Mexico  in  the  spring  of  1882  to 
"spy  out  the  land."  On  their  return,  the  "spies" 
made  a  most  favorable  report  of  what  they  had 
seen,  and  at  once  Southern  Baptists  began  to 
make  ready  to  "go  up  and  possess  the  land."  Ac- 
cordingly, on  May  31,  1882,  W.  D.  Powell  and 
wife  and  his  wife's  sister,  Miss  Anna  Mayberry, 
were  appointed  as  missionaries  to  Mexico,  and  in 
October  of  the  same  year,  they  arrived  in  Saltillo, 
the  capital  of  the  State  of  Coahuila. 

Organization  and  Growth — 1882-1898. 

On  reaching  Saltillo,  the  missionaries  rented  a 
house,  and  in  a  short  time  they  began  to  hold 
public  services,  Mr.  Powell  preaching  through  an 
interpreter.  Mrs.  Powell  and  Miss  Mayberry 
opened  a  day  school,  and  at  the  same  time  Mr. 
Powell  began  to  plan  for  a  school  for  boys,  where 


204      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

young  men  who  so  desired  might  study  for  the  min- 
istry. Much  work  had  already  been  done  in  this 
state  by  the  brethren  working  out  of  Monterey. 
The  new  missionaries  found  two  workers,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Flournoy,  five  preaching  stations,  fifty-two 
church  members,  and  one  school  with  forty  pupils. 
In  May,  1884,  less  than  two  years  afterward,  the 
reports  show  three  missionaries,  seven  native 
helpers,  seven  preaching  stations,  and  117  church 
members.  During  this  time,  El  Heraldo,  the  first 
Baptist  paper  ever  published  in  Mexico,  was  gotten 
out  by  W.  D.  Powell  and  Prof.  J.  M.  Cardenas. 
During  the  four  years  of  its  existence,  it  was  a 
great  help. 

In  December,  1883,  Dr.  Tupper,  who  was  then 
the  Corresponding  Secretary  of  our  Board,  came 
to  Saltillo  to  arrange  the  titles  to  several  pieces 
of  property — one  in  Saltillo  to  be  used  as  a  school 
for  girls,  and  another  for  a  church  and  school 
purposes;  also  a  property  in  Parras,  which 
was  given  to  the  Board  by  Governor  Madero. 
Another  in  Patos  was  rented.  Schools  were  to 
be  opened  in  these  three  places  at  an  early  day. 
Madero  Institute  was  opened  at  Saltillo  in  Octo- 
ber, 1884,  with  seventy  pupils  in  attendance.  On 
the  occasion  of  the  formal  opening  of  the  school, 
quite  a  number  of  American  Baptists  were  pres- 
ent. The  corner-stone  of  the  new  meeting  house 
was  laid  at  the  same  time,  and  those  present  con- 
tributed f  1,400  to  the  building  fund.  The  school 
at  Patos  was  opened  by  Misses  Barton  and  Tupper 


The  Mexican  Missions.  205 

in  the  following  year,  and  in  1889,  Zaragoza  Insti- 
tute for  boys  was  organized  in  Saltillo  by  H.  E. 
Moseley,  who  was  afterward  driven  out  of  the 
country  by  persecution.  On  December  12,  1884, 
messengers  from  eight  churches  having  150  mem- 
bers met  in  Saltillo  and  organized  the  "Baptist 
Association  of  Coahuila."  On  Sunday,  during 
the  session  of  the  Association,  J.  M.  Gonzalez  was 
set  apart  to  the  work  of  the  ministry,  and  the  day 
following,  he,  Albino  Martinez,  and  Pedro  N. 
Flores,  were  appointed  as  missionaries  within  the 
bounds  of  the  Association. 

In  1887,  the  Saltillo  meeting  house,  so  auspi- 
ciously begun  two  years  before,  was  completed  and 
dedicated.  This  was  the  first  meeting  house  built 
by  Southern  Baptists  in  Mexico,  and  its  com- 
pletion marked  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  our 
work. 

While  the  Saltillo  field  had  received  special 
attention  on  account  of  its  being  our  natural  "base 
of  supplies,"  the  workers  were  constantly  looking 
toward  other  fields  where  the  doors  were  open 
and  the  harvest  was  waiting  for  the  reapers.  In 
1887,  Zacatecas,  capital  of  the  state  of  the  same 
name,  was  occupied  by  H.  P.  McCormick  and  wife, 
and  these  were  soon  after  joined  by  Miss  Barton, 
who  went  to  open  a  day  school.  Several  members 
of  the  Saltillo  church  had  moved  to  Zacatecas, 
looking  for  work  in  the  mines,  and  these  formed 
the  nucleus  of  the  church  which  was  soon  after 
organized.      In   1892,  a  splendid  meeting  house 


206      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

was  built,  and  in  the  same  year  McCormick,  hav- 
ing moved  to  Morelia,  Eudd  took  charge  of  this 
work  and  remained  until  his  removal  to  Saltillo  in 
the  fall  of  1893.  He  was  succeeded  by  Eev.  Marion 
Gassoway,  who  died  in  Zacatecas  in  December, 
1895,  since  which  time  no  American  missionary 
has  lived  in  that  city.  The  work  has  been  carried 
on  by  native  preachers. 

Guadalajara,  the  capital  of  the  State  of  Jalisco, 
is  easily  the  second  city  in  the  Republic,  and  the 
commercial  capital  of  a  great  territory  reaching 
to  the  Pacific  coast.  To  this  city  D.  A.  Wilson 
moved  in  1887,  and  in  a  short  time  gathered  a  good 
congregation.  He  was  assisted  at  different  times 
by  Mrs.  Janie  Duggan,  Miss  McDavid,  and  Miss 
Sarah  Hale.  In  1892  he  began  publishing  our 
Sunday  School  Quarterly,  Expositor  Bi~blico, 
which  is  now  the  best  Sunday  school  quarterly 
published  in  Spanish.  It  circulates  in  Mexico, 
Porto  Rico,  and  Cuba,  as  well  as  in  South 
America. 

The  year  1892  was  a  year  of  expansion,  Morelia 
being  one  of  the  two  new  fields  opened  in  that  year 
is  the  capital  of  the  state  of  Michoacan.  H.  P. 
McCormick,  who  had  done  pioneer  work  in  Zaca- 
tecas, came  to  Morelia  and  remained  until  his 
return  to  the  States  in  1898.  During  his  ministry 
here,  many  places  were  visited,  a  great  deal  of  lit- 
erature was  distributed,  churches  were  organized 
in  Morelia,  San  Juan,  and  Guayameo;   two  faith- 


The  Mexican  Missions.  207 

ful  native  preachers  were  ordained,  and  in  March, 
1898,  the  Michoacan  Association  was  organized. 

Toluca  was  the  second  field  opened  in  this  year. 
The  regions  beyond  had  sent  up  the  "Macedonian" 
cry.  W.  D.  Powell,  who  had  done  a  remarkable 
work  on  the  frontier  during  the  ten  years  he  had 
lived  in  Saltillo,  moved  to  Toluca,  capital  of  the 
State  of  Mexico,  in  1892.  A  church  was  organized 
in  the  following  year,  and  before  he  left  the  field, 
in  1898,  many  believers  had  been  baptized  at 
various  places  and  churches  had  been  organized 
in  Villa  Guerrero  and  in  Taxco,  a  splendid  town 
in  the  State  of  Guerrero. 

The  work  so  auspiciously  begun  in  1882  had 
grown  rapidly  during  the  sixteen  years  from  1882 
to  1898 ;  the  single  station  had  multiplied  into  six 
independent  fields;  instead  of  work  in  one  state, 
we  had  work  in  seven  states;  and  since  the  first 
three  workers  reached  Saltillo  in  1882,  twenty-six 
additional  workers,  men  and  women,  had  been 
sent  out.  At  the  opening  of  the  year  1898  there 
were  fourteen  American  missionaries  on  the  differ- 
ent fields,  besides  a  large  number  of  native  pastors 
and  helpers.  Madero  and  Zaragoza  Institutes 
had  grown,  and  the  influence  of  both  was  being 
felt  far  and  wide,  while  the  school  at  Patos  had 
also  prospered  under  the  missionaries  who  were 
assisted  by  faithful  native  teachers.  That  mis- 
sions, like  individuals,  have  their  days  of  adversity 
as  well  as  their  days  of  prosperity  has  been  amply 
demonstrated  by  the  Mexican  Mission.      It  is  not 


208      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

the  purpose  of  this  chronicler  to  go  into  the 
causes  of  our  troubles  in  that  epoch.  Suffice  it  to 
say  that  the  year  1898  saw  the  splendid  work  so 
well  begun  almost  completely  abandoned.  Three  of 
our  most  active  workers,  with  their  wives,  resigned 
and  left  the  field.  Madero  Institute,  that  had 
been  the  chief  pride  and  joy  of  the  whole  mission, 
was  closed;  Zaragoza  Institute,  our  training 
school  for  preachers,  closed  its  doors;  and  the 
school  at  Patos  was  abandoned. 

Eeorganization  and  Eeinforcement — 1898-1909. 

When  the  writer  and  his  family  reached  Saltillo 
on  October  22,  1898,  he  found  Miss  Sarah  Hale 
the  only  American  missionary  in  the  city,  living 
in  the  Madero  Institute,  caring  for  the  property, 
and  at  the  same  time  editing  and  publishing  El 
Expositor  Biblico,  our  Sunday  school  quarterly 
that  had  been  started  in  Guadalajara  some  years 
before.  The  Saltillo  church  had  a  native  pastor, 
but  there  was  little  life  in  the  church,  and  the  con- 
gregations were  very  small.  At  the  time  of  the 
"exodus,"  A.  C.  Watkins  remained  in  Torreon, 
and  about  the  time  the  writer  arrived  in  Saltillo, 
J.  G.  Chastain  moved  from  Doctor  Arroyo  to 
Morelia.  These  brethren,  with  their  wives  and 
Miss  Hale,  constituted  our  missionary  force.  In 
planning  the  reorganization  of  its  work  in  this 
republic,  the  Board  thought  it  wise  to  have  two 
Missions  instead  of  one,  as  formerly,  and  decided 
on  the  22d  parallel  as  the  dividing  line  between 
the  North  and  South  Mexican  Missions. 


Inner  Court  of  Girls'  School  Building,  Toluca.  Mexico 
School  Building.  Chihuahua  Madero  Institute,  Saltillo 

Theological  Training  School,  Torreon 


The  Mexican  Missions.  209 

Miss  Hale  remained  in  Saltillo,  editing  El 
Expositor,  and  in  July,  1899,  J.  S.  Cheavens,  who 
had  come  out  in  December  of  the  year  previous, 
moved  from  Torreon  to  Saltillo  and  assumed 
charge  of  the  work  of  the  entire  Saltillo  field.  In 
October  of  the  same  year,  Miss  Barton  returned 
to  the  work  and  opened  a  day  school  in  the  old 
institute  building.  It  was  a  small  affair  com- 
pared with  former  years,  but  it  was  something, 
and  the  workers  looked  forward  to  the  time  when 
Madero  Institute  would  be  reopened  and  when 
the  Lord  would  again  send  prosperity  to  all  the 
work  on  that  field. 

In  the  year  1900,  Miss  Hale,  on  account  of  fail- 
ing health,  resigned,  and  Cheavens  became  editor 
of  El  Expositor,  which  place  he  filled  with  marked 
ability  until  four  years  later,  when  he  resigned  as 
editor  on  account  of  the  press  of  other  duties,  and 
J.  G.  Chastain  was  elected  to  take  his  place. 

In  the  early  part  of  1904,  G.  H.  Lacy  gathered 
together  some  teachers,  and  on  January  11,  Ma- 
dero Institute,  after  a  lapse  of  five  years,  was 
reopened  with  twenty-six  girls  in  attendance  on 
the  first  day,  which  number  within  two  months 
grew  to  fifty.  The  reopening  of  this  once  famous 
institution  marked  distinct  advance,  and  all  felt 
this  school  would  be  a  greater  power  than  ever 
before.  Miss  Ida  Hayes  is  now  in  charge  of  this 
school. 

The  Torreon  field,  that  had  been  opened  by  A.  C. 
Watkins  in  1896,  was  still  occupied  by  him  at  the 

14 


210       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

time  of  the  reorganization  of  the  Mission,  and 
amid  great  difficulties  he  had  done  a  substantial 
work.  As  the  Zaragoza  Institute  had  been  closed 
and  the  brethren  deemed  it  unwise  to  attempt  to 
reopen  it,  and  as  the  need  of  more  trained  native 
preachers  was  great,  in  1901  he  opened  a  theo- 
logical training  school  in  Torreon,  where  he  gath- 
ered a  small  company  of  young  men,  and  with  the 
help  of  his  native  assistant,  began  to  train  them  as 
preachers.  This  school  has  already  sent  out  a 
number  of  active,  efficient  preachers,  and  is  des- 
tined to  play  no  small  part  in  our  work  on  the 
frontier. 

In  the  fall  of  1903,  Watkins  was  forced  by  the 
continued  illness  of  his  wife  to  return  to  the 
States,  and  Cheavens  returned  to  Torreon  from 
Saltillo  to  take  charge  of  all  the  work  on  the  Tor- 
reon field,  including  the  theological  institute.  A 
splendid  new  school  building  was  completed  amid 
great  rejoicing  in  October,  1905.  Cheavens  re- 
mained with  the  school  until  the  spring  of  1907, 
when  he  was  forced  to  return  to  the  States  to 
recuperate  his  failing  health.  On  the  retirement 
of  Cheavens,  T>.  H.  LeSueur  was  elected  to  take 
his  place. 

In  1902,  a  day  school  was  opened  in  Toluca, 
under  the  care  of  Mrs.  Miiller.  At  the  opening  of 
the  second  session  a  boarding  department  was 
added,  and  Miss  Barton  came  down  from  Saltillo 
to  take  charge  as  principal,  Mrs.  Miiller  having 
resigned.      Another  native  teacher  was  secured, 


The  Mexican  Missions.  211 

and  the  second  year  was  a  very  satisfactory  one  in 
every  way.  It  was  the  first  boarding  school  we 
had  ever  had  in  the  South  Mexican  Mission,  and 
our  hearts  warmed  to  the  new-comer,  for  we  be- 
lived  it  to  be  a  gift  from  the  Lord.  We  named  it 
"Institute  Anglo-Mexicano." 

Having  seen  the  beginning  of  a  boarding  school 
for  girls,  the  missionaries  in  the  South  Mexi- 
can Mission  felt  that  the  time  had  come  when 
we  ought  to  have  a  boarding  school  for  boys. 
In  February,  1903,  the  "Institute  Centra?" 
was  opened,  with  eight  boys  in  attendance. 
It  was  a  small  beginning,  but  the  founders 
had  thought  they  had  seen  a  vision  of  a  real 
college,  with  a  theological  department.  The 
purpose  and  aim  of  it  all  was  the  thorough  train- 
ing of  Christian  workers.  Both  of  these  schools 
grew  rapidly,  and  we  soon  saw  the  necessity  of 
buying  properties  to  insure  better  results.  In  the 
spring  of  1904  the  "Institute  Anglo-Mexicano," 
our  school  for  girls,  moved  into  its  own  home,  a 
splendid  building,  well  located,  and  in  February, 
1906,  the  fourth  session  of  the  "Institute  Central" 
was  opened  in  its  own  quarters  with  a  full  corps 
of  teachers  and  a  large  number  of  students. 

Co-education  had  never  been  tried  in  any  school 
in  the  South  field  up  to  this  time,  but  driven  by 
necessity  we  consolidated  all  our  class  work  of 
the  two  schools  in  1905,  and  it  has  proved  a  great 
success.  At  the  same  time  there  was  a  saving  in 
teachers'  salaries  of  hundreds  of  dollars  annually. 


212       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  school  work  in 
Toluca,  the  missionary  in  charge  had  in  mind  the 
idea  of  adding  a  training  department  in  which  a 
special  course  would  be  given  to  the  young  ladies 
who  desired  to  prepare  themselves  for  special 
work  in  our  Missions,  but  it  was  not  possible  to 
carry  out  the  plan  until  the  spring  of  1906.  In 
April  of  that  year,  Miss  Susan  Jones,  who  had 
been  at  work  in  the  City  of  Mexico  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  Woman's  Board  of  Chicago,  was 
appointed  as  a  missionary  of  our  Board,  and  at 
once  took  charge  of  this  work.  iUtkough  she  has 
labored  amid  great  difficulties,  she  has  been  able 
to  keep  the  work  going,  and  this  year  her  first 
class  graduates. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  year  1901,  Mr.  Wilson 
signified  his  intention  of  leaving  Guadalajara,  and 
the  Board  at  once  set  about  planning  to  reenter 
that  important  field.  It  was  thought  wise  that 
J.  G.  Chastain  take  up  that  work,  and  accordingly, 
in  the  spring  of  the  same  year,  he  moved  to  Guad- 
alajara. Since  the  going  of  Chastain  to  that  field, 
the  church  has  been  reorganized — a  splendid 
property  for  church  and  school  purposes  has  been 
bought,  services  opened  in  one  of  the  suburbs  of 
the  city,  a  church  organized,  and  a  Sunday  school 
established  in  Colima,  the  capital  of  the  State  of 
Colima.  In  November,  1905,  our  first  medical 
Missionary,  Dr.  B.  W.  Hooker,  was  transferred 
from  Leon  to  Guadalajara,  where  he  at  once  began 
what  has  since  grown  into  a  great  work.      The 


The  Mexican  Missions.  213 

year  following,  Mrs.  Hooker  opened  a  flourishing 
day  school. 

In  the  spring  of  1899,  an  uneducated  native 
preacher,  Petronela  Cardona,  who  had  been  bap- 
tized years  before  by  W.  D.  Powell,  went  from 
Torreon  to  Durango  looking  for  work.  He  did 
not  forget  to  do  work  for  the  Lord,  and  it  was  not 
long  before  a  company  of  believers  sent  a  letter  to 
our  missionary  in  Torreon,  asking  him  to  come 
over  and  baptize  them,  which  he  did.  In  Novem- 
ber of  the  same  year  a  church  was  organized  in 
the  city  of  Durango,  of  which  this  same  Mexican 
preacher  became  pastor. 

J.  E.  Davis,  being  a  practical  printer,  by  the 
permission  of  the  Board,  collected  several  hundred 
dollars  before  leaving  the  States,,  and  on  his 
arrival  in  Toluca  in  October,  1904,  bought  a  press, 
and  in  a  short  time  our  first  printery  began  opera- 
tions. During  the  following  year  one  quarter's 
issue  of  El  Expositor,  then  edited  by  J.  G.  Chas- 
tain  was  printed  on  our  own  press.  This  marked 
another  epoch  in  our  work  in  Mexico.  In  Decem- 
ber, 1905,  the  printery  was  moved  to  Leon,  and 
since  then  has  been  greatly  enlarged.  On  our 
own  presses  are  now  printed  El  Expositor  Biblico, 
"Nuestros  Ninos,"  a  Sunday  school  quarterly  for 
children,  first  edited  and  published  by  J.  G.  Chas- 
tain;  also  our  weekly  denominational  paper,  El 
Atalaya,  which  first  saw  the  light  in  January, 
1908.  Several  books  have  been  gotten  out  by  our 
printery,  such  as  "The  Short  History  of  the  Bap- 


214       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

tists,"  by  Vedder;  Christian's  Book  on  Immer- 
sion; Dr.  Frost's  Book  on  the  Lord's  Supper,  be- 
sides others  which  will  be  of  great  help  to  our 
native  preachers  especially.  In  additon  to  his 
other  duties  in  and  out  of  the  printery,  Davis  was 
elected  in  July,  1907,  editor  of  all  our  periodicals 

In  the  early  days  of  our  work  in  Mexico,  our 
first  missionary  urged  the  Board  to  send  a  man  to 
Chihuahua,  but  it  was  June  13,  1902,  when  Eev. 
J.  W.  Newbrough  and  family  reached  that  city 
for  the  purpose  of  opening  work.  They  found  a 
number  of  Baptist  people  who  had  moved  in  from 
other  places,  and  on  June  22d,  soon  after  their 
arrival,  a  church  was  organized,  which  developed 
into  a  strong,  prosperous  body.  About  1906,  the 
school  that  had  been  conducted  by  Mr.  Newbrough 
as  a  private  enterprise,  became  a  mission  school, 
and  the  past  year,  1908,  saw  a  commodious  build- 
ing completed.  In  1906  the  second  Baptist 
church  in  this  state  was  organized  in  Parral,  an 
important  mining  town,  and  here  was  opened,  in 
February,  1908,  our  first  industrial  school,  and  so 
far  as  the  writer  knows,  the  first  industrial  school 
opened  by  any  denomination  in  this  country.  The 
church  and  school  are  both  in  charge  of  Bev.  P.  H. 
Pierson.  The  school  has  received  no  help  from 
the  Board,  being  supported  entirely  by  Mr.  Pier- 
son  and  his  personal  friends.  There  are  at  present 
forty  boys  in  attendance,  and  the  school  gives 
promise  of  becoming  a  great  blessing  to  that  field. 

In  March,  1909,  the  Chihuahua  Association  was 


The  Mexican  Missions.  215 

organized,  and  in  August  following,  another 
church  was  organized  at  Santa  Kosalia. 

When  W.  F.  Hatchell  left  Morelia  in  November, 
1904,  he  wras  anxious  to  get  to  a  lower  altitude. 
He  decided  to  open  work  on  the  west  coast,  and 
moved  to  Hermosillo,  capital  of  the  State  of 
Sonora.  He  maintained  preaching  services  in 
Hermosillo  and  at  Guaymas,  on  the  coast.  At 
the  latter  place  a  church  was  organized  in  Jan- 
uary, 1907.  In  April  of  this  same  year,  Hatchell 
and  Frank  Marrs  exchanged  fields,  Hatchell  going 
to  Jaurez.  Marrs  reached  Hermosillo  in  April, 
and  in  June  a  church  was  organized  in  that  city. 
Since  then,  churches  have  been  organized  in  Torin, 
Alamos,  and  at  Mazatlan,  State  of  Sinaloa.  Sev- 
eral native  preachers  have  been  set  to  work  on  that 
field,  and  besides  the  three  churches  organized, 
flourishing  day  schools  have  been  opened  in  Guay- 
mas and  Mazatlan. 

Although  Ciudad  Jaurez  is  in  the  State  of 
Chihuahua,  it  was  thought  wise  to  make  it  the 
home  of  a  missionary  and  the  center  of  an  inde- 
pendent work.  Leaving  Durango  in  July,  1906, 
Frank  Marrs  went  to  Juarez,  and  finding  there 
several  Baptists,  he  organized  them  into  a  church 
in  September  following  his  arrival.  He  remained 
in  this  field  and  in  charge  of  this  work  until  April, 
1907,  when  he  exchanged  fields  with  Hatchell  and 
moved  to  Hermosillo.  Hatchell  has  been  in  Jaurez 
since  the  exchange.  The  church  has  grown  in 
numbers,  and  last  year  a  day  school  was  opened. 


216      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Would  that  I  had  space  to  tell  more  of  the  his- 
toric labors  of  our  first  missionaries,  and  would 
that  I  could  give  a  more  extended  notice  of  those 
who  have  been  called  to  their  reward  while  labor- 
ing in  Mexico,  some  of  whom  sleep  in  Mexican 
cemeteries,  awaiting  the  coming  of  the  King.  Fain 
would  I  dwell  at  length  on  the  lives  and  labors  of 
our  faithful  native  colporteurs ;  for  many  of  them 
have  wrought  nobly  during  these  years  and  are  in 
every  way  worthy  of  our  love  and  respect.  Would 
that  I  could  lay  bare  to  you  the  appalling  needs  of 
16,000,000  people  who  live  in  Mexico.  But  I  must 
close,  with  the  hope  that  you  will  remember  "the 
harvest  indeed  is  plenteous,  but  the  laborers  are 
few;  pray  ye,  therefore,  the  Lord  of  the  harvest, 
that  he  send  forth  laborers  into  his  harvest." 

The  Mexican  Missions. 

I.  North  Mexican  Mission. 

1.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  18. 

(2)  Native,  38. 

2.  Church  Statistics- 
CD   Churches,  34. 

(2)  Members,  1,541. 

(3)  Church  buildings,  15. 

(4)  Out-stations,  68. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  35. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  1,086. 

3.  Educational — 

(1)   Day  schools,  6. 
(2)   Madero  Institute  (Girls)  at  Saltillo. 


The  Mexican  Missions.  217 

(3)  Boarding  School  at  Chihuahua. 

(4)  Industrial  School  at  Parral. 

(5)  Theological  School  at  Torreon. 

4.  General — 

(1)  Mission  opened  1880. 

(2)  Residences    for    missionaries    owned    by    the 

Board,  5. 
II.  South  Mexican  Mission. 

1.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  16. 

(2)  Native,  11. 

2.  Church  Statistics — 

(1)  Churches,  12. 

(2)  Church  buildings,  6. 

(3)  Members,  383. 

(4)  Out-stations,  16. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  11. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  330. 

3.  Educational — 

(1)  Instituto  Central  (Boys'  School,  Toluca). 

(2)  Instituto      Anglo-Mexicano      (Girls'      School, 

Toluca). 

4.  Medical — 

(1)  Dispensary  and  physician  at  Guadalajara. 

(2)  Dispensary  and  physician  at  Toluca. 

5.  Literary — 

(1)  Printery  at  Leon. 

(2)  Sunday     school     periodicals,     weekly     paper, 

books  published  at  Leon. 

6.  General — 

(1)  Work  opened  1880. 
(2)  Residences    for    missionaries    owned    by    the 
Board,  5. 


CHAPTER  XL 


THE  JAPAN  MISSION. 

Fifteen  years  after  the  organization  of  the 
Southern  Baptist  Convention  in  Augusta,  Ga.,  in 
1845,  its  Foreign  Mission  Board  appointed  three 
young  men,  J.  C.  A.  Khorer,  C.  H.  Toy,  and  John  L. 
Johnson,  as  missionaries  to  Japan.  They  were  all 
men  of  splendid  ability,  and  had  they  been  per- 
mitted to  reach  the  field,  their  work  would  doubt- 
less have  added  a  glorious  chapter  to  the  history 
of  the  stirring  events  of  that  pioneer  period. 
Ehorer  and  wife  sailed  from  New  York  on  August 
3,  1860,  but  their  ship,  the  ill-fated  Edwin  Forest, 
was  never  heard  from  after  it  left  the  home  port. 
Toy  and  Johnson  were  prevented  from  starting  by 
the  Civil  War,  which  began  the  year  following 
their  appointment. 

During  the  decade  which  followed  this  unsuc- 
cessful attempt,  there  was  one  Baptist  missionary 
in  Japan,  Jonathan  Goble  by  name.  He  first 
visited  the  country  as  a  member  of  the  crew  on 
one  of  Perry's  ships.  Goble  was  appointed  mis- 
sionary to  Japan  by  the  American  Baptist  Mis- 
sionary Union  in  1860,  and  he  labored  there  until 
1873,  when  his  connection  with  the  Union  ceased. 
According   to    all    accounts,    he    was    a    man    of 

(218) 


The  Japan  Mission. 


219 


220       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

little  learning  and  with  a  zeal  that  was  not  always 
tempered  by  discretion.  At  one  time  he  figured 
in  the  Consular  Court,  where  charges  had  been 
preferred  against  him  by  some  native  carpenters 
whom  he  had  tried  by  the  application  of  "muscular 
Christianity"  to  induce  to  observe  the  Christian 
Sabbath.  Though  he  left  no  organized  church  to 
commemorate  his  labors  in  Japan,  he  contributed 
his  share  to  the  making  of  the  nation  by  his  inven- 
tion of  the  jinriksha.  This  overgrown  perambu- 
lator on  two  wheels  was  constructed  by  him  for 
the  benefit  of  his  invalid  wife.  It  found  wide- 
spread favor  throughout  Japan  and  in  parts  of 
China  and  the  Malay  Peninsula.  It  now  affords 
employment  to  many  thousand  coolies,  as  well  as 
a  comfortable  and  cheap  means  of  conveyance  for 
the  general  public. 

The  real  pioneer  of  Baptist  missions  in  Japan 
was  Dr.  Nathan  Brown,  who  was  sent  out  by  the 
American  Baptist  Missionary  Union  in  1873. 
During  the  twelve  years  which  followed  his  ap- 
pointment, a  number  of  other  missionaries  were 
sent  out  by  the  Union,  but  four  of  the  six  died 
and  the  rest  returned  to  the  homeland  before  they 
had  been  in  Japan  long  enough  to  master  the 
language. 

The  advance  of  Protestant  Christianity  in 
Japan  after  the  first  decade  of  preparatory  work 
constitutes  one  of  the  most  marvelous  chapters  in 
the  history  of  modern  missions.  From  1870  until 
1890,  those  denominations  which  had  been   per- 


The  Japan  Mission.  221 

mitted  to  enter  the  field  when  the  ports  of  Japan 
were  first  opened  reaped  a  rich  harvest,  and  dur- 
ing this  period  the  membership  of  their  churches 
doubled  every  three  years.  Their  Boards  of  For- 
eign Missions  made  special  efforts  in  behalf  of  this 
promising  field,  with  such  success  that  thirty 
years  after  the  arrival  of  the  first  missionaries 
their  churches  numbered  30,G00  converts  and  a 
good  beginning  had  been  made  in  the  training  of 
a  native  ministry.  Before  the  Baptists  were  pre- 
pared to  strengthen  their  forces  in  Japan,  what  is 
known  as  the  Eeaction  came.  The  change  in  the 
attitude  of  the  Japanese  people  from  a  widespread 
and  marked  interest  in  Christianity  to  indiffer- 
ence and  even  hostility  was  at  first  gradual,  but  in 
the  end  very  pronounced.  The  first  large  rein- 
forcement of  Baptist  work  in  Japan  was  contem- 
porary with  the  beginning  of  this  Keaction,  and 
the  earliest  Baptist  churches  were  organized  dur- 
ing the  period  when  the  churches  of  other  de- 
nominations had  not  only  ceased  to  grow,  but 
were  not  able  even  to  hold  their  own.  During 
the  thirty  years  which  followed  their  first  un- 
successful attempts  to  send  missionaries  to  Japan, 
but  little  mention  was  made  among  Southern  Bap- 
tists of  this  country  as  a  mission  field. 

Several  years  before  the  close  of  this  period, 
however,  Dr.  M.  T.  Yates,  of  blessed  memory,  had 
urged  upon  the  Foreign  Board  the  advisability 
of  sending  missionaries  to  Japan,  even  going  so 
far   as   to   offer   to   become    responsible   for   the 


222      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

salary  of  a  man  if  the  Board  would  send  him 
out.  When  the  Board  finally  decided  to  enter 
this  inviting  field,  the  men  for  the  task  were 
at  hand.  When  the  writer  entered  the  Southern 
Baptist  Theological  Seminary,  in  the  fall  of  1888, 
two  of  the  most  brilliant  members  of  the  grad- 
uating class  of  that  session  were  J.  W.  McCollum 
and  J.  A.  Brunson.  In  May,  1889,  they  were 
appointed  as  missionaries  to  labor  in  Japan.  The 
writer  remembers  hearing  many  expressions  of 
astonishment  when  it  became  known  that  these 
two  men  were  about  to  turn  away  from  the  as- 
sured futures  which  aw^aited  them  in  the  home 
land  to  bury  their  lives  and  their  many  talents 
in  the  then  little  known  country  beyond  the 
Pacific.  Deep  and  powerful  as  was  the  mission- 
ary spirit  which  dominated  the  Seminary,  there 
was  a  lurking  feeling  in  the  minds  of  many 
that  it  was  a  pity  for  such  men  to  waste  their 
splendid  powers  on  the  foreign  field.  It  has 
been  hard  for  some  of  God's  people  to  learn  the 
lesson  which  the  Holy  Spirit  taught  to  the  church 
at  Antioch,  when  He  said,  "  Separate  me  Barna- 
bas and  Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have  called 
them." 

McCollum  and  Brunson  both  married  during 
the  summer  following  their  appointment  and 
sailed  with  their  wives  from  San  Francisco  October 
17,  1889.  They  had  as  fellow  passengers  eight 
missionaries  of  the  A.  B.  M.  U.  bound  for  the 
same  field.     The  party  landed  at  Yokohama  No- 


The  Japan  Mission.  223 

vember  5th,  where  the  young  representatives  of  the 
Southern  Board  received  a  generous  welcome 
from  the  missionaries  of  the  A.  B.  M.  U.  located 
at  this  port.  After  consultation  with  these 
brethren,  it  was  decided  that  McCollum  and  Bran- 
son should  take  up  their  residence  temporarily 
at  Kobe.  Here  and  in  the  neighboring  city  of 
Osaka  the  young  missionaries  spent  two  years 
in  studying  the  language,  the  customs  and  habits 
of  the  Japanese  and  some  phases  of  mission  work. 
During  this  period  of  preparation  McCollum  gave 
his  attention  chiefly  to  the  mastery  of  the  spoken 
language,  while  Brunson  concentrated  his  keen 
mind  on  the  intricacies  of  the  written  forms.  These 
two  forms  of  the  language  are  so  entirely  dis- 
tinct, both  in  grammar  and  vocabulary,  as  to 
almost  constitute  different  languages,  and  each 
form  is  so  difficult  that  the  ordinary  span  of 
human  life  hardly  suffices  for  the  mastery  of 
either. 

McCollum  secured  a  house  on  a  busy  street 
in  Osaka  where  he  could  come  into  daily  con- 
tact with  the  people  and  thus  learn  the  language 
from  their  lips.  His  method  of  study,  coupled 
with  a  quick  ear  and  a  retentive  memory,  enabled 
him  to  acquire,  in  the  short  space  of  two  years, 
a  better  use  of  the  colloquial  than  most  mission- 
aries have  after  live  years  of  work.  Brunson 
worked  in  his  study,  using  such  helps  as  were 
to  be  had,  and  laying  the  foundation  for  the 
mastery  of  the  literary  language. 


224       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Thus  equipped  it  became  necessary  for  the  mis- 
sionaries to  decide  upon  a  permanent  location  for 
their  work.  After  looking  the  field  over  as  op- 
portunity offered,  they  finally  selected  Kyushu, 
the  southernmost  of  the  four  main  islands  of 
the  Japanese  Archipelago,  and  January,  1892, 
found  Brunson  and  family  located  in  the  little 
city  of  Kokura.  McCollum  joined  them  there  in 
March  of  the  same  year.  He  was  able  to  begin 
preaching  at  once  and  several  out-stations  were 
opened.  For  some  months  before  coming  to  Kyu 
shu,  Brunson  had  been  much  exercised  over  the 
question  of  resigning  and  returning  to  America. 
He  had  never  been  happy  in  his  work.  His  often 
repeated  exclamation  to  his  fellow  missionary 
was,  "McCollum,  I  cannot  stand  it,  the  Lord  does 
not  want  me  here;  I  am  a  square  pin  in  a  round 
hole."  This  state  of  mind  finally  resulted  in  his 
resignation.  He  left  the  field  with  his  family 
in  September,  1892,  passing  somewhere  in  mid- 
ocean  E.  N.  Walne  and  wife  who  had  embarked 
at  Vancouver,  B.  C,  for  Japan,  on  September  9th. 
The  McCollums  were  thus  left  for  a  time  the 
only  representatives  of  Southern  Baptists  in 
Japan  and  the  only  Baptist  missionaries  in  Kyu- 
shu. A  few  weeks  after  the  Bransons'  depart- 
ure, the  Walnes  joined  the  McCollums  at  Kokura. 
The  two  families  lived  for  six  months  in  the 
same  compound,  and  during  those  early  days, 
when  they  mutually  shared  each  other's  trials  and 
disappointments,  there  grew  between  them  such 


Theological  Seminary,  Fukuoka.  Japan 

MR.  CHIBA,  President  of  Theological  Seminary,  Church,  Sasebo 

with  His  Family 

E.  N.  WALNE  and  J.  W.  McCOLLUM  AND  FAMILIES 


The  Japan  Mission.  225 

a  friendship  as  could  only  exist  between  those 
whose  lives  are  passed  in  close  and  congenial 
association  in  one  of  the  outposts  of  the  mission 
field. 

During  these  early  days,  the  two  families  shared 
many  troublesome  and  vexatious  experiences. 
The  people  were  unfriendly  toward  foreigners  in 
general  and  Christians  in  particular.  The  ap- 
pearance of  the  missionaries  upon  the  streets 
was  the  signal  for  the  gathering  of  curious  and 
sometimes  hostile  crowds.  They  were  frequently 
stoned  and  nearly  always  hooted  at.  As  stated 
above,  they  had  begun  their  work  at  a  time  when 
the  tide  of  popular  favor  had  turned  and  the 
old  barbarian  expelling  spirit  had  been  revived. 
They  found  it  almost  impossible  to  secure  preach- 
ing places.  Even  when  landlords  were  found  who 
were  willing  to  rent  their  property  to  Christians, 
no  binding  contract  could  be  made  and  land- 
lords were  often  forced  by  public  opinion  to  turn 
the  missionaries  out.  Though  more  anxious  for 
reinforcements  than  they  were  for  comfortable 
homes  and  suitable  chapels,  the  missionaries  were 
soon  forced  to  see  that  little  progress  could  be 
made  until  they  could  own  property  which  they 
could  control  as  centers  for  their  work. 

One  experience  which  came  soon  after  the 
arrival  of  the  Walnes  will  serve  to  illustrate  the 
difficulties  of  those  early  days.  The  foreigners 
had  no  treaty  rights  in  Japan  save  in  a  few 
open  ports  such  as  Yokohama,  Kobe,  and  Naga- 

15 


226      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

saki.  Those  who  went  into  the  interior  had  to 
hire  themselves  to  Japanese  subjects  who  secured 
passports  for  them  in  their  own  names.  The 
man  who  "employed"  the  Walnes  and  McCollums, 
and  in  whose  names  their  passports  were  issued, 
proved  false,  and  misappropriated  over  one  hun- 
dred dollars  which  had  been  paid  to  him  for 
rents  and  left  the  missionaries  in  the  interior 
without  any  legal  rights  to  be  there.  It  was 
at  this  time  that  Mr.  Kawakatsu,  Dr.  Brown's  old 
associate,  came  to  Kyushu.  He  was  sent  by  the 
Yokohama  brethren  to  help  the  new  missionaries 
out  of  their  difficulties.  When  his  time  was  up, 
he  chose  to  remain  and  has  been  connected  with 
the  Southern  Baptist  work  for  the  past  eighteen 
years.  Through  the  influence  of  his  brother,  who 
was  a  police  inspector,  Mr.  Kawakatsu  was  able 
to  secure  passports  for  the  missionaries  without 
their  having  to  return  to  Kobe.  In  this  connec- 
tion it  ought  to  be  said  that  this  was  the  only 
instance  in  which  the  missionaries  were  defrauded 
by  the  Japanese  in  whom  they  had  confided, 
though  for  years  the  titles  to  all  of  the  property 
acquired  by  the  Mission  were  held  in  the  names 
of  Japanese. 

In  the  spring  of  1893  in  order  to  more  econom- 
ically look  after  the  stations,  McCollum  moved 
to  Moji  and  Walne  to  Fukuoka,  the  two  stations 
being  fifty  miles  apart  and  connected  by  a  rail- 
road. Between  them  were  three  out-stations. 
At  this  time  there  were,  besides  Mr.  Kawakatsu, 


The  Japan  Mission.  227 

who  was  an  ordained  preacher,  two  Japanese  evan- 
gelists associated  with  the  missionaries.  Dur- 
ing the  two  years  1892-93  some  twrenty-flve  be- 
lievers were  baptized.  All  of  these  were  theo- 
retically members  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Shimo- 
noseki,  an  A.  B.  M.  U.  station.  The  Southern 
Baptist  missionaries  found  in  Eev.  E.  L.  Hal- 
sey,  who  had  charge  of  this  station,  a  sympathetic 
and  obliging  friend. 

In  October,  1893,  the  Moji  Baptist  church  was 
organized  with  thirty  members,  this  body  becom- 
ing the  mother  church  from  which  have  gone 
out  all  of  the  other  churches  now  on  the  field. 
At  the  time  of  the  organization  of  this  church 
the  total  membership  of  the  Baptist  churches  in 
Japan  was  1,394.  During  the  following  year 
eleven  wTere  added  by  baptism  to  the  membership 
of  the  Moji  church. 

In  the  spring  of  1894,  the  McCollums  were 
forced  by  ill  health  to  go  to  a  treaty  port  for 
medical  attention,  and,  in  the  fall,  they  returned 
to  the  United  States  for  recuperation.  Soon  after 
their  departure,  the  Walnes  were  cheered  by  the 
arrival  of  Nathan  Maynard  and  wife.  For  almost 
a  year,  the  two  families  lived  together  at  Fukuoka. 
In  the  fall  of  1895  the  Maynards  moved  to  Ko- 
kura,  being  unable  to  secure  a  house  at  Moji.  Mrs. 
Maynard's  delicate  health  made  it  impossible  for 
either  of  them  to  do  much  traveling,  so  that 
all  the  years  of  their  service  in  Japan  were  de- 
voted to  this  field,  with  results  which  have  been 


228      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

truly  gratifying.  No  other  part  of  the  field  in 
Kyushu  has  been  so  well  developed.  The  Moji 
church  is  well  on  the  way  toward  self-support, 
and  churches  have  been  organized  at  Kokura  and 
Yawata,  while  work  has  been  carried  on  at  several 
out-stations.  Owing  to  Mrs.  Maynard's  health 
the  Maynards  have  been  detained  in  the  United 
States. 

During  the  winter  of  1894-95  the  war  between 
Japan  and  China  was  in  progress  and  there 
were  many  interruptions  to  mission  work,  grow- 
ing out  of  the  excited  state  of  the  popular  mind 
and  other  causes  connected  with  the  war.  Sol- 
diers were  frequently  quartered  in  the  chapels  and 
at  such  times  regular  services  had  to  be  suspended. 

In  the  fall  of  1895  the  McCollums  returned 
to  the  field  and  were  located  at  Fukuoka,  and 
in  the  spring  of  the  following  year,  the  Walnes 
were  transferred  to  Nagasaki,  thus  lengthening 
out  the  line  until  the  stations  and  out-stations  of 
the  Mission  extended  along  the  northern  and  east- 
ern coasts  of  the  island  of  Kyushu  for  a  distance 
of  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles. 

The  only  event  to  be  noticed  during  the  five 
years  which  followed  was  the  coming  of  W.  H. 
Clarke,  who  was  appointed  by  the  Board  in  Jan- 
uary, 1899.  He  came  supported  by  a  free  will 
offering  from  the  First  Baptist  Church  in  At- 
lanta, Ga.  After  a  year  of  study,  during  which 
he  made  his  home  with  the  McCollums  at  Fuku- 
oka,  and,   after  first  taking  to  himself  a  help- 


The  Japan  Mission.  229 

meet  in  the  person  of  Miss  Lucille  Daniel,  also 
of  Atlanta,  Ga.,  he  located  in  the  historic  old  city 
of  Kumanioto,  in  the  interior  of  the  island,  where 
he  and  his  wife  have  built  up  a  splendid  work. 

The  year  1900  closed  what  might  be  termed 
the  preparatory  stage  of  Baptist  work  in  Kyushu. 
At  this  time  there  were  four  missionaries  and 
their  wives  and  four  Japanese  preachers  con- 
nected with  the  work,  only  one  of  the  latter  be- 
ing ordained.  There  was  only  one  organized 
church,  with  seventy-five  members.  Such  were 
the  visible  results  of  the  first  eight  years.  The 
workers  were  all  young  and  inexperienced,  and 
with  the  exception  of  McCollum  had  to  spend 
much  time  in  language  study. 

After  treaty  revision  was  accomplished  in 
1S99,  the  situation  rapidly  changed  for  the  better. 
Old  occasions  for  bitterness  disappeared,  and  ed- 
ucation made  rapid  advances.  Western  ideas 
came  pouring  in,  and  mission  work  shared  in 
the  new  life.  Between  1900  and  1905,  three  men 
and  their  wives  were  sent  out  to  reenforce  the 
workers  in  Kyushu,  G.  F.  Hambleton  and  wife 
of  Virginia,  C.  T.  Willingham  and  wife  of  Vir- 
ginia and  J.  F.  Eay  and  wife  of  Mississippi.  But, 
unfortunately,  all  three  of  these  families  were 
lost  to  the  Mission  after  short  terms  of  service. 
The  Hambletons,  who  went  out  in  the  fall  of 
1900,  were  forced  to  give  up  their  work  in  the 
spring  of  1906  owing  to  Mr.  Harableton's  nerv- 
ous breakdown.     During  the  most  of  their  term 


230       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

of  service,  they  were  located  at  Kagoshima,  the 
capital  city  of  the  famous  old  province  of  Sat- 
suma,  in  the  southern  part  of  the  island.  C.  T. 
Willingham  and  wife,  who  went  out  in  the  fall 
of  1903  and  were  located  at  Fukuoka,  had  to 
return  to  the  States  in  1905  on  account  of  Mrs. 
Willingham's  failing  health.  Those  who  were 
associated  with  them  will  long  remember  the 
heroic  struggle  which  this  noble  son  and  daugh- 
ter of  the  beloved  secretary  of  the  Foreign  Mis- 
sion Board  made  to  remain  at  their  post.  Only 
after  three  severe  surgical  operations  and  many 
month  £  in  the  hospitals  had  failed  to  relieve  the 
sufferer  did  they  give  up  the  struggle  which, 
to  many,  would  have  seemed  hopeless  from  the 
beginning.  For  five  years  after  their  return  to 
the  States  Mrs.  Willingham's  health  continued 
to  decline  and  recently  she  passed  away. 

The  Kays,  who  went  out  in  1904  and  who  fol- 
lowed the  Willinghams  at  Fukuoka,  were  forced 
also  to  give  up  the  work  after  two  years  on 
account  of  Mrs.  Kay's  ill  health.  She  suffered 
a  complete  nervous  breakdown  soon  after  reach- 
ing Japan.  Happily,  however,  after  two  years 
and  a  half  spent  at  home,  she  was  so  far  recovered 
as  to  be  able  to  return  to  the  field.  The  Rays  are 
now  located  at  Shimonoseki. 

By  the  loss  of  these  co-laborers  the  Mission 
force  was  reduced  to  four  families,  only  three  of 
which  were  on  the  field,  the  Clarkes  at  that  time 
being  at  home  on  a  furlough.    Thus  reduced  the 


The  Japan  Mission.  231 

Mission  was  barely  able  to  maintain  the  work 
already  organized.  The  Kagoshima  station  had 
been  without  a  resident  missionary  for  some 
months.  Though  opportunity  invited  advance  on 
every  hand,  the  Mission,  by  the  weakness  of  its 
forces,  was  shut  up  within  the  lines  already 
thrown  out.  The  situation  was  indeed  desperate. 
Clarke  was  away,  the  Maynards  were  on  the  eve 
of  leaving,  Mrs.  Maynard  having  been  ordered 
home  by  her  physician,  and  the  Walnes  had  been 
on  the  field  for  seven  years.  McCollum  had  re- 
turned in  the  spring  from  a  furlough  of  two  years, 
but  the  state  of  his  health  was  such  as  to  cause 
the  gravest  concern  to  his  colleagues.  In  this, 
the  darkest  hour  of  their  experiences,  the  mis- 
sionaries were  cheered  by  a  letter  from  the  Board 
which  announced  that  reinforcements  were  on 
the  way.  Soon  followed  the  arrival  of  G.  W. 
Bouldin  and  wife  of  Alabama,  C.  K.  Dozier  and 
wife  of  Georgia  and  J.  H.  Eowe  and  wife  of 
Virginia.  These  three  young  men  had  been  fel- 
low students  in  the  Seminary  at  Louisville,  grad- 
uating together,  marrying  about  the  same  time 
and  going  out  on  the  same  ship.  Their  coming 
was  the  occasion  of  great  joy  to  the  wearied  and 
well-nigh  discouraged  little  mission  in  Japan. 
Having  been  associated  so  long,  the  Mission  hes- 
itated to  separate  them,  so  it  was  arranged  for 
the  three  men  and  their  young  brides  to  occupy 
the  mission  residence  at  Fukuoka  while  they  made 
their  first  acquaintance  with  the  Japanese  Ian- 


232       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions, 

gauge.  So  happy  was  this  arrangement  and  so 
richly  did  domestic  joy  and  peace  abound  that 
a  young  English  bachelor,  who  went  to  pay  a 
visit  of  welcome  to  the  new  arrivals,  was  con- 
strained thereafter  to  speak  of  their  abode  as 
"The  Doves'  Nest." 

But  the  demands  of  the  work  soon  made  it 
necessary  to  break  up  "the  nest."  Within  less 
than  a  year,  Bouldin  was  in  charge  of  the  Kago- 
shima  work,  Eowe  had  located  in  the  important 
Kokura  field  and  Dozier  had  moved  to  Sasebo, 
each  of  them  having  of  necessity  been  placed  in 
charge  of  interests  which  would  have  taxed  the 
resources  of  veterans. 

While  new  missionaries  were  being  sent  out 
hardly  fast  enough  to  take  the  places  of  those 
who  were  being  compelled  to  return  to  the  home- 
land, the  force  of  Japanese  workers  has  been 
growing  steadily.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  faith- 
ful efforts  of  these  native  brethren,  much  of 
the  work  so  happily  begun  would  perhaps  be 
abandoned.  First  among  these  was  Rev.  T.  Ka- 
wakatsu,  who  has  numbered  more  years  of  service 
as  a  preacher  of  the  gospel  than  any  man  now 
connected  with  the  Baptist  work  in  Japan.  Be- 
ginning when  quite  a  young  man  as  Dr.  Brown's 
assistant,  he  has  continued  for  more  than  thirty 
years  to  work  as  a  translator,  evangelist  and  pas- 
tor. Every  part  of  the  field  has  shared  the  ben- 
efit of  his  labors.  The  missionaries  have  always 
found  in  him  a  wise  counselor  and  a  sympathetic, 


The  Japan  Mission.  233 

helpful  friend.  Eev.  M.  Goto,  the  earnest  and 
efficient  pastor  of  the  Moji  church,  was  the  pio- 
neer Baptist  preacher  in  Kyushu.  He  was  labor- 
ing there  in  an  out-station  of  the  A.  B.  M.  U. 
when  McCollum  and  Brunson  first  went  to  the 
island.  He  has  been  working  continuously  with 
the  Southern  Mission  for  eighteen  years  and  is 
now  pastor  of  one  of  the  strongest  churches  on 
the  field.  Key.  K.  Sato  was  educated  for  the 
ministry  in  a  school  conducted  by  the  Dutch  Ee- 
formed  Mission  at  Nagasaki,  and  for  a  number 
of  years  after  graduation  he  worked  as  an  evan- 
gelist of  that  mission.  He  is  a  good  student 
of  English.  He  came  to  his  first  knowledge  of 
Baptists  through  reading  an  attack  upon  their 
position  in  an  American  magazine.  The  argu- 
ments presented  were  so  unsatisfactory  that 
doubts  were  raised  in  his  mind,  and  when  he 
learned  that  there  were  Baptist  missionaries  in 
Fukuoka  he  came  to  them  for  more  light  on  the 
subject.  He  soon  afterward  united  with  the 
Moji  Baptist  church.  He  was  licensed  to  preach 
in  1896  and  ordained  in  1906.  In  1907  he  resigned 
the  pastorate  of  the  Fukuoka  church  to  accept 
the  Chair  of  Old  Testament  Interpretation  in 
the  Fukuoka  Baptist  Seminary.  He  is  a  highly 
cultured  man  and  a  strong  preacher.  Mr.  H. 
Sugano  was  baptized  by  Mr.  Brunson  in  the 
spring  of  1892.  The  next  year  he  began  to  preach 
as  a  lay  worker  and  later  on  he  became  a  reg- 
ular evangelist.     He  went  to  Nagasaki  with  the 


234      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Walnes  in  1896  and  helped  to  found  the  station 
there,  working  in  connection  with  it  for  ten  years. 
In  the  spring  of  1906,  he  accepted  a  call  from 
the  church  at  Sasebo  where  he  had  helped  to 
found  an  out-station  ten  years  before.  With  an 
overpowering  passion  for  souls,  together  with  an 
affable  and  frank  manner,  he  has  been  one  of 
the  most  successful  preachers  connected  with  the 
Mission. 

The  four  men  whose  work  has  been  sketched 
above,  ail  too  briefly,  were  the  only  Japanese 
connected  with  the  Mission  during  the  first  eight 
years  of  its  existence.  To  their  consecration  and 
faithfulness  the  results  which  were  achieved 
were  largely  due.  The  limitations  of  this  sketch 
inake  it  necessary  to  omit  references  to  the  other 
faithful  evangelists  who  have  been  connected 
with  the  Mission  since  1900. 

Any  story  of  Baptist  work  in  Kyushu,  how- 
ever, would  be  incomplete  which  did  not  include 
some  account  of  the  work  of  Eev.  Yugora  Chiba, 
who  accepted  an  invitation  from  the  Mission  to 
come  to  the  island  in  1905.  Mr.  Chiba  is  a  full 
graduate  of  Kochester  Theological  Seminary. 
For  several  years  he  taught  in  Duncan  Academy, 
a  Baptist  Boys'  School  in  Tokio,  at  the  same  time 
serving  one  of  the  churches  of  that  city  as  pas- 
tor. When  he  received  an  invitation  to  come  to 
Kyushu,  he  was  the  Dean  of  the  female  department 
of  the  Doshisha,  the  well  known  Congregational 
University  at  Kyoto.    When  he  offered  his  resig- 


The  Japan  Mission.  235 

nation  to  the  trustees  of  that  institution,  a  strong 
effort  was  made  to  influence  him  to  reconsider, 
but  he  replied  that  he  was  a  Baptist  and  wanted 
to  spend  his  life  in  connection  with  Baptist  work. 
His  coming  to  Kyushu  could  not  have  been  more 
timely.  The  work  was  growing  beyond  the  re- 
sources of  the  Mission.  Working  for  a  year  as 
an  evangelist  at  large,  he  helped  to  strengthen 
the  weak  places  in  the  line  of  stations.  ,  In  the 
summer  of  1906  upon  the  return  of  the  Hamble- 
tons,  he  w^ent  to  Kagoshima  to  look  after  that  im- 
portant field.  In  the  fall  of  1907,  he  was  elected 
by  unanimous  vote  of  the  Mission,  and  with  ap- 
proval of  the  Board,  President  of  the  Fukuoka 
Baptist  Theological  Seminary,  which  position  he 
has  since  filled  with  distinguished  ability. 

We  must  mention  also  Kev.  Y.  Fujinuma,  who 
worked  for  many  years  in  connection  with  the 
A.  B.  M.  U.  mission.  In  1908,  he  accepted  a 
call  from  the  Fukuoka  church,  which  he  is  still 
serving  acceptably  as  pastor. 

Until  1908  the  straits  of  Shimonoseki  formed 
the  northern  boundary  of  the  field  occupied  by 
the  missionaries  of  the  Southern  Board.  On 
the  northern  side  of  the  straits  the  Missionary 
Union  had  for  many  years  carried  on  a  work  with 
the  city  of  Shimonoseki  as  its  main  station.  The 
nearest  of  the  A.  B.  M.  U.  stations  north  of 
this  was  over  300  miles  away,  while  it  was  sep- 
arated from  the  field  of  the  Southern  Board  by 
only  the  width  of  the  straits,  less  than  a  mile. 


236       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

xlt  a  meeting  in  Shimonoseki  in  the  fall  of 
1908,  between  representatives  of  the  Northern 
and  Southern  Missions,  Dr.  T.  S.  Barbour,  For- 
eign Secretary  of  the  Missionary  Union,  being 
present,  an  agreement  was  reached  between  the 
representatives  of  the  two  missions  by  which  the 
Shimonoseki  field  was  turned  over  to  the  South- 
ern Board,  and  the  northern  boundary  of  the 
field  tQ  be  occupied  by  the  latter  was  fixed  so 
as  to  include  the  island  of  Shikoku  and  all  of 
the  territory  south  of  the  city  of  Hiroshima,  on 
the  main  island.  This  new  territory  has  a  pop- 
ulation of  over  six  millions,  which,  together  with 
that  of  the  island  of  Kyushu,  gives  a  total  pop- 
ulation of  sixteen  millions  for  the  territory  oc- 
cupied by  the  Mission  of  the  Southern  Board. 

During  the  first  eight  years  covered  by  the 
work  of  the  Mission  in  Kyushu,  only  one  church 
was  organized,  the  Moji  church,  which  in  1899 
had  a  membership  of  seventy-five.  All  of  the 
candidates  baptized  in  other  stations  and  out-sta- 
tions on  the  field  were  considered  as  members 
of  this  church.  During  the  ten  years  which  have 
followed  seven  more  churches  have  been  organized, 
which,  together  with  the  two  taken  over  with 
the  Shimonoseki  field,  make  a  total  of  ten  churches 
now  connected  with  the  work  of  the  Southern 
Mission.  The  total  membership  at  the  end  of 
1909  was  504.  During  the  past  few  years  nearly 
as  many  people  have  been  baptized  every  year 
as   were   received    during   the   first   eight   years. 


The  Japan  Mission.  237 

There  are  at  present  connected  with  the  Mission 
five  ordained  and  seven  unordained  preachers  and 
fifteen  students  preparing  for  the  ministry.  The 
churches  contributed  to  their  own  support  last 
year  a  little  over  one  thousand  dollars. 

Ten  years  ago  the  only  chapel  property  owned 
by  the  Board  in  Japan  was  a  little  dilapidated 
hut  in  Fukuoka,  to  purchase  which  McCollum  and 
Walne  borrowed  f 400  on  their  own  responsibility. 
Since  that  time  land  has  been  purchased  and 
neat,  comfortable  buildings  erected  at  Moji,  Fuku- 
oka, Kumamoto,  Sasebo  and  Nagasaki.  A  good 
lot  has  also  been  secured  at  Kagoshima,  and  it  is 
hoped  the  funds  will  soon  be  forthcoming  for  a 
chapel  at  this  place,  which  is  the  only  one  of 
the  mission  stations  not  now  supplied  with  this 
indispensable  equipment  for  successful  work. 
The  missionaries  who  tried  for  so  long  to  work 
with  rented  chapels  which  they  held  at  the  mercy 
of  unfriendly  landlords,  record  their  gratitude 
to  God  and  to  those  whose  liberality  supplied 
the  means  for  securing  these  chapels.  Including 
the  two  chapels  purchased  from  the  A.  B.  M. 
U.  at  the  time  of  the  transfer  of  the  Shimonoseki 
field,  the  total  number  of  church  buildings  now 
owned  by  the  Southern  Board  in  Japan  is  eight. 

In  1903  the  Sunday  School  Board  at  Nashville 
made  a  gift  of  f 500  to  the  Foreign  Mission  Board 
to  be  used  in  opening  a  Bible  and  Christian  book 
store  at  Nagasaki.  E.  N.  Walne  was  placed  in 
charge  of  this  work,  and  the  store  was  opened 


238      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

in  1903,  since  which  time  its  sales  have  averaged 
about  |500  per  year.  With  more  capital  this 
department  of  the  work  could  be  greatly  enlarged. 
It  is  now  in  charge  of  J.  H.  Eowe.  Owing  to 
the  lack  of  means,  neither  the  Northern  nor  the 
Southern  Missions  have  been  able  to  do  much 
in  the  way  of  publishing  and  circulating  Chris- 
tian literature.  The  Japanese  are  a  reading  peo- 
ple. Their  system  of  education  has  been  so  per- 
fected that  in  the  next  generation  there  will 
be  practically  no  illiteracy  in  the  country.  The 
percentage  of  children  of  school  age  now  in  school 
is  96  per  cent.  The  importance  of  greatly  en- 
larging the  literary  department  of  Baptist  work 
in  Japan  calls  for  the  most  serious  consideration. 
Until  the  fall  of  1907  the  missionaries  and  their 
Japanese  colleagues  had  devoted  all  of  their  time 
to  evangelistic  work,  but  as  the  work  grew  it 
became  apparent  that  something  must  be  done 
in  the  way  of  training  up  a  native  ministry  for 
the  churches  which  were  multiplying.  The  Mis- 
sionary Union  had  had  a  Theological  Seminary 
in  Yokohama  for  years  and  efforts  were  made 
to  combine  the  two  Missions  in  the  support  of 
this  school,  but  terms  of  union  could  not  be  agreed 
upon,  and  it  was  finally  decided  to  start  a  Theo- 
logical Seminary  at  Fukuoka.  The  school  was 
begun,  in  rented  quarters,  in  the  fall  of  1907. 
Y.  Chiba  was  appointed  president  and  K.  Sato, 
J.  W.  McCollum  and  E.  N.  Walne  teachers.  There 
were  ten  students  in  the  first  class.     During  the 


The  Japan  Mission.  239 

spring  of  the  following  year  a  tract  of  land,  front- 
ing 450  feet  on  the  moat  of  the  old  feudal  castle, 
was  secured  and  a  building  erected  in  time  to 
provide  a  dormitory  and  class  rooms  for  the 
next  session's  work. 

Negotiations  were  again  opened  and  plans  are 
now  well  under  way,  for  the  union  of  the  Fu- 
kuoka  and  Yokohama  schools  into  a  new  semi- 
nary to  be  located  at  Tokyo,  the  capital  city  of 
the  Empire,  and  the  chief  educational  center  of 
the  country. 

While  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Willingham  were  in  Japan, 
P.  P.  Medling  and  wife  of  Tennessee  were  on  their 
way  to  join  the  workers  there  and  one  other  man, 
John  Moncure  of  Virgina,  was  sent  out  later 
in  response  to  the  request  for  reinforcements.  The 
former  is  located  at  Kagoshima  and  the  latter 
is  studying  the  language  at  Fukuoka.  The  entire 
force  of  missionaries  now  on  the  field  is  not  suf- 
ficient for  the  work  already  organized  and  with- 
out reinforcements  it  will  not  be  possible  to  oc- 
cupy the  field  for  which  the  Mission  has  agreed 
to  become  responsible. 

It  is  fitting  that  this  sketch  of  the  Japan  Mis- 
sion should  close  with  a  tribute  to  the  memory 
of  the  man  who  founded  its  work  and  who  con- 
tributed so  largely  to  the  results  which  have  been 
achieved.  Eeference  has  been  made  to  the  fail- 
ing health  of  Dr.  J.  W.  McCollum.  The  early 
years  of  his  service  in  Japan  were  attended  by 
many  hardships  of  which  his  vigorous  manhood 


240       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

and  devoted  spirit  took  little  account,  but  it 
was  during  these  years  that  he  contracted  an 
affection  of  the  throat  and  lungs  which  greatly 
underminded  his  strength.  The  trouble  was  in- 
creased by  his  being  forced  to  prolong  his  second 
term  of  service  more  than  two  years  beyond  the 
period  fixed  by  the  Board.  Though  he  came  back 
to  Japan  for  a  third  term  in  1896  throwing  him- 
self without  reservation  into  the  work,  which  was 
in  desperate  need,  his  strength  failed  so  rapidly 
that  he  was  forced  to  return  to  America  in  the 
spring  of  1899  and  in  February  of  the  present 
year,  in  what  should  have  been  the  prime  of  his 
strength  and  great  usefulness,  he  passed  away 
at  Seattle,  Wash.  The  following  tribute  was  pen- 
ned by  one  of  the  two  men  who  was  associated 
with  him  in  the  work  in  Kyushu,  almost  from  its 
beginning : 

"He  was  a  rare  character.  He  did  not  be- 
long to  a  whole  class  of  men  as  one  of  the  class ; 
he  was  in  a  class  by  himself.  Those  who  knew 
him  always  admired  him  and  nearly  always  agreed 
with  him.  As  an  evangelist  he  had  few  equals 
and  no  superiors.  His  knowledge  and  use  of  the 
Japanese  language  was  as  perfect  as  a  foreigner 
ever  attains  to.  The  native  preachers  rarely  drew 
as  large  congregations  as  he  did.  Our  work  in 
Kyushu  would  never  have  become  what  it  is 
without  his  splendid  services  in  its  early  years. 
Our  hearts  go  out  in  tenderest  sympathy  to  his 
bereaved  family.     Mrs.   McCollum  was  in  every 


The  Japan  Mission.  241 

way  worthy  of  her  husband  and  in  losing  her  the 
Mission  will  sustain  a  severe  loss.  May  God  be 
with  her  and  her  children  henceforth." 

May  the  hearts  of  Southern  Baptists  be  so 
drawn  to  beautiful  Japan  and  may  so  many 
willing  hands  be  sent  out  to  supply  her  great 
need  that  this  splendid  man  may  be  the  last 
of  the  workers  to  be  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  his 
usefulness  because  of  the  unheeded  call  to  "Come 
over  and  help  us." 

The  Japan  Mission. 

1.  Missionaries — 

(1)  Foreign,  15. 

(2)  Native,  14. 

2.  Church  Statistics— 

(1)  Churches,  10. 

(2)  Members,  504. 

(3)  Church  buildings,  8. 

(4)  Out-stations,  11. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  13. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  617. 

3.  Theological  Seminary  at  Fukuoka. 

4.  The  Gospel  Book  Store  at  Nagasaki. 

5.  Residences  for  missionaries  owned  by  the  Board,  5. 

CHRONOLOGICAL  DATA. 

1853  A.D. — -Arrival  of  Commodore  Perry. 

1859  A.D. — Arrival  of  first  Protestant  missionaries. 

1873  A.D. — Baptist  work  begun  by  the  American  Baptist 

Missionary  Union. 
1889  A.D. — The  Constitution  proclaimed.     Arrival  of  first 

Southern  Baptist  missionaries. 
1892  A.D. — Baptist  work  begun  in  Kyushu. 

16 


CHAPTER  XII. 


THE  ARGENTINE  MISSION. 

If  we  measure  off  a  strip  of  land  twenty  miles 
wide  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river  La  Plata, 
beginning  at  the  city  La  Plata  on  the  south, 
and  terminating  at  Santa  Fe  on  the  north,  the 
strip  would  be  only  300  miles  long;  and  in  it 
would  be  found  one-half  of  the  population  of 
Argentina.  Here  very  close  together  are  situ- 
ated Buenos  Aires,  Eosario,  Santa  Fe,  and  La 
Plata.  Around  these  cities  there  are  many  towns 
of  from  5,000  to  20,000  inhabitants.  This  is  the 
district  in  which  we  have  worked  since  the  open- 
ing of  our  mission  in  1903.  The  cities  are  con- 
nected by  ferryboat. 

DISTRICT    OP    PRESENT    WORK. 

A  more  definite  word  about  the  cities  in  which 
we  now  work  will  not  be  out  of  place.  Buenos 
Aires,  the  federal  capital,  sustains  a  unique  re- 
lation to  the  country  as  a  whole.  Out  of  a  pop- 
ulation of  6,000,000,  1,200,000  belong  to  Buenos 
Aires  proper.  This  is  an  abnormal  proportion 
of  the  population. 

(242) 


The  Argentine  Mission.  243 

The  fact  is  that  commercially  Buenos  Aires 
not  only  predominates  but  almost  absorbs  the 
activities  of  the  country.  Politically,  her  influ- 
ence is  not  so  great.  There  is  a  certain  feeling 
which  is  part  jealousy  and  part  national  that 
does  not  accept  readily  the  candidates  nor  the 
ideas  that  come  from  Buenos  Aires.  And  yet 
the  country  takes  a  foolish  pride  in  its  capital 
and  spends  millions  on  its  streets,  public  build- 
ings and  parks.  All  find  their  pleasure  in  visits 
to  Buenos  Aires.  The  educational  influence  of 
the  capital  is  very  great.  The  public  schools, 
which  include  the  Buenos  Aires  University,  with 
its  academic,  scientific,  law,  medical,  philosophic, 
engineering  and  theological  faculties,  extend  a 
wide  influence.  To  these  are  to  be  added  many 
private  schools  largely  dedicated  to  the  teaching 
of  music  and  the  foreign  languages.  The  press 
is  a  strong  educational  factor.  The  daily  papers 
and  cheap  magazines  are  widely  read.  Something 
like  one  hundred  papers  of  different  languages 
and  objects  are  published  in  the  city. 

The  population  of  the  city  is  half  Italian,  a 
little  over  one-third  Argentine  and  Spanish,  and 
the  remaining  fraction  is  made  up  of  people  from 
all  lands.  The  Spanish  language  easily  predom- 
inates, as  do  also  Spanish  thought  and  customs. 

In  general  features,  Buenos  Aires  differs  from 
other  cities  of  the  Eepublic  only  in  the  greater 
scale  in  which  it  is  laid  off.  There  are  no 
slum  districts.     In  all  parts  of  the  city  live  rich 


244       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

and  poor  side  by  side.  The  houses  are  as  a  rule 
one  story  high.  The  blocks  are  one  hundred  and 
fifty  yards  square,  and  the  houses  are  built  out 
to  the  sidewalk,  leaving  no  space  for  yard  in 
front.  On  the  inside  of  this  shell  of  houses 
is  a  large  space  which  may  be  used  for  back 
yards,  but  too  often  is  used  for  some  factory  or 
lumber  yard  or  deposit  of  some  kind.  There 
are  many  public  parks  and  squares  which  add 
to  the  beauty  of  the  city.  The  people  love  the 
open  air  and  hence  there  is  a  splendid  oppor- 
tunity in  open  air  work.  Every  Sunday  groups 
may  be  seen  listening  to  the  gospel  in  a  dozen 
or  more  of  these  squares.  The  police  protection 
is  good  and,  as  a  rule,  the  people  listen  with 
due  respect.  Once  a  greater  interest  in  the  gos- 
pel is  awakened,  this  open  air  work  will  pro- 
duce good  results  numerically.  The  "Once" 
church  conducts  one  open  air  meeting  which  is 
encouraging.  The  city  enjoys  splendid  street  car 
service.  This  is  a  point  in  favor  of  the  services 
because  the  distances  are  very  great.  Our  mis- 
sion has  preaching  at  six  points  in  Buenos  Aires 
and  there  are  two  organized  churches.  It  is  un- 
necessary to  add  that  this  is  hardly  a  beginning 
if  the  city  is  to  be  reached.  The  whole  federal 
district  is  being  built  up  rapidly  and  there  is 
urgent  need  for  locating  work  in  the  western 
district  where  at  present  property  could  be  had 
at  a  nominal  price.     Soon  this  territory  will  be 


The  Argentine  Mission.  245 

full  and  then  the  work  will  be  correspondingly 
costly. 

The  second  city  of  the  Republic  in  popula- 
tion, commercial  importance  and  movement  in 
general,  is  Eosario.  Already  it  has  a  population 
of  165,000.  It  is  a  liberal  city  and  hence  ex- 
cellent as  a  center  of  missionary  activity.  The 
Catholic  influence  is  not  so  great  here  as  in 
other  places.  Socialism  in  the  Republic  has  its 
head  in  Rosario.  This  does  not  help  gospel  work 
any  except  in  that  the  field  is  open  wide  to 
tracts  and  public  conferences.  Here  we  have 
two  churches  and  four  out-stations.  Largely 
through  the  hard  work  of  Brother  R.  S.  Hosford,, 
we  also  have  two  houses  of  worship.  One  is  a 
new  brick  chapel  and  the  other  is  a  modest  wood 
structure.  The  chapel  has  a  seating  capacity  of 
300.  Also  we  own  the  portable  iron  and  wood 
chapel  which  was  formerly  on  the  site  of  the 
present  brick  building.  Brother  Hosford  is  plan- 
ning to  put  this  chapel  on  a  new  site  and  the 
lot  is  already  selected.  Rosario  covers  a  larger 
space  than  its  population  would  indicate  and 
hence  it  is  very  necessary  to  locate  a  number  of 
preaching  halls  to  reach  well  the  people.  The 
buildings  mentioned  all  belong  to  the  Second 
Church. 

Santa  Fe,  the  capital  of  the  province  of  the 
same  name,  is  a  city  of  45,000  inhabitants,  and 
Parana,  just  across  the  river,  has  35,000.  Santa 
Fe  is  very  active  commercially  and  will  soon  have 


246      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

an  excellent  port.  The  terminus  of  the  new  Bo- 
livian railroad  is  to  be  at  Santa  Fe,  which  will 
add  very  much  to  its  importance  as  a  railroad 
center.  The  Catholic  influence  is  very  great,  so 
much  so  that  some  thought  that  Brother  Fowler 
had  made  a  mistake  in  going  there.  The  result 
has  been  splendid.  Brother  Osterman,  a  French- 
man and  a  Baptist,  had  struggled  along  here 
for  years  without  getting  hold  of  more  than  a 
dozen  members.  He  at  once  began  to  cooperate 
with  our  work  and  the  combined  efforts  have  pro- 
duced excellent  results.  There  are  now  two 
churches  with  some  forty  members  each.  Becently 
a  church  has  been  organized  at  Parana,  just 
across  the  river,  consisting  of  nine  members,  seven 
of  which  were  baptized  on  the  22nd  of  Febru- 
ary and  two  coming  by  letter.  Our  work  is 
practically  all  that  is  being  done  on  the  Santa 
Fe  side  of  the  river.  The  Methodists  also  work 
in  Parana. 

La  Plata,  as  indicated,  marks  the  beginning  on 
the  south  of  the  district  of  denser  population. 
It  is  only  one  hour  and  twenty  minutes  by  train 
from  Buenos  Aires.  The  population,  which  is 
rapidly  growing,  numbered  last  year  87,000. 
There  is  a  good  port,  which,  added  to  its  being 
the  capital  of  the  province  of  Buenos  Aires,  gives 
the  city  importance.  The  overflow  from  Buenos 
Aires  has  already  reached  La  Plata.  This  last 
element  will  continue  to  augment  the  growth  in 
population.     Our  mission  has  a  fine  opportunity 


The  Argentine  Mission.  2A7 

to  enter  La  Plata  because  of  work  done  by  Brother 
Besson,  who  planted  a  congregation  there  fifteen 
years  ago.  In  recent  years  this  congregation  has 
been  cared  for  by  Brother  W.  D.  Smart.  The  con- 
gregation is  some  fifty  strong  and  desires  to  be- 
long to  our  convention. 

While  the  above  mentioned  district  deserves 
special  mention  on  account  of  its  denser  popu- 
lation, it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  overlook 
the  interior  of  the  country.  This  pause  of  the 
mass  of  the  people  on  the  river  front  is  for  a 
breathing  spell  to  gather  strength  for  the  conquest 
of  the  vast  and  rich  interior.  Here  important 
cities  already  exist.  Bahia  Blanca  is  attracting 
much  attention  and  doubtless  will  continue  to 
be  the  largest  city  of  the  southern  part  of  the 
country.  It  is  a  good  port  and  has  extensive 
railroad  connections.  Tucuman  lies  in  the  north 
and  is  the  center  of  the  sugar  industry,  which 
means  to  say  that  the  surrounding  districts  are 
agricultural  and  hence  more  thickly  populated. 
Cordoba  is  directly  west  of  Bosario.  It  is  an 
old  city  and  for  many  years  the  university  cen- 
ter. These  schools  still  flourish,  but  the  univer- 
sity at  Buenos  Aires  at  present  enjoys  more  pres- 
tige. Mendoza  is  far  out  to  the  West  in  the 
grape  district.  The  tunnel  through  the  Andes 
recently  opened  will  greatly  favor  Men- 
doza. It  deserves  the  immediate  attention  of 
some  good  worker.  These  are  the  largest  cities 
of  the  interior,  but  there  are  many  other  cities 


248      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

and  towns  of  from  5,000  to  15,000  inhabitants. 
In  the  vast  grazing  region  little  can  be  done  at 
present.    The  people  are  too  much  scattered. 

Catholic  Influence. 

The  country,  as  a  whole,  is  most  decidedly 
Catholic.  This  condition  is  not  much  changed 
by  immigration  as  the  overwhelming  majority 
of  the  immigrants  are  also  Catholic,  and  often 
even  more  fanatic  than  the  Argentines.  Buenos 
Aires  is  one  of  the  most  Catholic  cities  of  the 
world.  Other  strong  Catholic  centers  are  Cor- 
doba, the  old  university  center,  and  Santa  Fe, 
a  Jesuit  stronghold.  The  country  districts  are 
uniformly  fanatic. 

There  are  four  well  known  virgins,  but  the 
two  that  exercise  the  widest  influence  are  the 
Virgin  of  Lujan,  whose  chapel  is  in  the  province 
of  Buenos  Aires,  and  the  Virgin  of  Catamarca, 
who  performs  her  miracles  in  the  mountains  to 
the  north.  These  virgins  exercise  a  wide  influ- 
ence in  the  country.  At  certain  times,  10,000  peo- 
ple go  to  Lujan  in  one  day  from  Buenos  Aires. 
One  meets  constantly  the  proofs  of  the  virgin's 
influence.  A  concrete  example  may  serve  to  il- 
lustrate: One  day  I  was  inviting  a  woman  to 
attend  our  services,  but  she  held  up  her  hands 
in  horror  and  said  this  would  displease  the  Vir- 
gin of  Lujan  to  whom  she  had  made  vows  and 
in   consequence  had  been   cured  of  rheumatism. 


National  Congress.  Buenos  Aires,  Argentina 


The  Argentine  Mission.  249 

When  I  insisted  that  she  attend  she  finally 
showed  me  her  feet,  which  were  all  drawn,  and 
said,  "I  cannot  walk  because  I  suffer  so  from  rheu- 
matism." This  is  a  fair  sample  of  the  quality 
of  this  famous  virgin's  miracles.  A  word  as  to 
the  origin  of  this  virgin  may  be  of  interest.  The 
Catholic  Church  teaches  the  following  as  to  her 
beginning:  Years  ago,  before  the  days  of  rail- 
roads in  this  country,  when  all  the  freight  had 
to  be  moved  by  carts  drawn  by  oxen,  some  men 
were  hauling  boxes  of  goods  from  Buenos  Aires 
to  a  point  in  the  country,  when  they  discov- 
ered, upon  unloading,  a  box  too  heavy  to  be 
moved.  They  called  in  additional  help,  but  all 
attempts  failed  to  move  it.  Finally  they  opened 
the  box  and  found  the  present  Virgin  of  Lujan. 
They  took  this  discovery,  together  with  the  enor- 
mous weight  of  the  box,  to  indicate  beyond  all 
question  of  doubt  that  the  virgin  wanted  to  be 
located  there.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  her  will 
was  speedily  complied  with. 

This  adoration  of  the  virgin  is  not  confined 
to  the  poorer  classes.  In  fact,  just  the  reverse 
is  largely  true.  It  has  come  to  be  a  social  obli- 
gation to  go  at  least  once  each  year  to  Lujan,  and 
the  higher  circles  do  not  refuse  to  go, 

The  social  influence  is  so  mixed  with  the  relig- 
ious that  it  is  hard  to  distinguish  between  the 
two,  but  it  would  be  perfectly  safe  to  say  that 
even  with  reference  to  the  ordinances,  baptism 
and  communion,  the  social  is  the  greater  influence. 


250       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

The  funerals  are  distinctly  social  and  are  pub- 
lished in  the  social  columns  of  the  papers.  The 
result  of  all  this  is  that  when  Eome  has  no  fur- 
ther hold  religiously,  she  maintains  herself 
through  social  relations.  Wholly  irreligious  peo- 
ple are  whipped  into  line  and  made  to  christen 
their  children,  prepare  them  for  first  communion, 
and  also  pay  for  costly  funerals  and  masses  by 
social  obligation.  For  social  reasons  the  large 
majority  will  not  enter  any  evangelistic  service; 
so  this  influence  is  sufficient  to  prevent  their  hear- 
ing the  gospel.  The  people  who  are  religious  at 
heart  make  the  best  hearers  and  are  the  first  to 
accept  Christ.  In  every  case,  when  converted, 
they  testify  that  when  they  devoted  their  whole 
attention  to  the  Komish  ceremonies,  they  did  not 
even  understand  that  there  was  such  a  thing  as 
the  new  birth.  Moral  responsibility  does  not 
seem  to  be  associated  with  religious  thought. 
This  fact  is  the  sad  end  of  the  story  for  Eome. 
The  people  who  have  followed  her  will  have  to 
hear  the  gospel  from  others. 

A  man  from  the  province  of  Tucuman  told  the 
following  in  justification  of  his  devotion  to  the 
Virgin  of  Catamarca:  "A  man,  riding  across 
the  plain,  fell  with  his  horse  into  a  well  and 
sank  400  meters  in  the  water  where  he  remained 
four  days.  In  this  condition  he  made  a  vow  to 
the  virgin  of  the  region  that  if  she  would  save 
him,  he  would  tie  a  ribbon  on  her  statue.  The 
virgin  saved  him,  the  man  fulfilled  his  vow,  and 


The  Argentine  Mission.  251 

the  ribbon  is  still  tied  to  the  statue  and  was 
seen  by  me."  Such  stories  are  accepted  as  true 
and  the  minds  of  the  people  are  full  of  the  like. 
The  most  insignificant  happenings  are  held  as 
being  miracles  of  virgins  or  saints. 

The  vitiated  taste  for  marvelous  stories  makes 
it  hard  to  write  an  acceptable  tract.  Our  stories 
are  tame  in  comparison  with  those  recounted  in 
the  books  and  leaflets  of  the  priests.  The  Sacred 
History,  the  title  of  a  book  used  to  teach  the  chil- 
dren, combines  with  a  few  Bible  stories,  given 
in  changed  form,  a  large  number  of  stories  of 
saints  and  pretended  miracles.  The  volume  is 
so  false  that  it  does  not  produce  any  good  fruit 
at  all,  and  those  who  become  interested  in  the 
gospel  have  great  difficulty  in  unlearning  all  this 
rubbish.  The  theatres  also  have  contributed  to 
the  general  confusion,  for  pretended  sacred  scenes 
are  often  displayed  and  the  incorrect  pictures  fill 
the  minds  with  error  as  to  historical  points. 

The  only  cure  for  this  is  the  study  of  the  Bible 
itself.  It  is  beautiful  to  see  how  those  moved  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  read  the  Bible,  once  they  have 
it,  with  the  greatest  eagerness,  and  they  find  in  it 
a  rest  to  their  souls.  As  an  illustration  of  this, 
a  case  which  does  not  differ  from  scores  of  others 
may  be  cited:  Four  months  ago  Senor  Doblado, 
a  member  of  our  church  and  colporteur  of  the 
American  Bible  Society,  sold  the  Bible  to  a 
young  man  who  can  read  very  little.  The  young 
fellow  was  impressed  by  what  Brother  Doblado 


252       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

told  him  about  the  gospel  and  came  to  the  serv- 
ices of  the  church.  After  two  months  he  pro- 
fessed conversion  and  has  spelled  out  the  gospels 
of  Matthew  and  Mark  amid  the  ridicule  of  his 
fellow- workmen.  The  fine  young  fellow  told  me 
with  his  face  all  aglow  that  the  Bible  was  reason- 
able in  all  that  it  said.  This  remark  meant,  as 
he  at  once  explained,  that  his  soul  had  been 
starved  on  impossible  tales. 

The  Bible  does  not  exist  in  the  land  except 
for  the  copies  already  sold  or  given  away  by  mis- 
sionary agencies.  Preaching  must  be  done,  there- 
fore, to  wholly  untaught  hearers,  or  else  to  hearers 
who  attach  absolutely  no  value  to  the  Bible  over 
other  books.  The  Commandments  of  God  have 
no  weight  and  the  labor  of  prophets  and  apos- 
tles is  lost  to  them  because  ignored.  The  con- 
science, the  last  resort  of  the  preacher,  is  so  dead- 
ened by  false  teaching  and  false  standards  of 
morals  that  too  often  the  most  earnest  appeals 
are  answered  with  a  vacant  stare  or  by  the  favor- 
ite reply  of  those  who  make  fun,  "Macanas"  (tom- 
foolery). The  last  is  the  attitude  of  that  large 
number  of  people  disgusted  with  Komish  forms 
and  ceremonies  who  do  not  care  to  hear  more  of 
Christianity  in  any  form.  The  appalling  indiffer- 
ence which  exists  is  largely  due  to  the  fact  that 
Christ,  as  seen  through  the  Pope,  has  lost  his 
drawing  power. 


The  Argentine  Mission.  253 

The  Stage  of  Evangelistic  Work. 

Thus  far  very  few  have  been  reached.  It* is 
also  true  that  comparatively  little  work  has  been 
done.  With  the  exception  of  the  work  of  the 
Methodists,  the  missions  are  all  new.  The  con- 
gregations are  small  and  the  work  consists,  in 
the  main,  of  visits  and  studies.  Some  of  the 
best  opportunities  for  Bible  study  are  found  in 
the  homes  where  interest  has  been  awakened  after 
repeated  visits.  In  this  house  to  house  work 
entrance  is  not  always  possible,  but  enough  re- 
ceive the  worker  kindly  to  make  this  method  very 
fruitful.  Without  such  visiting,  even  a  gifted 
speaker  cannot  maintain  a  congregation.  In  the 
work  of  our  mission  the  constant  aim  has  been 
to  provide  a  room  in  as  many  districts  as  pos- 
sible and  to  use  these  rooms  for  regular  services 
and  studies.  These  rooms  are  very  necessary  be- 
cause of  the  limited  space  occupied  by  the  fam- 
ilies and  hence  the  impossibility  often  of  a  study 
in  the  home.  Some  have  the  courage  to  come  to 
these  rooms  or  halls  who  are  not  willing  to 
brave  the  criticism  of  friends  and  relatives  at 
home.  Working  thus,  with  few  people,  the  train- 
ing is  more  thorough  and  a  very  close  relation 
is  formed  with  each  one.  The  ties  of  affection 
are  precious  beyond  expression.  The  attendance 
is  so  small  that  even  in  the  larger  halls,  fifty  or 
sixty  is  considered  a  satisfactory  congregation. 
We  pray  and  look  constantly  for  a  more  general 


254       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

awakening  and  interest  in  the  gospel.  The  at- 
tendance improves  as  more  acquaintances  are 
made,  but  it  grows  by  inches. 

Impurity  and  lying  are  the  great  national  sins. 
The  Wee  of  drink  is  also  growing  and  the  liquors 
consumed  are  stronger  and  more  deadly  than 
those  known  to  North  Americans.  The  wines  that 
were  once  much  used  are  being  replaced  by  liquors 
made  of  sugar  cane  and  by  whiskey  that  too  often 
bears  an  English  stamp.  The  work  and  progress 
of  the  gospel  consequently  are  slow. 

The  work  is  complicated  and  made  more  diffi- 
cult by  the  large  amount  of  false  teaching  that 
has  come  into  the  country  at  the  same  time  with 
the  gospel.  All  the  isms  that  have  grown  up  at 
home  and  in  Europe  have  been  and  are  being  in- 
troduced into  Argentina. 

The  gospel  has  to  compete  with  these  before  an 
untrained  people.  As  none  of  these  errors  de- 
mand a  change  in  moral  conduct,  their  different 
theories  are  readily  accepted.  Many  of  the  advo- 
cates of  these  theories  pretend  to  be  friends  of 
the  gospel  workers,  so  much  so  that  hardly  a 
day  passes  in  which  he  does  not  have  to  defend 
himself  against  some  form  of  occultism  or  the- 
osophy.  The  country  is  about  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  faith  healers.  An  untrained  congregation 
is  at  the  mercy  of  these  smooth-tongued  fellows. 
The  only  safe  course  will  be  to  train  wTell  the 
converts.  Error  may  take  a  quick  hold,  but  it 
cannot  stand  against  serious  Bible  study. 


The  Argentine  Mission.  255 

The  type  of  the  larger  number  of  conversions 
is  well  represented  in  Manuel  Vasquez,  the  first 
one  converted  in  the  Once  station.  This  man 
ran  a  little  barber  shop  a  few  squares  from  the 
preaching  hall  and  while  he  had  lost  all  con- 
fidence in  Home,  he  still  retained  something  of 
a  religious  sentiment  in  his  heart.  His  life  was 
very  sinful  and  he  was  unhappy.  One  night  he 
attended  the  services  partly  out  of  curiosity  and 
partly  with  a  real  desire  to  know  what  we  taught. 
The  same  night  he  became  sufficiently  interested 
to  ask  for  a  study  at  my  home.  He  at  once  bought 
a  Bible  and  for  several  weeks  continued  to  study. 
He  was  so  aroused  that  he  soon  began  to  attend 
services  regularly  and  after  two  months  was  con- 
verted. On  the  organization  of  the  church,  he 
was  elected  clerk  which  office  he  faithfully  holds 
still,  and  in  every  way  he  is  one  of  our  most  use- 
ful members. 

Another  type  of  a  class  not  so  large  is  shown 
in  the  case  of  Eamona  Garcia,  who  had  a  vege- 
table stall  in  a  market  and  was  so  devoted  to  the 
virgin  that  she  left  her  post  every  morning  to 
go  to  the  church.  But  prayers  to  the  virgin  did 
not  keep  her  from  cheating  in  her  sales.  One  day, 
she  heard  a  gospel  sermon  and  was  at  once 
touched  by  the  spirit.  In  her  beautiful  testimony 
she  said:  "After  that  I  never  could  sell  as  fresh 
vegetables,  those  that  were  two  or  three  days 
old."  This  woman  says  that  her  prayers  when  a 
Bomanist  were  directed  wholly  to  the  virgin. 


256       Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

There  are  a  few  like  the  case  of  a  man  in  Santa 
Fe.  He  was  violent  in  his  home  and  reviled  all 
religions  thought.  First  his  daughter  began  to 
attend  Brother  Fowler's  service.  The  man  was 
furious  at  the  idea,  but  finally  he,  himself,  not 
knowing  why,  began  to  attend.  Almost  at  once 
he  was  converted  and  made  a  public  confession 
of  faith.  His  whole  frame  trembled  and  Brother 
Fowler  had  to  sustain  him  to  prevent  his  falling. 
It  was  a  sudden  conversion  of  a  man  who  up  to 
the  time,  seemingly,  was  wholly  contrary  to  all  re- 
ligious thought. 

Native  Helpers. 

Surely  native  helpers  cannot  be  more  useful 
on  any  field  than  on  ours.  This  is  a  cultured 
country,  and  the  attractiveness  of  the  speaker  sig- 
nifies a  great  deal.  The  Argentine  always  has 
an  advantage  over  the  foreigner  in  his  superior 
knowledge  of  the  language  and  customs.  The 
right  kind  of  a  native  helper  is  invaluable  in  get- 
ting into  the  homes  and  in  winning  the  confidence 
of  the  people. 

Our  first  native  helper  was  Maximino  Fernan- 
dez who  attracted  attention  by  his  evident  call 
to  the  ministry.  During  one  year  he  worked  with 
the  brethren  at  Bosario,  receiving  nothing  except 
his  board  which  was  given  him  by  the  Harts  and 
Spights.  The  young  fellow  proved  such  an  addi- 
tion to  the  work  that  the  Board  accepted  him  as 


The  Argentine  Mission.  257 

a  native  helper.  Fernandez  has  grown  into  the 
work  rapidly  and  is  at  present  capable  of  taking 
charge  of  an  idependent  post.  Soon  other  young 
men  began  to  give  proof  of  a  call  to  the  work, 
and  having  the  success  of  the  first  as  a  stimulus, 
we  have  asked  for  six  helpers  and  two  pastors. 
The  pastors  are  Brothers  Juan  C.  Varetto  and  Al- 
berto Osterman.  These  two  came  to  us  as  a  result 
of  Brother  Besson's  work.  It  is  also  true  that 
Brother  Graham,  an  Englishman,  had  given  Va- 
retto a  splendid  four  year's  training  in  academic 
and  theological  subjects.  Both  of  these  pastors 
made  a  fine  record  in  baptisms  last  year.  Brother 
Ostermann  baptized  twenty-one,  which  was  the 
largest  number  baptized  at  any  one  point  in  our 
mission.  Furthermore  the  quality  of  their  work 
seems  entirely  satisfactory.  None  of  the  six 
young  men  who  have  been  in  training  under  our 
own  workers  have  been  given  an  entirely  inde- 
pendent work  yet,  but  Fernandez  and  Yebra  will 
soon  have  to  take  this  responsibility.  They  are 
successful  preachers  and  ought  to  make  good  pas- 
tors. Thus  far  the  training  of  the  young  men 
has  been  in  the  hands  of  the  missionary  with 
whom  each  one  works.  The  teaching  of  them  has 
taken  time,  but  as  a  recompense,  the  young  men 
assist  with  the  visiting,  teaching  of  members  and 
in  preaching.  All  of  these  young  fellows  are 
bright  and  as  is  true  of  the  people  in  general,  are 
especially  quick  in  imitation.  For  this  reason  the 
system  of  educating  the  new  by  close  contact  with 

17 


258      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

more  experienced  workers,  promises  good  results. 
The  only  serious  drawback  is  that  our  mistakes 
seem  to  be  the  first  points  imitated.  For  example, 
the  young  man  who  works  with  me  is  beginning 
to  preach  and  invariably  holds  up  the  index  finger 
just  as  I  do  when  making  a  gesture.  As  a  rule 
the  Argentine  is  attractive  as  a  speaker,  and  what 
is  better  by  far,  he  is  not  wanting  in  sterling 
worth. 

The  richness  of  the  Spanish  literature  makes  it 
possible  for  the  native  helper  to  inform  himself 
very  well  indeed  without  the  knowledge  of  a  for- 
eign tongue.  The  Spanish  affords  good  histories, 
biographies  and  books  on  general  subjects.  It  is 
true  that  there  is  little  on  theology,  but  the  list  of 
works  translated  on  this  line  is  growing  con- 
stantly. Naturally,  many  of  the  works  are  written 
from  a  Eomish  standpoint.  However,  a  few  of 
our  best  religious  books  have  been  published  in 
Spanish.  "Pilgrim's  Progress"  has  been  received 
with  great  favor.  Our  two  native  pastors  both 
read  French,  which  is  a  great  help  to  them. 
Brother  Varetto  also  reads  English  and  trans- 
lates beautifully  from  English  to  Spanish.  While 
it  is  a  great  help  to  know  some  language  rich  in 
religious  literature,  still  the  Argentine  who  works 
faithfully  in  Spanish  will  not  be  an  ignorant 
pastor. 


The  Argentine  Mission.  259 

Our  Growth. 

Thus  far  we  have  organized  seven  churches,  as 
has  been  seen.  The  total  membership  at  this 
writing  is  270.  The  Constitution  church  in 
Buenos  Aires,  the  first  organized,  leads  in  member- 
ship, with  fifty-three  on  the  roll.  The  growth  on 
the  whole  field  has  been  very  uniform.  No  church 
has  grown  rapidly,  but  each  has  enjoyed  a  steady 
gain.  At  every  point  much  attention  has  been 
devoted  to  the  training  of  the  converts.  While 
each  station  would  make  an  interesting  study  in 
itself,  the  conditions  are  so  similar  that  it  will 
hardly  be  profitable  to  carry  the  reader  through 
the  whole  story  of  the  working,  praying,  and  wait- 
ing at  each  point  before  seeing  a  single  conversion. 
It  has  been  true  in  practically  every  opening  that 
the  first  visible  fruits  have  come  after  one  whole 
year  of  sowing  and  cultivation. 

The  uniform  growth  at  all  points  has  greatly 
added  to  the  solidity  of  the  work  and  has  given 
room  for  a  most  delightful  rivalry,  which  pleases 
most  when  it  is  known  that  the  other  point  has 
enjoyed  greater  blessing  still.  The  joy  and  happi- 
ness of  a  good,  hard  pull  together  has  character- 
ized the  work  thus  far.  We  are  praying  for  a 
more  abundant  harvest,  for  an  awakening  of  inter- 
est in  the  gospel,  which  will  open  the  doors  to  the 
homes  of  the  people.  Thus  far  we  have  had  to 
work  in  the  streets  and  conventillos  (houses  so 
arranged  that  many  families  live  around  an  open 


260      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

court,  the  main  entrance  of  which  is  open  by  day 
to  anyone  who  cares  to  enter).  Working  thus, 
we  have  been  able  to  reach  only  the  poorest  people. 
They  make  up  in  willingness  to  give  what  they 
lack  in  means.  The  members  are  very  much  in- 
terested in  helping  the  noble  group  of  Baptist 
brethren  in  Chili.  They  also  give  well  to  local 
expenses.  Last  year,  taking  the  whole  member- 
ship of  the  churches,  the  contributions  of  the  year 
amounted  to  ten  dollars  (gold)  per  member.  It 
is  not  easy  to  teach  the  grace  of  giving,  and  some 
do  not  give,  but  we  are  trying  to  start  off  with 
something  of  the  independent  spirit,  or  at  least 
with  the  spirit  of  sharing  in  the  expenses.  Be- 
sides the  halls  occupied  by  the  seven  churches,  we 
have  preaching  in  ten  other  halls.  Just  about  half 
of  the  expenses  of  the  out-stations  is  borne  by  the 
churches. 

Sunday  school  work  offers  difficulties  which  are 
hard  to  surmount.  The  parents  are  too  much  in- 
fluenced by  relatives  and  friends  to  allow  their 
children  to  attend.  About  the  only  children  we 
have  in  the  six  schools  opened  are  those  of  con- 
verted parents.  Competent  teachers  are  hard  to 
find,  but  when  a  class  has  a  good  teacher  it  nearly 
always  keeps  up  in  attendance.  Our  six  schools 
show  some  two  hundred  enrolled. 

The  work  in  Argentina  continues  to  be  largely 
personal — that  is  to  say,  very  few  attend  the 
public  services  who  were  not  first  cultivated  by 
some  worker. 


The  Argentine  Mission.  261 

We  are  working  in  a  rich  country  and  one  with 
a  great  future.  Its  being  rich  means  that  living 
is  expensive  and  the  cost  of  work  in  general  con- 
stitutes a  real  difficulty.  At  the  same  time  it 
ought  to  be  one  of  the  very  first  countries  to  be- 
come self-sustaining.  We  are  doing  our  best  to 
train  the  members  of  our  churches  to  depend  upon 
themselves  and  contribute  to  the  support  of  the 
work.  The  statistical  tables  will  show  that  some- 
thing is  being  accomplished  in  this  respect.  It 
is  the  most  decided  opinion  of  the  writer  that  the 
present  cost  of  work  in  Argentina  ought  not  to 
be  a  reason  for  doing  less  work  in  the  republic. 

The  only  solution  of  one  big  item  of  expense, 
that  of  rents,  will  be  found  in  building  our  own 
chapels.  The  necessity  of  owning  property  is  so 
great  that  the  matter  ought  to  be  kept  constantly 
in  mind  by  all  concerned.  It  pays  to  own  prop- 
erty here,  for  the  rents  are  out  of  proportion  to 
the  cost  of  the  land  and  houses.  But  the  economy 
of  it  is  not  even  the  greater  gain.  The  fact  is 
that  suitable  accommodations  cannot  be  had ;  and 
the  time  of  missionaries  and  native  helpers  is 
unprofitably  used  because  of  this  want  of  accom- 
modations. We  here  on  the  field  ought  to  do  our 
part  toward  this  expense  of  building;  but  the 
Board,  in  most  cases,  will  have  to  take  the  larger 
share  of  the  burden.  With  buildings  the  work 
will  take  on  a  different  form. 

The  last  word  is,  that  while  growth  has  not  been 
rapid,   the  work   is   in   every   way   encouraging. 


262      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

Argentina  is  an  important  country,  destined  in 
the  near  future  to  be  much  more  important.  This 
land,  so  rich  in  other  respects,  sorely  needs  the 
gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  to  enrich  its  moral  impor- 
tance. 

The  Argentine  Mission. 

1.  In  Buenos  Aires — 

(1)  Eight  missionaries. 

(2)  Constitution  Church. 

(3)  Once  Church. 

(4)  Three  out-stations. 

(5)  Printing  plant. 

(6) "Expositor  Baptista"  (monthly  paper). 

2.  In  Rosario — 

(1)  Four  missionaries. 

(2)  First  Church. 

(3)  North  Church. 

(4)  Three  out-stations. 

3.  In  Santa  Fe— 

(1)  Two  missionaries. 

(2)  Church  at  25  de  Mayo. 

(3)  Church  at  4  de  Enero. 

(4)  Four  out-stations. 

4.  Summary  of  Statistics — 

(1)  Churches,  7. 

(2)  Church  buildings,  2. 

(3)  Members,  270. 

(4)  Out-stations,  10. 

(5)  Sunday  schools,  6. 

(6)  Sunday  school  scholars,  195. 

(7)  Missionaries — 

(a)  Foreign,  14. 

(b)  Native,  9. 

5.  Work  opened  1903. 


Appendix.  263 


APPENDIX  A. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

1.  On  the  General  Subject. 

(1)  The  Morning  Hour  of  American  Baptist  Missions. 

By  A.  L.  Vail.     Price,  $1.25. 

(2)  The   Missionary   Work   of  the   Southern   Baptist 

Convention.     By    Mary    Emily    Wright.     Price, 
75  cents. 

(3)  The  Highway  of  Mission  Thought.     By  T.  B.  Ray. 

Price,  75  cents. 

2.  On  the  Countries. 

(1)  The  Uplift  of  China.     By  A.  H.  Smith.     Price,  58 

cents. 

(2)  Sunrise  in  the  Sunrise  Kingdom   (Japan).     By  J. 
H.  De  Forest.     Price,  58  cents. 

(3)  South  America :  Its  Mission  Problems.     By  T.  B. 

Neeley.    Price,  58  cents. 

(4)  Daybreak  in  the  Dark   Continent    (Africa).     By 

W.  S.  Naylor.     Price,  58  cents. 

(5)  The  Yoruba  Country.     By  S.  G.  Pinnock.     Price, 

20  cents. 

(6)  Italy  and  the  Italians.     By  G.  B.  Taylor.     Price, 

68  cents. 

(7)  On  a  Mexican  Ranch.     By  Alice  Duggan.     Price, 

50  cents. 

3.  Biographies. 

(1)  William     Carey.     By     Smith.     Price,     $1.50;     by 

Myers,  75  cents ;  by  Farwell,  30  cents. 

(2)  Adoniram  Judson.     by  his  son.     Price,  90  cents; 

by  Johnston,  30  cents. 


264      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

(3)  The   Story  of  Yates,   the  Missionary.     By   C.   E. 

Taylor.     Price,  50  cents. 

(4)  George  Boardman  Taylor.    By  his  son.    Price,  $1.50. 


APPENDIX  B. 


"ELICIT,    COMBINE,    DIRECT." 

It  is  interesting  to  note  the  source  from  which  came 
the  words,  "elicit,  combine,  direct,"  which  appear  in  the 
Preamble  to  the  Constitutions  of  both  the  Triennial  Con- 
vention and  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention,  and  which 
express  so  admirably  the  genius  of  our  organization. 
These  words  were  used  first  by  Rev.  William  B.  Johnson 
in  an  address  issued  December  17,  1813,  by  the  Savannah 
Baptist  Society  for  Foreign  Missions,  of  which  Dr. 
Johnson  was  then  President.  Dr.  Johnson  wrote  this 
address,  which  was  issued  "to  the  inhabitants  of  Georgia 
and  adjacent  parts  of  South  Carolina."  After  setting  forth 
the  general  situation  and  the  Judson-Rice  story,  it  an- 
nounces the  proposed  Convention  "in  some  central  situa- 
tion of  the  United  States  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  an 
efficient  and  practical  plan  on  which  the  energies  of  the 
whole  Baptist  denomination  throughout  America  may  be 
elicited,  comb^ed,  and  directed  in  one  sacred  effort  for 

sending  the  word  of  life  to  idolatrous  lands 

What  a  sublime  spectacle  will  this  Convention  present! 
A  numerous  body  of  the  Lord's  people,  embracing  in  their 
connection  between  one  and  two  hundred  thousand  souls, 
all  rising  in  obedience  to  their  Lord,  and  meeting  by  dele- 
gation in  one  august  assembly,  solemnly  to  engage  in  one 
sacred  effort  for  effectuating  the  great  command,  'Go  ye 
therefore  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  into  the 
name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;   teaching  them 


Appendix. 


265 


to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you, 
and  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world/  " 

Dr.  Johnson  was  the  representative  of  Georgia  at  the 
Convention  in  Philadelphia,  which  organized  the  Trien- 
nial Convention.  He  served  on  the  Committee  which 
drafted  the  Constitution.  It  is  easy,  therefore,  to  trace 
the  origin  of  these  historic  words. 

Dr.  Johnson  had  the  distinction  of  being  the  President 
of  the  Triennial  Convention  from  1841  to  1845,  and  of 
being  elected  the  first  President  of  the  Southern  Baptist 
Convention. 


APPENDIX  C. 


NAMES  OF  DELEGATES  TO  THE  FIRST  TRIENNIAL 
CONVENTION,   PHILADELPHIA,  MAY  18,  1814. 


Massachusetts. 


New  York. 


Rev.  Thomas  Baldwin,  D.D. 

Rev.  Lucius  Bolles,  A.M. 

Rev.  Stephen  Gano,  A.M. Rhode  Island. 

Rev.  John  Williams,  A.M. 

Mr.  Thomas  Hewitt _-_- 

Mr.  Edward  Probyn  _. 

Mr.  Nathaniel  Smith 

Rev.  Burgiss  Allison,  D.D. 

Rev.  Richard  Proudf oot  _„_ 

Rev.  Josiah  Stratton 

Rev.  William  Boswell 

Rev.  Henry  Smalley,  A.M. 

Mr.  Mathew  Randall  -T 

Mr.  John  Sisty 

Mr.  Stephen  Ustick 


>-New  Jersey. 


266      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 


Rev.  William  Rogers,  D.D 1 

Rev.  Henry  Holcombe,  D.D. j 

Rev.  William  Staughton,  D.D.. 
Rev.  William  White,  A.M. 
Rev.  John 
Rev.  Horatio  G.  Jones. 

Rev.  Silas  Hough 

Rev.  Joseph  Mathias  _ 

Rev.  Daniel  Dodge ".Delaware. 


[am  White,  A.M. I 

P.  Peckworth Pennsylvania 


Rev.  Lewis  Richards 
Rev.  Thomas  Brooke 


y  Maryland. 
Rev.  Luther  Rice,  A.M. Dist.  Columbia. 


Rev.  Robert  B.  Semple |         . 

Rev.  Jacob  Grigg |  Virginia. 

Rev.  James  A.  Ranaldson North  Carolina. 

Rev.  Richard  Furman,  D.D.  _ ) 

Hon.  Mathias  B.  Tallmadge ^  South  Carolina. 

Rev.  W.  B.  Johnson   Georgia. 

APPENDIX  D. 


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  TRIENNIAL  CONVENTION. 

"We,  the  delegates  from  Missionary  Societies,  and 
other  religious  bodies  of  the  Baptist  denomination,  in 
various  parts  of  the  United  States,  met  in  Convention,  in 
the  city  of  Philadelphia,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  into 
effect  the  benevolent  intentions  of  our  constituents,  by 
organizing  a  plan  for  eleciting,  combining,  and  directing 
the  energies  of  the  whole  denomination  in  one  sacred 
effort  for  sending  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  the 
heathen,  and  to  nations  destitute  of  pure  Gospel  light,  do 
agree  to  the  following  rules  as  fundamental  principles, 
viz. : 


Appendix.  267 

"I.  That  this  body  shall  be  styled  'The  General  Mis- 
sionary Convention  of  the  Baptist  Denomination  in  the 
United  States  of  America  for  Foreign  Missions.' 

"II.  That  a  Triennial  Convention  shall,  hereafter,  be 
held,  consisting  of  delegates,  not  exceeding  two  in  num- 
ber, from  each  of  the  several  Missionary  Societies,  and 
other  religious  bodies  of  the  Baptist  denomination,  now 
existing  or  which  may  hereafter  be  formed  in  the  United 
States,  and  which  shall  each  regularly  contribute  to  the 
general  missionary  fund  a  sum  amounting  at  least  to  one 
hundred  dollars  per  annum. 

"III.  That  for  necessary  transaction  and  despatch  of 
business,  during  the  recess  of  the  said  Convention,  there 
shall  be  a  Board  of  twenty-one  Commissioners,  who  shall 
be  members  of  the  said  Societies,  Churches,  or  other 
religious  bodies  aforesaid,  triennially  appointed  by  the 
said  Convention,  by  ballot,  to  be  called  the  'Baptist  Board 
of  Foreign  Missions  for  the  United  States,'  seven  of 
whom  shall  be  a  quorum  for  the  transaction  of  all  busi- 
ness ;  and  which  Board  shall  continue  in  office  until  suc- 
cessors be  duly  appointed ;  and  shall  have  power  to  make 
and  adopt  by-laws  for  the  government  of  the  said  Board, 
and  for  the  furtherance  of  the  general  objects  of  the 
Institution. 

"IV.  That  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  this  Board  to  employ 
missionaries,  and,  if  necessary,  to  take  measures  for  the 
improvement  of  their  qualifications ;  to  fix  on  the  field 
of  their  labors,  and  the  compensation  to  be  allowed  them 
for  their  services ;  to  superintend  their  conduct,  and  dis- 
miss them,  should  their  services  be  disapproved ;  to  pub- 
lish accounts,  from  time  to  time,  of  the  Board's  transac- 
tions, and  an  annual  address  to  the  public;  to  call  a 
special  meeting  of  the  Convention  on  any  extraordinary 
occasion,  and,  in  general,  to  conduct  the  executive  part  of 
the  missionary  concern. 

"V.  That  only  such  persons  as  are  in  full  communion 
with  some  regular  church  of  our  denomination,  and  who 


268      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

furnish  satisfactory  evidences  of  genuine  piety,  good  tal- 
ents, and  fervent  zeal  for  the  Redeemer's  cause,  are  to  be 
employed  as  missionaries. 

"VI.  That  the  Board  shall  choose,  by  ballot,  one  Presi- 
dent, two  Vice-Presidents,  a  Treasurer,  a  Corresponding 
and  a  Recording  Secretary. 

"VII.  That  the  President,  or  in  case  of  his  absence  or 
disability,  the  senior  Vice-President,  shall  preside  in  all 
meetings  of  the  Board,  and  when  application  shall  be 
made  in  writing,  by  any  two  of  its  members,  shall  call  a 
special  meeting  of  the  Board,  giving  due  notice  thereof. 

"VIII.  That  the  Treasurer  shall  receive  and  faithfully 
account  for  all  moneys  paid  into  the  treasury,  keep  a  reg- 
ular account  of  receipts  and  disbursements,  make  a  report 
thereof  to  the  said  Convention,  whenever  it  shall  be  m 
session,  and  to  the  Board  of  Missions  annually,  and  as 
often  as  by  them  required.  He  shall  also,  before  he 
enters  on  the  duties  of  his  office,  give  competent  security  to 
be  approved  of  by  the  Board,  for  the  stock  and  funds 
that  may  be  committed  to  his  care. 

"IX.  That  the  Corresponding  Secretary  shall  main- 
tain intercourse  by  letter  with  such  individuals,  societies, 
or  public  bodies  as  the  interests  of  the  institution  may  re- 
quire. Copies  of  all  communications  made  by  the  partic- 
ular direction  of  the  Convention  or  Board,  shall  be  by 
him  handed  to  the  Recording  Secretary,  for  record  and 
safe  keeping. 

"X.  That  the  Recording  Secretary  shall,  ex  officio,  be 
the  Secretary  of  the  Convention,  unless  some  other  be  by 
them  appointed  in  his  stead.  He  shall  attend  all  the 
meetings  of  the  Board,  and  keep  a  fair  record  of  all  their 
proceedings,  and  of  the  transactions  of  the  Convention. 

"XI.  That  in  case  of  the  death,  resignation,  or  disabil- 
ity of  any  of  its  officers,  or  members,  the  Board  shall 
have  power  to  fill  such  vacancy. 

"XII.  That  the  said  Convention  shall  have  power,  and 
in  the  interval  of  their  meeting,  the  Board  of  Commis- 


Appendix.  269 

sioners,  on  the  recommendation  of  any  one  of  the  con- 
stituent bodies  belonging  to  the  Convention,  shall  also 
have  power  to  elect  honorary  members  of  piety  and  dis- 
tinguished liberality,  who,  on  their  election,  shall  be 
entitled  to  a  seat,  and  to  take  part  in  the  debates  of  the 
Convention ;  but  it  shall  be  understood  that  the  right  of 
voting  shall  be  confined  to  the  delegates. 

"XIII.  That  in  case  any  of  the  constituent  bodies  shall 
be  unable  to  send  representatives  to  the  said  Convention, 
they  shall  be  permitted  to  vote  by  proxy,  which  proxy 
shall  be  appointed  by  writing. 

"XIV.  That  any  alterations,  which  experience  may 
dictate  from  time  to  time,  may  be  made  in  these  articles, 
at  the  regular  meeting  of  the  Convention,  by  two-thirds 
of  the  members  present." 


APPENDIX  E 


CONSTITUTION  OF  SOUTHERN  BAPTIST  CONVEN- 
TION, AS  ORIGINALLY  ADOPTED  AT  THE  TIME 
OF      ORGANIZATION,      IN      1845,      AND 
WHICH,  WITH  SLIGHT  MODIFICA- 
TION, IS  STILL  OPERATVE. 


Preamble  and  Constitution  of  the  Southern  Baptist 
Convention. 

"We,  the  delegates  from  Missionary  Societies,  Churches, 
and  other  religious  bodies  of  the  Baptist  Denomination, 
in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  met  in  Convention, 
in  the  city  of  Augusta,  Ga.,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying 
into  effect  the  benevolent  intentions  of  our  constituents, 
by  organizing  a  plan  for  eliciting,  combining  and  directing 


270      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

the  energies  of  the  whole  denomination  in  one  sacred 
effort,  for  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel,  agree  to  the 
following  rules,  or  fundamental  principles: 

"Akticle  I.  This  body  shall  be  styled  the  Southern 
Baptist  Convention. 

"Art.  II.  It  shall  be  the  design  of  this  Convention  to 
promote  Foreign  and  Domestic  Missions,  and  other  im- 
portant objects  connected  with  the  Redeemer's  kingdom, 
and  to  combine  for  this  purpose,  such  portions  of  the 
Baptist  denomination  in  the  United  States,  as  may  desire 
a  general  organization  for  Christian  benevolence,  which 
shall  fully  respect  the  independence  and  equal  rights  of 
the  Churches. 

"Art.  III.  A  Trienial  Convention  shall  consist  of 
members  who  contribute  funds,  or  are  delegated  by  relig- 
ious bodies  contributing  funds,  and  the  system  of  repre- 
sentation and  terms  of  membership  shall  be  as  follows, 
viz. :  An  annual  contribution  of  one  hundred  dollars  for 
three  years  next  preceding  the  meeting,  or  the  contribu- 
tion of  three  hundred  dollars  at  any  time  within  said 
three  years,  shall  entitle  the  contributor  to  one  representa- 
tive; an  annual  contribution  of  two  hundred  dollars,  as 
aforesaid,  shall  entitle  the  contributor  to  two  representa- 
tives ;  and  so,  for  each  additional  one  hundred  dollars,  an 
additional  representative  shall  be  allowed.  Provided, 
however,  that  when  application  shall  be  made  for  the 
first  time  by  bodies,  or  individuals,  to  be  admitted  into 
the  Convention,  one  delegate  shall  be  allowed  for  each 
one  hundred  dollars.  And  provided,  also,  that  in  case  of 
great  collateral  Societies,  composed  of  representatives, 
receiving  contributions  from  different  parts  of  the  coun- 
try, the  ratio  of  representation  shall  be  one  delegate  for 
every  thousand  dollars,  annually  contributed  for  three 
years,  as  aforesaid ;  but  the  number  of  representatives 
shall  never  exceed  five. 

"Art.  IV.  The  officers  of  this  Convention  shall  be  a 
President,   four   Vice-Presidents,   a   Treasurer,   and   two 


Appendix.  271 

Secretaries,  who  shall  be  elected  at  each  triennial  meeting 
and  hold  their  offices  until  a  new  election;  and  the 
officers  of  the  Convention  shall  be,  each  oy  virtue  of  his 
office,  members  of  the  several  Boards. 

"Art.  V.  The  Convention  shall  elect  at  each  triennial 
meeting  as  many  Boards  of  Managers,  as  in  its  judgment 
will  be  necessary  for  carrying  out  the  benevolent  objects 
it  may  determine  to  promote,  all  which  Boards  shall  con- 
tinue in  office  until  a  new  election.  Each  Board  shall 
consist  of  a  President,  Vice  Presidents,  Secretaries,  Treas- 
urer, Auditor,  and  fifteen  other  members,  seven  of  whom, 
including  one  or  more  of  the  officers,  shall  form  a  quorum 
for  the  transaction  of  business.  To  each  Board  shall  be 
committed,  during  the  recess  of  the  Convention,  the  entire 
management  of  all  the  affairs  relating  to  the  object  with 
whose  interest  it  shall  be  charged,  all  which  management 
shall  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the  constitutional  pro- 
visions adopted  by  this  Convention,  and  such  other  in- 
structions as  may  be  given  from  time  to  time.  Each 
Board  shall  have  power  to  make  such  compensation  to  its 
Secretaries  and  Treasurer,  as  it  may  think  right ;  fill  the 
vacancies  occurring  in  its  own  body;  enact  its  own  by- 
laws; have  an  annual  meeting  at  any  place  it  may 
appoint,  and  other  meetings  at  such  times  and  places  as 
it  may  think  best ;  keep  a  record  of  its  proceedings  and 
present  a  report  of  them  to  the  Convention  at  each  tri- 
ennial meeting. 

"Art.  VI.  The  Treasurer  of  each  Board  shall  faithfully 
account  for  all  moneys  received  by  him,  keep  a  regular 
entry  of  all  receipts  and  disbursements,  and  make  report 
of  them  to  the  Convention,  whenever  it  shall  be  in  session, 
and  to  his  Board  as  often  as  required.  He  shall  also,  on 
entering  upon  the  duties  of  his  office,  give  competent 
security  to  the  President  of  his  Board,  for  all  the  stock 
and  funds  committed  to  his  care.  His  books  shall  be 
open  at  all  times,  to  the  inspection  of  any  member  of  the 
Convention  and  of  his  Board.     No  moneys  shall  be  paid 


272      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 

out  of  any  of  the  Treasuries  of  the  Boards,  but  by  an 
order  from  that  Board,  from  whose  Treasury  the  money 
is  to  be  drawn,  which  order  shall  be  signed  by  its  pre- 
siding officer. 

"Art.  VII.  The  Corresponding  Secretaries  of  the  sev- 
eral Boards  shall  maintain  intercourse  by  letter,  with 
such  individuals  or  public  bodies,  as  the  interests  of  their 
respective  bodies  may  require.  Copies  of  all  such  commu- 
nications, with  their  answers,  if  any,  shall  be  kept  by 
them  on  file. 

"Abt.  VIII.  The  Recording  Secretaries  of  the  several 
Boards  shall  keep  a  fair  record  of  their  proceedings,  and 
of  suck  other  documents  as  may  be  committed  to  them 
for  the  purpose. 

"Abt.  IX.  All  the  Officers,  Boards,  Missionaries  and 
Agents,  appointed  by  the  Convention,  or  by  any  of  its 
Boards,  shall  be  members  of  some  regular  Church,  in 
union  with  the  Churches  composing  this  Convention. 

"Art.  X.  Missionaries  appointed  by  any  of  the  Boards 
of  this  Convention  must,  previous  to  their  appointment, 
furnish  evidence  of  genuine  piety,  fervent  zeal  in  their 
Master's  cause,  and  talents  which  fit  them  for  the  service 
for  which  they  offer  themselves. 

"Art.  XI.  The  bodies  and  individuals,  composing  this 
Convention,  shall  have  the  right  to  specify  the  object,  or 
objects,  to  which  their  contributions  shall  be  applied. 
But  when  no  such  specification  is  made,  the  Convention 
will  make  the  appropriation  at  its  own  discretion. 

"Art.  XII.  The  Convention  shall  hold  its  meetings 
triennially,  but  extra  meetings  may  be  called  by  the  Pres- 
ident, with  the  approbation  of  any  one  of  the  Boards  of 
Managers.  A  majority  of  the  attending  delegates  shall 
form  a  quorum  for  the  transaction  of  business. 

"Art.  XIII.  Any  alterations  which  experience  shall 
dictate,  may  be  made  in  these  articles,  by  a  vote  of  two- 
thirds  of  the  members  present,  at  any  triennial  meeting 
of  the  Convention." 


Appendix.  273 

APPENDIX  F. 


RECEIPTS  OF  THE  MISSION  BOARD,  1845-1910. 

1845-6  ._ $  11,689  05  1879  .... 36,578  22 

1847  . 17,964  97  1880 45,543  32 

1848 19,503  73  1881  46,808  45 

1849 16,727  93  1882 51,157  02 

1850 23,016  67  1883 56,904  71 

1851 21,789  01  1884 80,465  87 

1852 24,548  30  1885 -_..  65,431  47 

1853 21,438  45  1886 83,933  02 

1854 22,741  92  1887 87,830  53 

1855 30,066  60  1888  _. 86,340  66 

1856 26,503  84  1889 99,023  75 

1857 31,932  29  1890 109,174  20 

1858  ._  34,402  55  1891 113,522  37 

1859  .. 39,823  87  1892 114,325  80 

1860  _... 41,195  07  1893  .. 154,686  28 

1861  ._ 32,886  47  1894 106,332  69 

1862 24,347  08  1895  ----.-__-_  129,348  72 

1863  ------ 8,634  43  1896 . -  102,056  15 

1864  . 40,299  71  1897 _-  125,681  99 

1865 28,680  05  1898 -  124,249  69 

1866 6,630  53  1899 108,716  06 

1867 . 21,667  94  1900 140,102  30 

1868 14,831  44  1901 156,083  33 

1869 19,192  41  1902 —  173,849  51 

1870 21,938  03  1903 __--  218,512  62 

1871 25,749  30  1904 247,629  69 

1872 28,905  55  1905 283,415  88 

1873 51,023  62  1906 315,248  48 

1874 52,841  68  1907 403,811  54 

1875 30,848  58  1908 402,328  16 

1876 45,646  86  j909 460,797  62 

1877 32,287  34  1910 501,058  84 

1878 33,064  45 

18 


274      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 


APPENDIX  G. 


STATISTICAL  TABLE.  SOUTHERN  BAPTIST  CONVEN 


MISSIONS 

CHURCH  STATISTICS. 

COUNTRIES 

§ 

.a 

a 

g 

O 

1 
P 

1 
1 

O 

-£ 

B 

J. 
Ijf 

OS 

—  & 
o  a 

II 

§ 

I 
1 

o 

Increase 

_  :- 

1 
S 

pq 

1 

a 
o 

(5 

China 

South  China 

Central  China 

North  China.. 

Interior  China 

Total 

Total 

Total 

Total 

North  Mexico 

1845 
1847 
1860 
1904 

28 
16 
17 

1 

5 

1 

61 
16 
49 
5 

566 

231 

297 

12 

89 

.... 

40 

4 

31 

10 
ft 

2 

62 

6 

131 

1,106 

105 

2 

75 

Africa 

1850 

21 

9 

20 

231 



3 

13 

Japan 

1890 

10 

11 

58 

17 



2 

Italy 

1870 

34 

80 

113 

36 

18 

32 

Mexico | 

34 
13 

68 
19 

270 
107 

35 
10 

15 

South  Mexico 

Total 

47 

87 

377 

45 

15 

11 

Amazon  Valley 

Pernambuco 

Bahia 

Al  agoas-Maceio 

Victoria 

Campas 

Rio 

Sao  Paulo 

Total 

Brazil ... 

1897 
1889 
1882 
1885 
1903 
1900 
1884 
1899 

11 

18 
32 
5 
8 
15 
10 
10 

4 

::::: 

2 
14 
45 

5 

94     18 
228    104 
335    105 

46       6 

5 

14 

21 

.... 

91 
12 
8 

24 
14 

. 

39 

2     50 
1      29 
1      16 

116 

139 

205 

91 

7 

73 
29 
51 

109 

8    200 

1,254 

393 

152 

56 

Total 

Argentina 

1903 

6 

10 

84 

11 

5 

2 

Gr«nd  Totaln 

289 

23 

539 

3,223 

607 

195 

191 

Appendix. 


275 


APPENDIX  G-Continued. 


TION.  FOREIGN  MISSIONS.  FOR  THE  YEAR  1909-10. 


CHURCH  STATISTICS. 

WORKING  FORCE. 

k 

Q 

d 

1 
a 
1 

d 

i 

o 

W 

Sunday 
Schools 

a 

o 

'I 

'! 

o 
o 

Mission- 
aries 

t 

.§ 

S 

Unobdain- 

ed  Native 
Helpebs. 

8  . 

11 
« 

•P 

Jo 

o 

1 

2 

■M 

|| 

a-8 

53 

4 
1 

i 

1 

i 

6 
•3 

a 

5 
9 
12 

72 

"iir 

4,235 

818 

2,223 

28 

70 

6 

26 

52 
14 
44 

1,817 

705 

1,770 

$    6,893  99 

1,081  40 

834  18 

18 
14 
15 

4 

21 
19 
31 

4 

15 

1 
2 

72 

21 

52 

8 

29 
11 

26 

1 

9 
15 
13 

2 

L26 

87 

7,304 

102 

110 

4,292 

$    8,809  57 

51 

75 

18 

153 

67 

39 

6 



1,098 

27 

22 

678 

$    3,293  00 

5 

6 

3 

42 

7 



21 

504 

8 

13 

617 

1,025  64 

8 

~          T 

6 

8 

5 

21 

66 

993 

5 

32 

744 

1,474  23 

2 

2 

25 

HI 

17 
3 

15 
13 

1,541 
459 

15 
6 

35 
11 

1,086 
314 

4,644  00 
913  03 

7 
8 

10 

8 

15 
6 

15 
5 

8 

5 
5 

20 

28 

2,000 

21 

46 

1,400 

$  55,570  03 

15 

18 

21 

20 

8 

10 

8 

2 

62 
33 
12 
43 
156 
34 
29 

538 

1,048 

1,807 

158 

488 

1,737 

886 

423 

5 
5 
15 

1 
7 
7 
2 

9 
16 
22 

5 
10 

9 
12 

6 

456 
642 
847 
70 
243 
296 
478 
198 

5,246  10 
2,526  00 
6,510  00 
431  24 
2,676  00 
5,988  96 
6,825  82 
2,659  75 

1 
2 
5 

1 
1 
3 
3 
5 

1 

3 
5 
1 
1 
3 
3 
5 

8 
8 
12 
2 
2 
5 
1 

3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
13 
5 
2 

28 
26 
19 

i 

l 

1 
25?, 

2 

37 
14 

1 

385 

371 

7,085 

42 

89 

3,230 

$  32,863  87 

21 

22 

38 

33 

5 

10 

5 

255 

2 

6 

195 

$    4,400  64 

7 

7 

3 

6 

468 

578 

19,239 

207 

318 

11,156 

$  57,423  98 

109 

137 

114 

273  1      80 

61 

276      Southern  Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 


APPENDIX  G-Continued. 


STATISTICAL  TABLE.  SOUTHERN  BAPTIST  CONVENTION, 


MISSIONS 

SCHOOL  STATISTICS. 

COUNTRIES 

DAT 

Schools 

Boys' 

Boarding 

Schools 

Girls' 
Boarding 
Schools 

*S  g 

*! 

<&  2 

a -8 

^  2 

SZS 

o  g 

•°  2 
SOT 

u 

•°  2 

*o  g* 
-^  2 

s-s 

China J 

South  China 

Central  China 

North  China [. 

Interior  China 

Total 

36 
11 

58 
3 

1,039 

208 

1,043 

25 

4 
2 
3 
1 

247 
116 

268 
20 

3 
2 
4 

1 

169 
103 

160 
5 

108 

2,315 

10 

651 

10 

437 

Total 1 

Africa 

6 

153 

Total 

Japan 

Total 

Italy 

3 

159 

North  Mexico 

South  Mexico 

Total 

Mexico j 

6 

3 

365 
97 

1 
1 

103 
70 

1 

70 

9 

462 

1 

70 

2 

173 

Amazon  Valley 

Pernambuco 

Bahia 

3 
1 
1 
2 
4 
3 

52 
74 

120 

42 

173 
64 

Alagoas-Maceio. 

Victoria 

Campos 

Rio 

Sao  Paulo 

2 

157 

* 

Total 

16 

682 

Total 

Argentine 

Grand  Totals 

142 

3,771 

11 

721 

12 

610 

Appendix. 


277 


APPENDIX  G-Continued. 


FOREIGN  MISSIONS,  FOR  THE  YEAR  1909-10— CONT'D. 


SCHOOL  STATISTICS 

MEDICAL  STATISTICS. 

Col- 
leges 

Women's 
Training 
Schools 

Theolog- 
ical 
Training 
Schools 

o 

B 

Z 

1 

'el 

09 

*-<  <u 

Bj'fa 

V  03 

11 

^    09 
•^    09 

■sN 

-a 

a 

■S.9 
"&S 

Wm 
*o 

a 

4 

Qi  03 

.2 
Q 

*o 
o 

a 

0Q 

.'"8 

CM 

Ml 

53 

a 

4 

0 

o 
& 

Xi 

a 

1 
"32 

O    09 

Ms 

go 

SB 

«4H       • 

O  £ 

a -8 

Si 
£8 

■Si 

a  a 

■a* 

■s 

Eh 

4 
2 
1 

in 

32 
14 

1 
1 
1 

61 
40 
36 

48 
19 

77 

1,627 

548 

1,521 

5 

2 
3 

1 

i 

i 

3 

2 
1 
3 

1 

341 
45 
30 

9,601 
1,545 

~~2~998~ 

9,941 

1 

49 

1,590 
21,112 

3,028 

1 

49 

7 

157 

3 

137 

144 

3,696 

11 

5 

7 

416 

14,144 

35,671 

1 

20 

8 

189 

1 



1 

25 

5,200 

5,225 

1 

15 

1 

17 

1 

1 

21 
2 

8 
6 

489 
290 

1 

20 

2 



2 

1,950 

1,950 

1 

20 

2 

23 

14 

779 

2 



2 

1,950 

1,950 

1 

6 

2 

80 

2 

1 

4 

176 

1 

85 

1 

8 

2 

93 

1 

85 

2 

2 

15 

8 

349 

2 

134 

8 

179 

10 

227 

174 

5,013 

14 

5 

10 

441 

21,294 

42,846 

AUG  19  1910 


Oeacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Sept..  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

!T WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVAT.ON 

111  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
(724)779-211* 


; 


One  copy  del.  to  Cat.  Div. 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  014  669  908  A 


