Moody’s Anecdotes. 
1 Moody’s Stories. 
Men of the Bible. 


Weighed and Wanting. 
Short Talks. 
Latest Sermons. 


Thoughts for the Quict 
Hour. 


The Overcoming Life. 

Sowing and Reaping. 

Pleasure and Profit in 
Bible Study. 

Sovereign Grace. 

| Bible Characters. 

Prevailing Prayer. 

To the Work! 

The Way to God. 

Heaven. 

Secret Power. 

Select Sermons. 


The above books, paper, 1 5c; 
cloth, 3oc, net. 


ELEMING II. 


Moody in Chicago; or 
The World’s Fair 
Gospel Campaign. 


r2mo, cloth, $1.00, net. 


The Home Work of 
D. L. Moody. 


r2mo, cloth, Soc. 


The Full Assurance cf 
Faith. 


r2nto, paper, 10c; flex. 
cloth, 20¢. 


How to Study the Bible. 
The Way and the Word. 


The Second Coming of 
Christ. 
Inquiry Meetings. 
The above books, paper, roc: 
flex, cloth, 1 5c. 


Gospel Booklets. 
g5e per dozen. 


REVELL COMPANY 


PUBLISHERS 


SOWING AND REAPING 


BY 


VA 
D. L. MOODY. 


i Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.’ 
Gal. vi: 7. 


Chicago : New York : Toronto 


Fleming H. Revell Company 


Publishers of Evangelical Literature 


- 


Lt een 
Copyright 1896 by 
Lleming H. Revell Company. 


Sa rr ce a EET 


Chap. 


I. 


CONTENTS. 


Page. 
SOWING AND KEAPING.....0.0csccessses B06 ben ere) 
Be Not DEcEIvED: Gop Is Not MocKED.......... 25 
WHEN A Man Sows, HE ExpectsTo REaApP.......... 39 
A Man ReEaps THE SAME Kinp as HE Sows........ 57 
A Man REaps MORE THAN HE SOWS........-eeceece 71 


IGNORANCE OF THE SEED MAKES No DIFFERENCE.... 79 
PORGIVENSSSMAND RETRIBUTION......000-sccccucces gi 


WARNING @e eweoevoeeoovoeeoe82 eseeeceeveoeveoeoeoevneceeoeeeeveeuneae ee eee 105 


SOWING AND REAPING. 


CHAPTER 1. 


‘* Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man 
soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh 
shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the 
ae shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.” Galatians vi: 

I think this passage contains truths that no infidel 
or sceptic will dare to deny. There are some pass- 
ages in the Word of God that need no other proof 
than that which we can easily find in our daily experi- 
ence. This is one of them. If the Bible were to be 
blotted out of existence, the words I have quoted 
would be abundantly verified by what is constantly. 
happening around us. We have only to take up the 
daily papers to see them being fulfilled before our eyes. 

I remember giving out this text once when a man 
stood right up in the audience and said: 

Peleg ommtenelleve ii. : 

I said, “ My friend, that doesn’t change the fact. 
Truth is truth whether you believe it or not, and a lie 
is a lie whether you believe it or not.” 

He didn’t want to believe it. When the meeting 
broke up, an officer was at the door to arrest him. 


10 SOWING AND REAPING 


He was tried and sent to the penitentiary for twelve 
months for stealing. I really believe that when he 
got into his cell, he believed that he had to reap what 
he sowed. 

We might as well try to blot the sun out of the 
heavens as to blot this truth out of the Word of God. 
It is heaven’s eternal decree. The law has been en- 
forced for six thousand years. Did not God make 
Adam reap even before he left Eden? Had not Cain 
to reap outside of Eden? A king on the throne, like 
David. or a priest behind the altar, like Eli; priest and 
prophet, preacher and hearer, every man must reap 
what he sows. I believed it ten years ago, but I be- 
lieve it a hundred times more to-day. 

My text applies to the individual, whether he be 
saint or sinner or hypocrite who thinks he is a saint; 
it applies to the family; it applies to society; it applies 
to nations. I say the law that the result of acticns 
must be reaped is as true for nations as for individ- 
wals, indeed, some one has said that as nations have , 
no future existence, the present world is the only place 
to punish them as nations. See how God has dealt 
with them. See if they have not reaped what they 
sowed. Take Amalek: ‘“ Remember what Amalek did 
unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth out of 
Egypt; how he met thee. by the way, and smote the 
hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind 
thee, when thou wast faint and weary; and he feared 
not God.” What was to be the result of this attack ? 


SOWING AND REAPING li 


Was it to go unpunished ? God ordained that Amalek 
should reap as they sowed, and the nation was all but 
wiped out of existence under King Saul. 

What has become of the monarchies and empires 
of the world? What brought ruin on Babylon? Her 
king and people would not obey God, and ruin came 
upon them. What has become of Greece and all 
her power? She once ruled the world. What has 
become of Rome and all her greatness? When their 
cup of iniquity was full, it was dashed to the ground. 
What has become of the Jews? They rejected sal- 
vation, persecuted God’s messengers, and crucified 
their Redeemer; and we find that eleven hundred 
thousand of them perished at one time. Look at the 
history of this country. With an open Bible, our fore- 
fathers planted slavery; but judgment came at last. 
There was not a family North or South that had not 
to mourn over some one taken from them. Take the 
case of France. It is said that a century ago men 
were spending millions every year in France in the 
publication and distribution of infidel literature. What 
has been the harvest? Has France not reaped? Mark 
the result: “ The Bible was suppressed. God was 
denied. Hell broke loose. Half the children born in 
Paris were bastards. More than a*millicn of persons 
were beheaded, shot, drowned, outraged, and done to 
death between September, 1792, and December, 1795. 
Since that time France has had thirteen revolutions 
in eighty years ; and in the republic there has been an 


12 SOWING AND REAPING 


overturn on an average once in nine months. One- 
third of the births in Paris are illegitimate; ten thou- 
sand new-born infants have been fished out at the out- 
let of the city sewers ina single year ; the native pop- 
ulation of France is decreasing; the percentage of 
suicides is greater in Paris than in any city in Christen- 
dom; and since the French Revolution there have 
been enough French men and women slaughtered in 
the streets of Paris in the various insurrections, to 
average more than two thousand five hundred each 
year!” 

The principle was not new in Scripture or in history 
when Paul enunciated it in his letter to the Galatians. 
Paul clothes it in language derived from the farm, 
but in other dress the Law of Sowing and Reaping 
may be seen in the Lawof Cause and Effect, the Law 
of Retribution or Retaliation, the Law of Compensa- 
tion. It is not to my purpose to enter now intoa 
philosophical discussion of the law as it appears 
under any of these names. We see that it exists. It 
is beyond reasonable dispute. Whatever else sceptics 
may carp at and criticise in the Bible, they must ac- 
knowledge the truth of this. It does not depend 
upon revelation for its support; philosophers are 
agreed upon it as much as they are agreed upon any: 
thing. 


SOWING AND REAPING 13 


THE SUPREMACY OF LAW. 


The objection may be made, however, that while 
its application may be admitted in the physical world, 
it is not so certain in the spiritual sphere. It is just 
here that modern research steps in. The laws of the 
spiritual world have been largely identified as the same 
laws that exist in the natural world. Indeed, it is 
claimed that the spiritual existed first, that the natural 
came after, and that when God proceeded to frame 
the universe, He went upon lines already laid down. 
In short, that God projected the higher laws down- 
ward, so that the natural world became “ an incarna- 
tion, a visible representation, a working model of the 
supernatural.” “In the spiritual world the same 
wheels work—without the iron.”’ 

Our whole life is thus bounded and governed by 
laws ordained and established by God, and that a man 
reaps what he sows is a law that can be easily ob- 
served and verified, whether we regard sowing to the 


i= 


Le 


flesh or sowing to the Spirit. The evil harvest of sin - 


and the good harvest of righteousness are as sure to 
follow the sowing as the harvest of wheat and barley. 
“ Life is not casual, but causal.” 

We shall see, as we proceed, that the working of 
the law ts evident in the earliest periods of Bible his- 
tory. Job’s three friends reasoned that he must be a 
great sinner, because they took it for granted that the 


14 SOWING AND REAPING 


calamities that overtook him must be the results of 
his wickedness. ‘‘ Remember, I pray thee,’’ said one of 
them, “ who ever perished, being innocent ? or where 
were the righteous cut off? Even as I have seen, 
they that plough iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap 
the same.” | 

In the book of Proverbs we find it written: “ The 
wicked worketh a deceitful work: but to him that 
soweth righteousness shall be a sure reward.”’ And 
again: “ He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity.” 

In Isaiah we find these words: ‘“ Say ye to the 
righteous that it shall be well with him ; for they shall 
eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked ! 
it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his hands 
shall be given him.”’ 

Hosea prophesied regarding Israel: “ They have sown 
the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind.” “ Sow 
to yourselves in righteousness,’ he advised them, 
“reap in mercy.” 


TEACHING FROM ANALOGY. 


The Bible is full of analogies drawn from nature. 
When Christ was on earth, it was His favorite mode 
of teaching to convey heavenly truths in earthly dress. 
“Truths came forth from His lips,’’ wrote one, “ not 
stated simply on authority, but based on the analogy 
of the universe. His human mind, in perfect har- 
mony with the Divine mind with which it was united, 


SOWING AND REAPING 15 


— 


discerned the connection of things, and read the eter- 
nal will in the simplest laws of nature. For instance, 
if it were a question whether God would give His 
Spitit to them that asked, it was not replied to by a 
truth revealed on His authority > the answer was de- 
rived from facts lying open to all men’s observation. 
‘Behold the fowls of the air’; ‘behold the lilies of 
the field’—learn from them the answer to your ques- 
tion. A principle was there. God supplies the wants 
He hascreated. He feeds the ravens—He clothes the _ 
liiies—He will feed with His Spirit the craving spirits 
of His children.” 

This is the style of teaching that Paul adopts in the 
text. He takes the simple process of sowing and 
reaping, a process familiar to all, and reads in it a 
deeply spiritual and moral meaning. It is as if he 
said that every man as he journeys through J:fe is 
scattering seed at every step. The seed consists of 
his thoughts, his words, his actions. They pass from 
him, and by and by (it may be sooner or later), they. 
spring up and bear fruit, and the reaping time comes. 


LIFE A SEED-TIME. 


The analogy contains some solemn lessons. Life is 
to be regarded as a seed-time. Every one has his 
Held to sow, to cultivate, and finally, to reap. By our 
habits, by our intercourse with friends and cempan- 
1ens. by exposing ourselves to good or bad influences, 


i6 SOWING AND REAPING 


we are cultivating the seed for the coming harvest. 
We cannot see the seed as it grows and develops, 
but time will reveal it. 

Just as the full-grown haivest is potentially con- 
tained in the seed, so the full results of sin or holiness 
are potentially contained in the sinful or holy deed. 
“ When lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin , and 
sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.” 

Just as we cannot reap a good harvest unless we 
have sown good seed, so we cannot reap eternal 
life unless we have sown to the Spirit. Weeds are 
easy to grow. They grow without the planting. And 
sin springs up naturally in the human heart. Ever 
since our first parents broke away from God, the 
human heart has of itself been thoroughly vile, and 
all its fruits have been evil. “ The heart of the sons 
of men is fully set in them to do evil.” Do you 
doubt it? If you do, ask yourself what would become 
of a child if it was left to itself—no training, no guid- 
ance, noeducation. In spite of all that is done for 
children, the evil too often gets the upper hand. The 
good seed must be planted and cared fer, often with 
toil and trouble: but the harvest will be sure. 

Do we desire the love of our fellows in our seasons 
of trial? Then we must love them when they need its 
cheering influence most. Do we long for sympathy 
in our sorrow and pain? Then we shall have it if we 
have also wept with those who weep. Are we hops 
ing to reap eternal life? Then we must not sow to the 


ee 


flesh, or we shall reap corruption, but-to the Spirit, 
then the promise is that we shall reap its immortal 
fruits. 

Dr. Chalmers has drawn attention to ¢he difference 
between the act of sowing and the act of reaping. 
“ Tet it be observed,” he says, “that the act of indulg- 
ing in the desires of the flesh is one thing and the act 
of providing for the indulgence of them is another. 
When a man, on the impulse of sudden provocation, 
wreaks his resentful feelings upon the neighbor who 
has offended him, he is not at that time preparing for 
the indulgence of a carnal feeling, but actually indulg- 
ing it. He is not at that time sowing, but reaping 
(such as it is) a harvest of gratification. This distinc- 
tion may serve to assist our judgment in estimating 
the ungodliness of certain characters. The rambling 
voluptuary who is carried along by every impulse, and 
all whose powers of mental discipline are so enfeebled 
that he has become the slave of every propensity, lives in 
the perpetual harvest of criminal gratification. A daugh- 
ter whose sole delight is in her rapid transitions from one 
scene of expensive brilliancy to another, who dissi- 
pates every care and fills every hour among the frivoli- 
ties and fascinations of her volatile society, —she leads 
a life than which nothing can be imagined more oppo- 
site to a life of preparation for the coming judgment 
or the coming eternity. Yet she veaps rather than 
sows. It lies with another to gather the money which 
purchaseth all things, and with her to taste the fruits 


SOWING AND REAPING 17 


18 SOWING AND REAPING 


of the purchase. Jt 7s the father who sows. It is he 
who sits in busy and brooding anxiety over his specu- 
jations, wrinkled, perhaps, by care, and sobered by 
years into an utter distaste for the splendors and in- 
significancies. of fashionable life.”” The father sows, 
and he reaps in his daughter's life. 


“ PAINTING FOR ETERNITY.” 


A famous painter was well known for the careful 
manner in which he went about his work. When 
some one asked him why he took such pains, he re- 
plied: 

“ Because I am painting for eternity.” 

It is asolemn thing to think that the future well be the 
harvest of the present—that my condition in my dying 
hour may depend upon my actions to-day! Belief in 
a future life and in a coming judgment magnifies the 
importance of the present. Eternal issues depend 
uponit. The opportunity for sowing will not last for- 
ever; it is slipping through our fingers moment by 
moment; and the future can only reveal the harvest of 
the seed sown now. ; 

A sculptor once showed a visitor his studio. It was 
full of statues of gods. One was very curious. The 
face was concealed by being covered with hair, and 
there were wings on each foot. 

“ What is his name ?” said the visitor. 

“ Opportunity,’”’ was the reply. 


SOWING AND REAPING 19 


“Why is his face hidden ?”’ 

“‘ Because men seldom know him when he comes to 
them.” 

“ ‘Why has he wings on his feet ?” 

“ Because he is soon gone, and once gone can 
never be overtaken.”’ 

It becomes us, then, to make the most of the 
opportunities God has given us. It depends a good 
deal on ourselves what our future shall be. We can 
sow for a good harvest, or we can do like the Sioux 
Indians, who once, when the United States Commis- 
sioner of Indian Affa‘rs sent them a supply of grain 
for sowing, ate it up. Men are constantly sacrificing 
their eternal future to the passing enjoyment of the 
present moment; they fail or neglect to recognize the 
dependence of the future upon the present. 


NoTHING TRIFLING. * 

w 
From this we may learn that there is no such thing 
as a trifle on earth. When we realize that every 
thought and word and act has an eternal influence, 
and will come back to us in the same way as the seed 
returns in the harvest, we must perceive their respon- 
sibility, however trifling theyemay seem. We are apt 
to overlook the results that hinge on small things. The 
law of gravitation was suggested by the fall of an 
apple. It is said that some years ago a Harvard pro- 


20 SOWING AND REAPING 


fessor brought some gypsy-moths to this country in 
the hope that they could with advantage be crossed 
with silkworms. The moths accidentally got away, 
and multiplied so enormously that the Commonwealth 
of Massachusetts has had to spend hundreds of thou- 
sands of dollars trying to exterminate them. 

When H. M. Stanley was pressing his way through 
the forests of Darkest Africa, the most formidable 
foes that he encountered, those that caused most loss 
of life to his caravan and caine the nearest to entirely 
defeating his expedition, were the little Wambutti 
dwarfs. So annoying were they that very slow progress 
could be made through their dwelling places. 

These little men had only little bows and little 
arrows that looked like children’s playthings, but upon 
these tiny arrows there was a small drop of poison 
which would kill an elephant or a man as quickly and 
as surely as a Winchester rifle. Their defense was by 
means of poison and traps. They would steal through 
the darkness of the forest and, waiting in ambush, 
let fly their deadly arrows before they could be discove 
ered. They dug ditches and carefully covered them 
over with leaves. They fixed spikes in the ground and 
tipped them with the most deadly poison, and then 
covered them. Into thgse ditches and on these spikes 
man and beast would fall. or step to their death. 

A lady once writing to a young man in the navy who 
was almost a stranger, thought “ Shall I close this as 


SOWING AND REAPING 21 


anybody would, or shall I say a word for my Mas. 
ter?” and, lifting up her heart for a moment, she 
wrote, telling him that his constant change of scene 
and place was an apt illustration of the word, “ Here 
we have no continuing city,’ and asked if he could 


say: “I seek one to come.” Tremblingly she folded 
it and sent it off. 
Back came the answer. “ Thank you so much for 


those kind words! Iam an orphan, and no one has 
spoken to me like that since my mother died, long 
years ago.”’ The arrow shot at venture hit home, and 
the young man shortly after rejoiced in the fulness of 
the blessing of the gospel of peace. 

An obscure man preached one Sunday to a few 
persons in a Methodist chapel in the South of Eng- 
land. A boy of fifteen years of age was in the audi- 
ence, driven into the chapel by a snowstorm. The 
man took as his text the words, “ Lock unto me and 
be ye saved,” and as he stumbled along as best he 
could, the light of heaven flashed into that boy’s 
heart. He went out of the chapel saved, and soon 
became known as C. H. Spurgeon, the boy-preacher. 

The parsonage at Epworth, England, caught fire 
one night, and all the inmates were rescued except 
one son. The boy came to a window, and was 
brought safely to the ground by two farm-hands, one 
standing on the shoulder of the other. The boy was 
John Wesley. If you would realize the responsibility 


22 SOWING AND REAFING 


of that incident, if you would measure the conse- 
quences of that rescue, ask the millions of Methodists 
who look back to John Wesley as the founder of their 
denomination. 


“* Let no man deceive you.”—Eph. v? d. 


“€ As one man mocketh another, do ye so mock Him 2"— Jot 
xii? a. 


CHarierk it. 


Be Not DEcEIvED: Gop'Is Not Mockep. 


We have all lived long enough to know what it is to 
be deceived. We have been deceived by our friends, 
by our enemies, our neighbors, our relatives. Ungodly 
companions have deceived us. At every turn of life 
we have been imposed upon in one way or another. 

False teachers have crossed our path, and under 
pretence of doing us good, have poisoned our mind 
with error. They have held out hopes to us that have 
proved false; apples of Sodom, fair without, but full 
of ashes within. They have told us that there is no - 
God, no future life, no judgment to come; or they have 
said that all men will be saved, that there is ample 
time to repent, that we may be saved by doing the best 
we can. 

Sin has deceived us. Every sinner is under a de- 
lusion. Sin meets him smilingly, and holds out to him 
pleasures and delights that are not pure and lasting. 

During our meetings in- Boston a young man came 
into the Tabernacle. He looked around, and he 
thought to himself the people that came there were 
great fools—those who had business, and comfortable 
homes, and good clothes, He had nothing in the 


26 SOWING AND REAPING 


world—he was a tramp, and went in there to keep 
himself warm. But to think that people who had 
homes would come and spend their time in listening to ~ 
such stuff as I preached was more than he could under- 
stand. 

One night after he had been coming there for two 
weeks, I happened to point right down where he was 
sitting, and I said, “ Young man, be not deceived!” 
God used that as an arrow. He began to think about 
himself. His mind went back to the time when he 
had a good situation in Boston; when he was a young 
man getting a good salary; when he was in good soCleny 
and had a great many friends. 

Then he looked at his present condition. His friends 
were all gone, his clothes were gone, his money was 
gone; and there he was, an outcast in that city. He 
said to himself, “I have been deceived,’’ and that 
very hour God waked him. He wanted to get friends 
to pray for him; but as he was not able to buy a piece 
of paper, or pay for a postage stamp, he got an old 
piece of soiled paper, stood up in the street, and wrote 
a request to be read in the Tabernacle, that if God 
would save a poor, lost man like him, he wanted to be 
saved. That prayer was answered. Asin the case of 
Nebuchadnezzar, his friends gathered around him 
again, and the Lord restored him to position and to 
society. His eyes were opened to see how he had 
been deceived. 


SOWING AND REAPING 2% 


paren 


SATAN. 


How many men all over the world are being de- 
seived by the god of this world! Ithas been asserted 
that during the late Franco-German war, German 
drummers and trumpeters used to give the French 
beats and calls in order to deceive their enemies. 
The command to “ halt,” or “ cease firing,” was often 
given by the Germans, it has been said, and the 
French soldiers were thus placed in positions where 
they could be shot down like cattle. 

Satan is the arch-enemy of our souls, and he has 
often blinded our reason and deceived our conscience 
by his falsehoods. He has often come as an angel of 
light, concealing his hideousness under a borrowed 


cloak. He says to a young man: “ Sow your wild 
oats. Time enough to be religious when you grow 
old.” The young man yields himself to a life of ex- 


travagance and excess, under the false hope that he 
will obtain solid satisfaction; and it is well if he 
awakens to the deception before his appetites become 
tyrants, dragging him down into depths of want and 
woe. Satan promises great things to his victims in the 
indulgence of their lusts, but they never realize the 
promises. The promised pleasure turns out to be 
pain, the promised heaven a hell. 

Beware lest Satan deceive you as he deceived Eve 
in the beginning. “ There is notruthinhim. When 


28 SOWING AND REAPING 


he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own, for he is a 
liar, and the father of it.”’ 


Our HEART. 


But we have been deceived by our own heart most 
of all. Who has not proved the truth of the Scripture: 
“The heart is deceitful above all things and des- 
perately wicked; who can know it?” How many 
times we have said that we never would do a certain 
thing again, and then have done it within twenty-four 
hours! A man may think he has fathomed its 
depths, but he finds there are further depths he has 
not reached. What gross self-deception is due to it } 
“ He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool,” said 
Solomon. Luther once said he feared his own heart 
more than the Pope and all the cardinals. , 

Many a weeping wife has come to me about her 
husband, saying: “ He is good at heart.” The truth 
is—that is the worst spot in him. If the heart was 
good, all else would be right. Out of the heart are 
the issues of life. Christ said: ‘“ From within, out 
of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, 
fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wicked- 
ness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, 
pride, foolishness.’’ That is Christ’s own statement 

regarding the unregenerate heart. 
' Some years ago a remarkable picture was exhibited 
in London. As you looked at it from a distance, you 


SOWING AND REAPING 29 


seemed to see a monk engaged in prayer, his hands 
clasped, his head bowed. As you came nearer, how- 
ever, and examined the painting more closely, you 
saw that in reality he was squeezing a lemon into a 
punchbowl ! 

What a picture that is of the human heart! Super- 
ficially examined, it is thought to be the seat of all 
that is good and noble and pleasing in a man; whereas 
in reality, until regenerated by the Holy Ghost, it is 
the seat ofallcorruption. “ Thisis the condemnation, 
that light is come into the world, and men loved dark- 
ness vather than light.” 

A Jewish rabbi once asked his scholars what was 
the best thing a man could have in order to keep him 
in the straight path. One said a good disposition, 
another, a good companion; another said wisdom was 
the best thing he could desire. At last a scholar 
replied that he thought a good heart was best of all. 

“True,” said the rabbi, “ you have comprehended 
all that the others have said. For he that hath a 
good heart will be of a good disposition, and a good 
companion, and a wise man. Let every one, there- 
fore, cultivate a sincerity and uprightness of heart at 
all times, and it will save him an abundance of sor- 
row.” We need to make the prayer of David— 
“Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me!” 


30) SOWING AND REAPING 


Gop Is Not MockKED. 


Bear in mind, the God of the Bible has never 
deceived anyone, and never can, and never will; that 
is the difference between the God of the Bible and the 
god of this world. He beholds the ways of men; He 
looks into their hearts; He knows their secret ways; 
they need not tell Him or try to conceal anything from 
Him. 

However successfully we may deceive or be deceived 
by ourselves or others, we cannot deceive Him. Adam 
and Eve tried it in Eden when they hid themselves 
from the presence of Jehovah amongst the trees of the 
garden. Saul tried it when he spared the best of the 
sheep and oxen of the Amalekites under the pretence 
of sacrificing them to God. Ananias and Sapphira 
tried it when they kept back part of the price of the 
land they sold. “ Why hath Satan filled thine heart 
to lie unto (deceive) the Holy Ghost? * * * Thou 
hast not lied unto men, but unto God.” 

Men try it every day. They have got it into their 
heads that God can be mocked. Because they can 
deceive their pastor, and their employer, and their 
friends, they think they can deceive God. They put 
on false appearances, they use empty words, they per- 
form unreal service, they make idle excuses, they 
indulge in all kinds of hypocrisy. But it is of no avail. 
God cannot be imposed upon. He sees the cor- 
ruption inside the whited sepulchre. 


SOWING AND REAPING 3] 


WARNING TO CHRISTIANS. 


It is worth noticing that this warning was given by 
Paul to Christian men—converts in the Galatian 
church. After all, a man is not all the time deceived 
about the grosser sins. The drunkard realizes in his 
sober moments what must be the end of a course of 
intemperance. Loss of self-respect and of the esteem 
of friends, the marks he soon begins to bear in his 
body—unsteady hands and discolored features—these 
things are the quick harvest of drunkenness, and may 
easily be detected asthey ripen. The licentious man, 
also, reaps the early fruit of his sin in diseases of the 
body, which are often effective warnings against con- 
tinuing in such a dangerous path. But with “ respect- 
able’’ sins it is different. A man may be sowing for 
years, and not even realize it himself. 

You remember that in the parable of the sower 
some seeds fell among thorns, and the thorns sprung 
up and choked them. Our Master, expounding this 
parable, said: “He that received seed among the 
thorns is he that heareth the word: but the care of this 
world and the decettfulness of riches choke the wora, 
and he becometh unfruitful.””. Who would have expect- 
ed this result of the world or ofriches? But it has been 
said that Christ never spoke of riches except in words 
of warning. We are not apt to regard them in that 
light to-day. Men are trampling each other down in 


32 SOWING AND REAPING 
the pursuit of wealth. “ Be not deceived.” He whe 
sets his heart upon money is sowing to the flesh, and 
shall of the flesh reap corruption. “ Adversity hath 
slain her thousands, but prosperity her tens of thou- 
sands.”’ 

“What is .se value of this estate?” said a gentle- 
man to another, 2s they passed a fine mansion sur- 
rounded by fair and iertile fields. 

“JT don’t know what it is valued at; I know what it 
cost its late possessor.” 

“ How much?” 

“ His soul.” 

An English clergyman was called to the death-bed 
of a wealthy parishioner. Kneeling beside the dying 
man the pastor asked him to take his hand as he 
prayed for his upholding in that solemn hour, but he 
declined to give it. After the end had come, and they 
turned down the coverlet, the rigid hands were found 
holding the safe-key in their death-grip. Heart and 
hand, to the last, clinging to his possessions, but he 
could not take them with him. 

A man may be proud, and his very sin reckoned a 
virtue. Hear what the Word of God says: “ Haughti- 
ness of eyes and a proud heart is sin’’; “ every one 
that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord.” 

These are the mistakes men make. They are lead- 
ing respectable lives, and they think that all is wel). 
They do not recognize the taint of corruption upon 
many of the most cherished objects of their hearts. 


SOWING AND REAPIANG 33 


ee 


Christian professors, most of all, need to beware lest 
‘hey are being deceived. 


NEGEERCT. 


How watchful men should be of their thoughts, 
their practices, their feelings! The reason of decep- 
tion is, for the most part, neglect. Men do not stop 
to examine themselves, to lay their hearts and minds 
bare as in the sight of God, and judge themselves by 
His most holy will. A man need not shoot himself in 
order to commit suicide: he need only neglect the 
proper means of sustenance, and he will soon die. 
Where an enemy is strong and aggressive, an army is 
doomed to sure defeat and capture unless a sharp 
look-out is kepc, every man wide awake at his post of 
duty. 

It has been noticed that there are more accidents in 
Switzerland in fine seasons than in stormy ones. 
People are apt to undertake expeditions that they 
would not take under less favorable conditions, and 
they are less careful in their conduct. And so it is 
that moral and spiritual disaster usually overtakes 
men when they are off their guard, careless against 
temptation. They become proud and self-reliant in 
seasons of prosperity, whereas adversity drives them 
to the living God for guidance and comfort. 

Dr. Johnson once said that it is more from careless- 
ness regarding the truth than from intentional lying 
that there is so much falsehood in the world. 


34 SOWING AND REAPING 


Hence the necessity of continual watchfulness. 
The Persians had an annual festival when they slew 
all the serpents and venemous creatures they could 
find; but they allowed them to swarm as fast and 
freely as ever until the festival came round once more. 
It was poor policy. Sins, like serpents, breed quickly, 
and need to be constantly watched. 

And we ought to watch on every side. Many a 
man has fallen at the very point where he thought he 
was safest. The meekness of Moses has passed intoa 
proverb. Yet he lost the Promised Land, because he 
allowed the children of Israel to provoke him, and 
“he spake unadvisedly with his lips.” Peter was the 
most zealous and defiant of the disciples, bold and out- 
spoken; yet he degenerated for a short time into a 
lying, swearing, sneaking coward, afraid of a maid. 

There is an old fable that a doe that had but one 
eye used to graze near the sea; and in order to be safe, 
she kept her blind eye toward the water, from which 
side she expected no danger, while with the good eye 
she watched the country. Some men, perceiving this, 
took a boat and came upon her from the sea and 
shot her. With her dying breath, she said: 

“ Oh! hard fate! that I should receive my death- 
wound from that side whence I expected no harm, and 
be safe in the part where I looked for most danger.”’ 

Let danger and need drive you closer to God. He 
wever slumbers or sleeps, and in His keeping you will 


SOWING AND REAPING 35 


be safe. Seize hold of Him in prayer. “ Watch and 
pray.” 


CHRISTIANITY NOT RESPONSIBLE. 


Christianity is not responsible for the deception that 
exists among its professing disciples. The illustration 
has been used before that you might just as reason- 
ably hold the Cunard company responsible for the 
suicide of a passenger who jumps overboard one of 
their vessels at sea. Had the person remained on the 
vessel, he would have been safe; and had the disciple 
remained true to his principles, he would never have 
turned out a hypocrite. Was anybody ever more 
severe in denouncing hypocrisy than Christ? Do you 
want to know the reason why, every now and then, 
the church is scandalized by the exposure of some 
leading church member or Sabbath school superin- 
tendent? It is not his Christianity, but his lack of it. 
Some secret sin has been eating at the heart of the 
tree, and in acritical moment it is blown down and 
its rottenness revealed. 


THE DECEPTION CAN Not LAST FOREVER. 


It is impossible for the deception to last forever. 
Lincoln had a saying that you may be able to deceive 
all the people some of the time, and some of the peo- 
ple all of the time, but you will not be able to deceive 
all the people all of the time. Death will uncover the, 


36 SOWING AND REAPING 

deception, if it has not been detected sooner; and the 
unfortunate victim will stand, undeceived, in the pres- 
ence of a God who cannot be mocked. 


* pehold, the husbandman waiteth for th2 treious fruit of 
the earth, and hath long patience for tt, until he receive the early 
and latter rain.","—James V: 7. 


CHAPTER III. 


WHEN A MAN Sows, HE EXPEcTs To REAP. 


Notice these four things about sowing and reaping: 
A man expects to reap when he sows; he expects to 
reap the same kind of seed that he sows; he expects 
to reap more; and ignorance of the kind of seed makes 
ne difference. 

First: When a man sows, he expects to reap. 

If a farmer went on sowing, spring after spring, and 
never reaping in the autumn, you would say he was 
a fit subject for the lunatic asylum. No; he is always 
looking forward to the time when he will reap the re- 
ward of his toil. He never expects that the seed he 
has sown will be lost. 

A young man serves a long apprenticeship to some 
trade or profession; but he expects by and by to reap 
the fruit of all those years of patient industry. Ask 
an engineer why he works so hard for five, six, or 
seven years in the endeavor to learn his profession. 
He replies that he is looking forward to the reaping 
time, when'his fortune and reputation will be made. 
The lawyer studies long and hard; but he, too, an- 
ticipates the time when his clients will be numerous, 
and he will be repaid for his toil. A great many 


40 SOWING AND REAPING 

medical students have a hard time trying to suppott 
themselves while they are at college. As soon as 
they get their diploma and become doctors they ex- 
pect that the reaping time is coming; that is what they 
have been working for. 

Some harvests ripen almost immediately, but asa 
rule we find it true in the natural world that ¢here zs 
delay before the seed comes to maturity. It is grow- 
ing all the time, however; first the little green shoot 
breaking through the soil, then the blade, then the 
ear, then the full corn in the ear. The farmer is not 
disappointed because all his crops do not spring up in 
a night like mushrooms. He looks forward with 
patience, knowing that the reaping time will come in 
due season. 

So with the harvest of our actions. Few men, if 
any, would indulge in sin unless they expected pleas- 
ure out of it. A drunkard does not drink for the mere 
sake of drinking, but in the hope of present enjoy- 
ment. A thief does not steal for the mere sake of 
stealing, but for the sake of gain. And similarly with 
the good man. He does not make sacrifices merely 
for the sake of sacrifice, but because thereby he hopes 
and expects to do good, and help others. All these 
things are means to ends: there is always expecta- 
tion of a harvest. | 


—_ 


SOWING AND REAPING 4] 


THE CERTAINTY OF THE REAPING. | 


The text bids us look forward to the certainty of 
the reaping: ‘“ Whatsoever a man soweth, that SHALL 
he also reap.”’ 

We know what it is to have a failure of the crops, 
but in the spiritual world no such failure is possible. 
Wet soil may rot the seed, or frost may nip the early 
buds, or the weather may prove too wet or too dry to 
bring the crops to maturity, but none of these things 
occur to prevent the harvest of one’s actions. The 
Bible tells us that God will render to every man ac- 
cording to his deeds. ‘ To them who by patient con- 
tinuance in well-doing seek for glory and honor and 
immortality, eternal life: but unto them that are con- 
tentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unright- 
eousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and an- 


guish upon every soul of man that doeth evil.” How 
careful we should be of our actions in all departments 
of our being, physical, moral, intellectual! The 


deeds we do, the words we speak, the thoughts we 
harbor, are all recorded, and shall meet their just re- 
ward, for God is no respecter of persons. 

And it must not be overlooked that ¢he harvest 
comes as a@ necessary consequence of the sowing. It 
has been said that God is not a sort of a moral despot, 
as He is so frequently regarded. He does not sit on 
a throne, attaching penalties to particular actions as 


42 SOWING AND REAPING 


they come up for judgment. He has laid down cer- 
tain laws, of which the law of sowing and reaping 
is one, and punishment is the natural outcome of 
sin. There is no escape. It must be borne; and 
though others may have to reap with you, no one can 
reap for you. 

The text teaches, further, that the harvest is one or 
other of two kinds. There are two, and only two, di- 
rections in which the law leads: Sowing to the flesh, 
and a harvest of corruption—sowing to the Spirit, and 
a harvest of everlasting life. 


SOWING TO THE FLESH. 


“ Sowing to the flesh’’ does not mean simply tak- 
ing due care of the body. The body was made in the 
image of God, and the body of a believer is a temple 
of the Holy Ghost, and we may be sure that due care 
for the image is well-pleasing to God. The expres- 
sion refers rather to pandering to the lusts of the 
body, pampering it, providing gratification for its un- 
lawful desires at the expense of the higher part of a 
man, indulging the animal propensities which in their 
excess are sinful. ‘ Sowing to the flesh”’ is scattering 
the seeds of selfishness, which always must yield a 
harvest of corruption. 

“When we were in the flesh, the motions of sins 


ba 


did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto 


death.” And what does Paul say are the works of the 


SOWING AND REAPING 43 


flesh? “ Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lascivi- 
ousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emula- 
tions, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, mur- 
ders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like.”’ 

{ was at the Paris exhibition in 1867, and I noticed 
there a little oil painting, only about a foot square, 
and the face was the most hideous I have ever seen. 
On the paper attached to the painting were the words 
‘‘ Sowing the tares,”” and the face looked more like a 
demon’s than a man’s. As he sowed these tares, up 
came serpents and reptiles, and they were crawling up 
on his body, and all around were woods with wolves 
and animals prowling in them. I have seen that pict- 
ure many times since. Ah! the reaping time is 
coming. If you sow to the flesh you must reap 
the flesh. If you sow to the wind you must reap 
the whirlwind. 

And yet it must not be thought that indulgence in 
the grosser vices is the only way of sowing to the flesh. 
Every desire, every action that has not God for its end 
and object is seed sown to the flesh. If a man is sowing 
for a harvest of money or ambition, he is sowing to 
the flesh, and will reap corruption, just as surely as 
the liar and adulterer. No matter how “ polite’’ and 
“refined ’’ and “ respectable’’ the seed may be, no 
matter how closely it resembles the good seed, its 
true nature will out, the blight of corruption will be 
upon it. 


44 SOWING AND ansssse npn 


How foolish are the strivings of men in view of this 
judgment! Many a man will sacrifice time, health— 
even his character--for money. What does he gain ? 
CORRUPTION; something that is not eternal, that has 
not the qualities of “ everlasting life.” John said, 
‘The world passeth away, and the lust thereof.” 
Peter said, “ All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of 
man asthe flower of-grass. The grass withereth, and 
the flower thereof falleth away.’ None of these 
fleshly things have their roots in the eternal. You 
may even outlive them in your own short life. 


No BRIDGE BETWEEN. 


Now, men make this mistake—they sow to the flesh, 
and they think they will reap the harvest of the spirit; 
and on the other hand, they sow to the spirit and are 
disappointed when they do not reap a temporal har-y 
Vest. 

A teacher had been relating to his class the parable 
of the rich man and Lazarus, and he asked: 

‘“ Now, which would you rather be, boys, the rich 
man or Lazarus ?” 

One boy answered, “ I would rather be the rich man 
while I live, and Lazarus when [I die.”’ 

That cannot be: it is flesh and corruption, or, Spirit 
and everlasting life. There is no bridge from one to 
the other. 

“Seed which is sown for a spiritual harvest has no 


SOWING AND REAPING 45 


tendency whatever to procure temporal] well-being. 
Christ declared, ‘ Blessed are the pure in heart; for 
they shall see God; blessed are they that hunger and 
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled’ (with 
righteousness); ‘ blessed are they that mourn, for they 
shall be comforted.’ You observe the beatific vision 
of the Almighty—fulness of righteousness—divine com- 
tort. There is nothing earthly here, it is spiritual 
results for spiritual labor. It is not said that the pure 
in heart shall be made rich; or that they who hunger 
and thirst after righteousness shall be filled with bread, 
or that they who mourn shall rise in life, and obtain dis- 
tinction. Each department has its own appropriate 
harvest, reserved exclusively to its own method of 
sowing. 

“Everything reaps its own harvest, every act has 
its own reward. And before you covet the enjoyment 
which another possesses, you must first calculate the 
cost at which it was procured. 

“ For instance, the religious tradesman complains 
that his honesty is a hindrance to his success; that the 
tide of custom pours into the doors of his less scrupu- 
lous neighbor in the same street, while he himself waits 
for hours idle. My brother, do you think that God 
is going to reward honor, integrity, high-mindedness, 
with this world’scoin ? Do you fancy that He will pay 
spiritual excellence with plenty of custom? Now con- 
sider the price that man has paid for hissuccess. Per- 
haps mental degradation and inward dishonor. His 


46 SOWING AND REAPING 
advertisements are all deceptive, his treatment of his 
workmen tyrannical, his cheap prices made possible by 
inferior articles. Sow that man’s seed, and you will 
reap that man’s harvest. Cheat, lie, be unscrupulous 
in your assertions, and custom will come to you. But 
if the price be too high, let him have his harvest, and 
you take yours—a clear conscience, a pure mind, rec- 
titude within and without. Will you part with that 
for his harvest ?””’ 


SOWING TO THE SPIRIT. 


“ Sowing to the Spirit’ implies self-denial, resist- 
ance of evil, obedience to the Spirit, walking in the 
Spirit, living in the Spirit, guidance by the Spirit. 
We sow to the Spirit when we use. our abilities and 
means to advance Spiritual things; when we support 
and encourage those who are extending the influence 
of the Spirit. We sow to the Spirit when we crucify 
the flesh and all its lusts, when we yield ourselves to 
Him as we once yielded ourselves to the flesh. A Jew- 
ish rabbi once said: ‘“ There are in every man two 
impulses, good and evil. He who offers God his evil 
impulses offers the best sacrifice.” : 

The fruit of such sowing is “ love, joy, peace, long- 
gupcr ing. gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, tem- 
perance.”’ 

In this world the We vest is sisi of character, 
deeper respect, increasing usefulness to others; in the , 
mext world, acceptance with God, everlasting life. 


SOWING AND REAPING 47 


Among the last recorded words of Henry Lloyd 
Garrison in his public speeches in England were these: 
“T began my advocacy of the anti-slavery cause in the 
Northern States of America, in the midst of brickbats 
and rotten eggs; and I ended it on the soil of South 
Carolina almost literally buried beneath the wreaths 
of flowers which were heaped upon me by her liber- 
ated bondmen.”’ 

A young man was employed by a large commission 
firm in New York City during the late civil war, to 
negotiate with a certain party for a lot of damaged 
beans. The beans were purchased, delivered, and 
spread out upon the upper floor of the building occu- 
pied by the firm. 

Men were employed to turn them over and over, and 
to sprinkle them with a solution of soda, so as to 1m- 
prove their appearance and render them more salable. 
A large lot of the first quality of beans was then pur- 
chased; some of the good beans were first put into 
barrels, then the barrels were nearly filled with the poor 
ones; after this the good ones were again put on the tcp 
and the barrels headed up for sale. 

The employer marked the barrels, “ Beans—-A 1.” 
The clerk seeing this, said: “ Do you think, sir, that it 
is right to mark those beans A 1?” 

The employer retorted sharply: ‘ Are you head of 
the firm?” 

The clerk saidno more. The barreling and heading © 
went on. When all was ready, the beans (many hun- 


48 SOWING AND REAPING 


— 


oo 


dreds of barrels) were put on the market for sale. 
Specimens of the best quality were shown in the office 
to buyers. 

At length a shrewd purchaser came in (no man 1s so 
sharp in business but he will often meet his equal), ex- 
amined the samples in the office, inquired the price, and 
then wished to see the stock in bulk. The clerk was 
ordered to go with the buyer to the upper loft and show 
him the stock.. An open barrel was shown apparently 
of the same quality of the sample. The buyer then 
said to the clerk: 

“ Young man, the samples of beans shown me are of 
the first quality, and it is impossible to purchase beans 
anywhere in the market for the price at which you offer 
them; there is something wrong here. Tell me, are’ 
these beans the same quality throughout the entire bar- 
rel as they appear on the top?” 

The clerk now found himself in a strange position. 
He thought, “ Shall I lie for my employer, as he un- 
doubtedly means I shall; or shall I tell the truth, come 
what will ?”’ He decided for the truth, and said: 

[eNO sit, they are mot. 

“ Then,’’ said the customer. “Ido not want them”; 
and he left. 

The clerk enterea the office. The employer said to 
him: ‘ Did you sell that man those beans?” 

He said, “ No, sir.’’ 

oNyihyenot 


SOWING AND REAPING 49 


“ Well, sir, the manasked meif those beans were of 
the same quality through the entire barrel as they ap- 
peared onthe top. Itoldhim they werenot. Hethen 
eqid. ‘1 do not want them,’ and left.” 

“Go to the cashier,’”’ said the employer, “and get 
your wages; we want you no longer.” 

He received his pay and left the office, rejoicing that 
he had not lied for the purposes of abetting a sordid 
avariciousness, and benefiting an unprincipled em- 
ployer. 

Three weeks after this the firm sent after the young 
clerk, entreated him to come back again into their em- 
pioy, and offered him three hundred dollars salary more 
per year than they had ever before given him. 

And thus was his honesty and truthfulness rewarded. 
The firm knew and felt that the man was right, although 
apparently they had lost largely by his honesty. They 
wished to have him again in their employ, because they 
knew that they could trust him, and never suffer 
through fraud and deception. The~ ‘new that their 
financial interests would be safe in his custody. They 
respected and honored that young man. 


THE LESSON OF PATIENCE. 


Let us learn the lesson of patience. “ Behold the 
husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, 
and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early 
and latter rain.’’ Delay does not mean denial. Too 


50 SOWING AND REAPING 


often one generation sows and another has to reap. 
God is a jealous God, “ visiting the iniquity of the 
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth gen- 
eration of them that hate ” Him. 

In the early years of Israel’s existence as a separate 
people, God commanded them to give the land of 
Canaan rest every seventh year. 

“Six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather 
in the fruits thereof: but the seventh year thou shalt 
let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may 
eat, and what they leave the beasts of the field shall 
eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vine- 
yard, and with thy olive yard.” From the anointing of 
Saul to be king this law was not observed. After 
four hundred and ninety years God gave the nation 
into captivity for seventy years. During this period 
the land had rest; seventy sabbath years to compen- 
sate for the sabbath years of which it had been de- 
prived. Those Israelites sowed the bitter seed of dis-: 
obedience, and .i:eir descendants had to reap the 
harvest in exile and captivity. 

A leading surgeon performed a critical operation 
before his class one day. The operation was success- 
ful, as far as his part was concerned. But he turned 
to the class and said: ‘“ Six years ago a wise way of 
living might have prevented this disease. Two years 
ago a Safe and simple operation might have cured it. 
We have done our best to-day as the case now stands, 
but Nature will have her word to say. She does not 


SOWING AND REAPING 5} 


always repeal her capital sentences.” Next day the 
patient died, reaping the fruit of his excesses. 

Paul says: ‘“ Let us not be weary in well-doing; 
in due season we shall reap if we faint not.” 

In a recent chat with an interviewer, Mr. Edison 
quite unconsciously preached a most powerful sermon 
on perseverance and patience. 

He described his repeated efforts to make the 
phonograph reproduce the aspirated sound, and 
added: “ From eighteen to twenty hours a day for 
the last seven months I have worked on this single 
word ‘specia.’ I said into the phonograph, ‘specia, 
specia, specia,’ but the instrument responded, ‘ pecia, 
pecia, pecia.’ It was enough to drive one mad! But 
[ held firm, and I have succeeded.”’ 

An insurance case was brought to Daniel Webster 
when he was a young lawyer in Portsmouth. Only a 
small amount was involved, and a twenty-dollar fee was 
all that was promised. He saw that to do his client full 
justice, a journey to Boston would be desirable, in order 
to consult the law library. He would be out of pocket 
by the expedition, and for the time he would receive 
no adequate compensation. But he determined to do 
his best, cost what it might. He accordingly went to 
Boston and looked up the authorities, and gained the 
case. . 

Years after, Webster, who had meanwhile become 
famous, was passing through New York. An import- 
ant insurance case was to be tried that day, and one 


7 SOWING AND REAPING 

of the counsel had suddenly been taken ill. Money 
was no object, and Webster was begged to name his 
terms and conduct the case. 

“TI told them,” said Mr. Webster, “that it was 
preposterous to expect me to prepare a legal argument 
at a few hours’ notice. They insisted, however, that 
I should look at the papers; and this I finally con- 
sented todo. It was my old twenty-dollar case over 
again; and.as I never forget anything, I had all the 
authorities at my fingers’ ends. The court knew that 
I had no time to prepare, and were astonished at the 
range of my acquirements. So you see, J was hand- 
somely repaid both in fame and money for that jour- 
ney to Boston; and the moral is that good work is re- 
warded in the end.” 

Two men were digging in California for gold. They 
worked a good deal and got nothing. At last one of 
them threw down his tvols and said: 

“ T wilt leave here before we starve’’; and he left. 

The next day his comrade’s patience was rewarded 
by finding a nugget that supported him until he made 
a fortune. 

“Because sentence against an evil work is not ex- 
ecuted speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of 
men is fully set in them to do evil. Though a sinner 
do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, 
yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that 
fear God, which fear before Him; but it shall not be 
well with the wicked. neither shall he prolong his days, 


SOWING AND REAPING 53 


which are as a shadow; because he feareth not before 
God.” 

The idea that because a person does a thing in the 
dark it will never be brought to light, is fatal—God 
says it sha// be brought to light. It is folly for a man 
who has covered his sins to think there shall be no 
resurrection of them and no final adjudication. Lookat 
the sons of Jacob. They sold Joseph and deceived 
their father. Twenty long years rolled away, and 
away down to Egypt their sin followed them; for they 
said: ‘Weare guilty of the blood of our brother.” 
The reaping time had come at last, for those ten boys 
who sold their brother. 

I was once preaching in Chicago, and a woman 
who was nearly out of her mind came tome. You 
know there are some people who mock at religions 
meetings, and say that religion drives people mad. It 
is s¢z that drives people mad. It is the want of Christ 
that sinks people into despair. This was the woman's 
story: She had a family of children. One of her 
neighbors had died, and her husband had brought 
homea little child. Shesaid, “‘ I don’t want the child,” 
but her husband said, “ You must take it and look 
after it.” She said she had enough to do with her 
own, and she told her husband to take that child away. 
But he would not. She confessed that she tried to 
starve the child; butit lingered on. One night it cried 
all night; I suppose it wanted food. At last she took 
the clothes and threw them over the child, and smoth- 


54 SOWING AND REAPING 


ered it. No one saw her; no one knew anything about 
it. The child was buried. Years had passed away; 
and she said, “ I hear the voice of that child day and 
night. It has driven me nearly mad.” No one saw 
the act; but God had seen it, and this retribution fol- 
lowed it. History is full of these things. You nee: 
not go to the Bible to find it out. pp 


** Herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding Sruit 
pees mea /cer sits Kid. —Gen. 11 12. 

** Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles ?”—Matt. 
vii: 16. 

" For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through 
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.”— 
Romans viil: 13. 


CHAPTERAIV. 


A MAN ExPECTs TO REAP THE SAME KIND AS HE Sows. 


If I should tell you that I sowed ten acres of wheat 
last year and that watermelonscame up, or that Isowed 
cucumbers and gathered turnips, you wouldn’t believe 
it. It isa fixed law that you reap the same kind of 
seed yousow. Plant wheat and you reap wheat, plant 
an acorn and there comes up an oak, plant a little elm 
and in time you have a big elm. 

One day, the master of Lukman, an Eastern fabul- 
ist, said to him, “ Go into such a field, and sow bar- 
iey.”” Lukman sowed oats instead. At the time of 
harvest his master went to the place, and, seeing the 
green oats springing up, asked him: 

“Did I not tell you to sow barley here? Why, 
then, have you sown oats?” 

He answered, “ I sowed oats in the hope that barley 
would grow up.” 

His master said, ‘' What foolish idea is this? Have 
you ever heard of the like?” 

Lukman replied, “ You yourself are constantly sow- 
ing in the field of the world the seeds of evil, and yet 
expect to reap in the resurrection day the fruits of 
virtue. Therefore J thought, also, I might get barley 
by sowing oats.” 


58 SOWING AND REAPING 


The master was abashed at the reply and set Luk- 
man free. — 

Like produces like in vegetation, and like produces 
like in labor. If a man has Jearnt the trade of a car- 
penter, he does not expect to excel as a watchmaker. 
If he has toiled hard to acquire a knowledge of the law, 
he does not expect to practice medicine for a liveli- 
hood. Men expect to reup in the same line as they 
have learned. 

This law is just as true in God’s kingdom as in man’s 
kingdom; just as true in the spiritual world as in the 
natural world. If I sow tares, I am going to reap 
tares; if I sow a lie, I am going to reap lies; if I sow 
adultery, Iam going to reap adulterers; if Isow whisky, 
Iam going to reap drunkards. You cannot blot this 
law out, it isin force. No other truth in the Bible is 
more solemn. 

Suppose that a neighbor, whom I don’t want tosee, 
comes to my house and I tell my son to tell him, if he 
asks for me, that Iam out of town. He goes to the 
door and lies to my neighbor; it will not be six 
months before that boy will lie to me; I will reap 
that lie. 

A man said to me some time ago, ‘“ Why is it that 
we can not get honest clerks now ?”’ 

I replied, “ I don’t know, but perhaps I can imagine 
a reason. When merchants teach clerks to say that 
goods are all wool when they are half cotton, and to 
adulterate groceries and say they are pure, when they 


SOWING AND REAPING 52 


grind up white marble and put it into pulverized 
sugar, and the clerk knows it, you will not have hon- 
est clerks. ”’ 

As long as merchants teach their clerks to lie and 
to misrepresent, to put a French or an English tag on 
domestic goods and sell them for imported goods, so 
long they will have dishonest clerks. Dishonest 
merchants make dishonest clerks. I am not talk- 
ing fiction, I am talking truth. It is not poetry, but 
solemn prose that a man must reap the same kind of 
seed that he sows. 

This is a tremendous argument against selling liquor. 
Leaving out the temperance and religious aspects of 
the question, no man on earth can afford to sell 
strong drink. If I sell liquor to your son and make 
a drunkard of him, some man will sell liquor to my 
son and make a drunkard of him. Every man who 
sells liquor has a drunken son or a drunken brother or 
some drunken relative. Where are the sons of liquor 
dealers? To whom are their daughters married? 
Look around and see if you can find a man who has 
been in that business twenty years who has not a 
skeleton in his own family. 

I threw that challenge down once, and a man said 
to me the next day, “I wasn’t at your meeting last 
night, but I understand you made the astounding 
statement that no man had been in the liquor busi- 
ness twenty years who hadn't the curse in his own 
family.” 


6U SOWING AND REAPING 


“Yes,” I said, “I did.” 

“Tt isn’t true,” he said, “and I want you to take 
it back. My father was a rumseller, and I ama rum- 
seller, and the curse has never come into my father’s 
family or into mine. ” 

I said, ‘ What ! two generations selling that infernal 
stuff, and the curse has never come into the family! 
I will investigate it, and if I find I am wrong I will 
make the retraction just as publicly as I did the state- 
ment. ” 

There were two prominent citizens of the town in 
the room, on whose faces I noticed a peculiar expres- 
sion as the man was talking. After he left, one of 
them said: 

“ Do you know, Mr. Moody, that man’s own brother 
was a drunkard and committed suicide a few weeks 
ago and left a widow with seven children ; they are 
under hisroof now! He wasa terrible drunkard him- 
self until the shock of his brother’s suicide cured 
him.” 

I don’t know how you can account for it unless he 
thought his brother wasn’t a relative. Perhaps he 
was a sort of a Cainite, saying, ‘ Am I my brother’s 
keeper ?”’ 

When I was a pastor of a church in Chicago we were 
trying to get hold of the working-men. They used to 
say: 

“ Come down to the factory at dinner-time and we 
will give you a chance to speak.”’ 


SOWING AND REAPING 61 


I would ask them, “ Why won’t you come to the 
enurch ?” 

“ Oh,” they would say, “ you have it all your own 
way there, and wecan’t answer back; but come to the 
factory and we will put a few questions to you.” 

So I went down, and they made it pretty hot for me 
sometimes. One of the favorite characters that they 
brought up was Jacob. Many a time I have had men 
say, “ You think Jacob was a saint, don’t you? He 
was a big rascal.’”” Many have said they thought 
Jacob wasn’t as goodas Esau. Notice this fact. 
You read in the Bible, “ I will punish Jacob according 
to his doings.’”’ This law of retribution runs through 
his ufe; although he was a friend of God, a kinsman 
of Abraham, and was third in the line of the cove- 
nant, yet God made Jacob reap the same kind of seed 
he sowed. Some one has said that “ Jacob’s mis- 
fortunes were uniformly calculated to bring back to 
his recollection the picture as well as the punishment 
of his faults.”’ 

When Isaac in his old age wanted some venison, 
and sent Esau out to get it, Jacob slipped out and 
took a kid from his father’s flock, and Rebekah, his 
mother, cooked it; he brought it to his old blind 
father and said he was Esau. The old man recog- 
nized his voice, but he had very cunningly put the 
skin of the kid on his hands and neck; so that the old 
man felt him and said: 


62 SOWING AND REAPING 


“The voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are 
the hands of Esau.” 

By this lie he got his brother’s birthright blessing, 
but he paid ten thousand times more for it than it was 
worth. ‘“ Who steals my purse stealstrash.”” A man 
who steals my pocketbook is the chief sufferer, not I. 
When Jacob had grown to be an old man, he lived 
in continual suspicion that his sons were deceiving 
him. The sin of deceiving his own father bore fruit. 

Jacob was the great loser in this transaction. 
When Esau returned he had to flee for his life. Then 
God met him at Bethel. ‘“ And behold, the Lord 
stood above it and said, I am the Lord God of Abra- 
ham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land 
whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy 
seed: and thy seed shall be asthe dust of the earth: 
and thou shalt spread abroad to the west and to the 
east and to the north and to the south, and in thee 
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed. 

‘““ And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in 
all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee 
again unto this land, for I will not leave thee, until I 
have done that which I have spoken to thee of.” 

Men will read that far in the life of Jacob and say, 
“ | don’t want anything.more to do with a God who will 
deal in grace with a man who had done so meana 
tning.”’ My friend, hold on. Follow him to Padan- 
aram. He was there twenty years, and during that 


SOWING AND REAPING 63 


time his wages were changed ten times. He worked 
seven years for the lovely Rachel, and then had an- 
other woman put upon him. Jacob had by deception 
obtained the blessing of the first-born son, but Laban 
sarcastically reminded him, “ It must not be so done in 
my country to give the younger before the first-born.”’ 
He found that Laban could drive as sharp a bargain 
as he. Wherever you find a sharp, shrewd man, you 
will always find that he draws just such men around 
him, and that he who cheats will himself be cheated. 
“ Birds of a feather flock together’ ; blasphemers get 
together, and sharp, shrewd men get together. Jacob 
found in Laban just such a man as himself. It was 
“ diamond cut diamond.” 

Look a little further. Jacob had twelve sons, but 
he loved Joseph and Benjamin more than the others 
because they were the sons of his beloved Rachel. 
He was partial to Joseph, and had a coat made of 
many colors for him. Partiality will raise the old 
Adam in any family. 

One morning Joseph, in the innocence of his heart, 
tells a dream in which his father and all his brothers 
had bowed down to him. Then his brothers began to 
plan to get him out of the way, and when his father 
sent him to find them when they were terding the 
flocks, they said: 

“ Now we have him; let us slay him and cast him 
into a pit, and say that some beast has devoured 
ga, 


64 SOWING AND REAPING 


Later they sold him, and took his coat of many 
colors and dipped it in the blood of a kid, and, taking 
it to their father, said: ‘-This have we found; know 
now whether it be thy son’s coat or no.” And he 
knew it and said, “ It is my son’s coat; an evil beast 
hath devoured him.” | 

Now notice: Jacob deceived his father with the skin 
of a kid, and his sons deceived him with the blood of 
a kid. Jacob lied to his father, and his sons lied to 
him. The lie came home. Every lie is bound to 
come back to you. You cannot dig a grave so deep 
but that it will have a resurrection. Tramp, tramp, 
your sins will all come back. 

‘Be sure your sin will find you out.’”’ You may 
think you are very shrewd and far-sighted, and can 
plan and cover up, but it is the decree of high heaven 
that no sin shall be covered; God will uncover it. 
You cannot deceive the Almighty. Jacob found that 
out. He had to reap what he sowed. 

Again, look at David. A man said to me some 
years ago: 

“ Don’t you think David fell as low as Saul ?”’ 

Yes, he fell lower, because God had lifted him 
higher. The difference is that when Saul fell there 
was no sign of repentance, but when David fell, a 
wail went up from his broken heart; there was true 
repentance. No man in all the Scripture record rose 
so high and fell so low as David. God took him from 
the sheepfold and placed him on the throne. He gave 


t 


SOWING AND REAPING 65 


— 


him riches and lands in abundance. He was on a 
pinnacle of glory, and was loved and honored among 
men. But one day, you remember, David was walk- 
ing upon the roof of the king’s house, and he saw 
Bathsheba, and lusted after her, and committed: the 
awful sin of adultery; and then, to cover up that sin, 
he made Bathsheba’s husband drunk, and had him 
murdered. The decree came: “TI will raise up evil 
in thy family and the sword shall never leave thy 
house.”’ Amnon, David's son, commits adultery with 
David’s own daughter. Absalom makes a feast for 
Amnon and has him murdered. Not long after he 
comes with an army to drive David, his father, from 
the throne, and publicly commits adultery with David's 
concubines on the roof of the king’s house; if God had 
not been overruling, he would have killed his father. 

David sowed adultery and reaped it in his own 
family. He sowed murder and reaped it in his own 
family. I believe that what brought the bitter wail 
from that father’s heart when he said, “ Oh, my son 
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! Would God 
I had died for thee,” was the fact that these were 
the wages of his own sin. From the time he fell into 
that sin with Uriah’s wife until he went down to his 
grave, it was one billow after another rolling over 
him. | 

If God did not spare David, do you think He will 
spare us if we fall into sin and do not confess and turn 
wom our sins? If ever a man had an apportunity te 


u6 SOWING AND REAPING 


cover his sins, David had. No judge or jury dared te 
pronounce judgment against him. The thing was 
done in the dark, but his sin found him out. Nathan 
was sent across his path, and, young man, Nathan 
will appear to you some day. Some messengei will 
smite you in the way if you do not repent and turn 
from your sins. My friend, why not call on God now 
as David did when he came to himself ? make the same 
prayer—how thankful we should be that we have the 
prayer ! why not make it on your knees now? 


DAVID’S PRAYER FOR FORGIVENESS. 


“Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy 
loving kindness: according unto the multitude of thy 
tender mercies blot out my transgressions. 

Wash mé@ thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse 
me from my sin. For I acknowledge my transgres- 
sions; and my sin is ever before me. 

Against thee, thee only, have 1 sinned, and done 
this evil in thy sight; that thou mightest be justified 
when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest. 

Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my 
mother conceive me. 

Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts; 
and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know 
wisdom. ; 

Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash 
me, and I shall be whiter than snow. 


SOWING AND REAPING 67 
- Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones 
which thou hast broken may rejoice. 

Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine 
iniquities. 

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me. 

Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not 
thy Holy Spirit from me. 

Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and up- 
hold me with thy free Spirit. 

Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and sin- 
ners shall be converted unto thee. 

Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God 
of my salvation; and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy 
righteousness. 

O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall 
shew forth thy praise. 

For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it; 
thou delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices 
of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite 
heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.” 


EXAMPLES FROM HIsToryY. —~ 


But you say you don’t believe in the Bible. Then 
look at history, and see if this law is not true. Max- 
entine built a false bridge to drown Constantine, but 
was drowned himself. Bajazet was carried about by 
Tamerlane in an iron cage which he intended for Tam- 


68 SOWING AND REAPING 


erlane. Maximinus put out the eyes of thousands of 
Christians ; soon after a fearful disease of the eyes 
broke out among his people, of which he himself died 
in great agony. Valens caused about eighty Christians 
to be sent to sea in a ship and burnt alive: he was de- 
feated by the Goths and fled to a cottage, where he 
was burnt alive. 

Alexander VI. was poisoned by wine he had pre- 
pared for another. Henry III. of France was stabbed 
in the same chamber where he had helped to contrive 
the cruel massacre of French Protestants. Marie An- 
toinette, riding to Notre Dame Cathedral for her bri- 
dal, bade the soldiers command all beggars, cripples, 
and ragged people to leave the line of the procession. 
She could not endure the sight of these miserable ones. 
Soon after, bound in the executioner’s cart, she was 
riding toward the place of execution amidst crowds 
who gazed on her with hearts as cold as ice and hard 
as granite. When Foulon was asked how the starving 
populace was to live, he said: ‘“ Let them eat grass.” . 
Afterward, the mob, maddened with rage, caught him 
in the streets of Paris, hung him, stuck his head upon 
a pike and filled his mouth with grass. 


“* wut other fell into good ground,:and brought forth srutt, 
some a hundredfold, suine sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.”--Matt. 
xill: 8. 


CHAPTER V. 


A Man ReEAps More THAN HE Sows. 


If I sow a bushel, I expect to reap ten or tweaty 
bushels. I can sow in one day what will take ten men 
to reap. The Spaniards have this proverb: “ Sowa 
thought and reap an act. Sow an act, and reap a 
habit. Sowa habit, and reap a character. Sow a 
character and reapa destiny.” And it takes a longer 
time to reap than to sow. Ihave heard of a certain 
kind of bean that reproduces itself a thousand fold. 
One thistle-down which blew from the deck of a vessel 
is said to have covered with thistles the entire surface 
of a South Seaisland. The oak springs from an acorn, 
the mighty Mississippi from a little spring. 

One glass of whisky may lead to a drunkard’s death. 
One lie may ruin a man’s career. Oneerror in youth 
may follow a man all through life. Some one has said 
that many a Christian spends half his time trying to 
keep down the sprouts of seed sown in his young days. 
Unless it is held in check, the desire to “ havea drink ”’ 
will become a consuming thirst; the desire to “ playa 
game of cards”’ an irresistible gambler’s passion. 

Abraham gave up his only son at God's bidding, and 
as the fruit of that act of obedience God gave him seed 


7 SOWING AND REAPING 


2 


as numerous as the stars of the heaven and as the 
sands upon the seashore. 

Jacob told one lie, and his ten sons came back with 
his he multiplied tenfold. For twenty years Jacob 
mourned for Joseph, supposing that he was dead. I 
have no doubt that night after night he wept for Joseph, 
and in his dreams saw the boy torn to pieces, and 
heard his cries for help. It took him a long time to 
teap the harvest. 

Israel murmured against God because of the report 
of the land of Canaan brought back by the spies. Had 
they not to reap a multiplied harvest ? Listen: “ After 
the number of the days in which ye searched the land, 
even forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear 
your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shall know my 
breach of promise.”’ 


When I made the remark in a meeting once that a 
man had to reap more than he sowed, a man in front 
of me dropped his head and sobbed aloud. After the 
meeting, a friend stepped up to him and said: 

“What is your trouble ?” 

Pointing to me he said, “ Every word that man has 
been saying is true. Four years ago I was the con- 
fidential clerk of a firm in this city. I have reason to 
believe that if I had continued as I began, I should 
have been in the firm now. But one night in a sa- 
loon under the influence of drink I committed a crime, 
and J was sent to the penitentiary, where I repented 
im sackcloth and ashes. To-day I came back for the 


SOWING AND REAPING v6) 


first time, and went to the old house’, and they ordered 
me out. JI went to other business-houses I was ac- 
quainted with, and received the same treatment. I 
met men on the street whom I once knew, who had 
held inferior places to me, and I lifted my hat, but no 
one returned the bow.” 

The man wrung his hands in agony and said, “ It 
is all true, it takes a longer time to reap than to 
sow.” 

Do you not believe it? Ask your neighbor who has 
drank up his character and reputation and home, and 
has brought a blight on his family. It takes a long 
time to build up a character, but you can blast it in a 
single hour. 

A man died in the Columbus penitentiary some years 
ago whe had spent over thirty years in his cell. 
He was one of the millionaires of Ohio. Fifty 
years ago when they were trying to get a trunk 
road from Chicago to New York, they wanted 
to lay the line through his farm near Cleveland. He 
did not want his farm divided by the railroad, so the 
case went into court, where commissioners were ap- 
pointed to pay the damages and to allow the road to 
be built. One dark night after the tracks were laid, 
a train was thrown off the track, and several were 
killed. This man was suspected, was tried and found 
guilty, and was sent to the penitentiary for life. The 
farm was soon cut up into city lots, and the man be- 
came a millionaire, but he got no benefit from it. Be« 


i4 SOWING AND REAPING 


tore he died, the chaplain told me that he became a 
child of God. It may not have taken him more than 
an hour to lay the obstruction on the railroad, but he 
was over thirty years reaping the result of that one 
act! 

In the history of France we read that a certain king 
wanted some new instrument to torture his prisoners 
with. One of his favorites suggested that he should 
build a cage, not long enough to lie down in, and not 
high enough to stand up in. The king accepted the 
suggestion; but the first one put into the cage was the 
very man who suggested it, and he was kept in it for 
fourteen vears. It did not take him more thana 
few minutes, perhaps, to suggest that cruel device; but 
he was fourteen long years reaping the fruit of what 
he had sown. 

If a man could do his reaping alone, it would not be 
so hard; but it is terrible when he has to make that 
godly father, and that mother who loves him, or that 
wife and family, reap along with him Does not the 
drunkard make his wife and children reap a bitter har- 
vest? Does not the gambler make his relatives reap? 
Does not the harlot make her parents reap agony and 
shame? What a bitter enemy is sin! May God help 
each one of us to turn from it at once! 

Whenever I eur a young man talking in a flippant 
way about sowing his wild oats, I don’t laugh. I feel 
more like crying, because I know he is going to make 
his gray-haired mother reap in tears; he is going to 


SOWING AND REAPING 15 


—_ 


inake his wife reap in shame; he is going to make his 
old father and his innocent children reap with him. 
Only ten or fifteen or twenty years will pass before he 
will have to reap his wild oats; no man has ever 
sowed them without having to reap them. Sow the 
wind and you reap the whirlwind. 

We cannot control our influence. If I plant thistles 
in my field, the wind will take the thistle-down when 
it is ready, and blow it away beyond the fence; and 
my neighbors will have to reap with me. So my ex- 
ample may be copied by my children or my neighbors, 
and my actions reproduced indefinitely through them, 
whether for good or evil. How many have gone to 
ruin because of the sins of such men as Jacob and 
David and Lot! 


SOWING AND REAPING 


=. 


NoTHING But LEAVEs. 


Nothing but leaves! The Spirit grieves 
O’er years of wasted life ! 
O’er sins indulged while conscience slept, 
O’er vows and promises unkept, 
And reap from years of strife— 
Nothing but leaves! Nothing but leaves! 


Nothing but leaves! No gathered sheaves 
Of life’s fair ripening grain; 

We sow our Seeds; lo! tares and weeds— 

Words, zd/e words, for earnest deeds— 
Then reap, with toil and pain, 

Nothing but leaves! Nothing but leaves! 


Nothing but leaves! Sad memory weaves 
No veil to hide the past; 

And as we trace our weary way, 

And count each lost and misspent day, 
We sadly find at last— 

Nothing but leaves! Nothing but leaves/ 


Ah, who shall thus the Master meet, 
And bring but withered leaves? 
Ah, who shall, at the Saviour’s feet, 
Before the awful judgment-seat, 
Lay down, for golden sheaves, 
Nothing but leaves! Nothing but leaves ? 
—L. E. ACKERMAN. 


S521 shy 6 
Pay a th the 


** Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all 
that are in the graves shall hear Ais voice, and shall come forth 
they that have done good; unio the resurrection of life; and they 
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation,”—Jobn 
v: 28, 2Q- 


CHATER VI. 


IGNORANCE OF THE SEED MAKES NO DIFFERENCE. 


Now, notice again: Ignorance of the kind of seed 
makes no difference. If I think I am sowing good 
seed and it happens to be bad, I shall have a bad 
harvest; therefore, it becomes me to see what kind of 
seed I am sowing. 

Suppose I meet a man who is sowing seed, and 
say: “ Hello, stranger, what are you sowing?” 

“ Seed.” : 

“ What kind of seed ?” 

“IT don’t know.” 

“Don’t you know whether it is good or bad ?”’ 

“No, I can’t tell; but it is seed, that is all I want 
to know, and I am sowing it.”’ 

You would say that he was a first-class lunatic, 
wouldn’t you? ‘But he wouldn’t be half so mad as the 
man who goes on sowing for time and eternity, and 
never asks himself what he is sowing or what the 
harvest will be. 

Father, what seed are you sowing in your family? 
Are you setting ycur children a good or a bad example ? 
Do you spend your time at the saloon or the club, un- 
til you have become almosta stranger to them ? or are 
you training them for God and righteouness ? 


80 SOWING AND REAPING 


The story is told that a man once said he would 
not talk to his son about religion; the boy should make 
his own choice when he grew up, unprejudiced by 
him. The boy broke his arm, and when the doctor 
was setting it, he cursed and swore the whole time. 

“Ah,” said the doctor, “you were afraid to 
prejudice the boy in the right way, but the devil had g- 
no such prejudice. He has led your son the other 
way.” The idea that a father is to let his children 
run wild! Nature alone never brings forth anything 
but weeds. ; 

One of Coleridge’s friends once objected to preju- 
dicing the minds of the young by selecting the things 
they should be taught. The philosopher-poet invited 
him to take a look at his garden, and took him te 
where a luxuriant growth of ugly and infragrant weeds 
spread themselves over beds and walks alike. 

“ You don’t call that a garden!” said his friend. 

“ What!” said Coleridge, ‘“ would you have me 
prejudice the ground in favor of roses and lilies?” 

Have you never noticed the same thing about the 
mind and the heart? Leta child be idle, and Satan 
will soon lead him into mischief. He must be looked 
after. Those things that will help to develop char- 
acter must be selected for him, and hurtful things 
must be kept out, just as industriously as the farmer 
cultivates the useful products of the soil, but wages 
continual war on weeds and all unwholesome growths, 


SOWING AND REAPING 8] 

A murderer was to suffer the penalty of his crime. 
Speaking of his reckless career, he said: 

“ How could it be otherwise, when I had such bad 
training? I was taught these things from my youth. 
When only four years old my mother poured whisky 
down my throat to see how I would act.” 

On the morning of his execution, the wretched 
mother bade good-bye to the son whom her influence 
had helped to that shameful end. 

A father started for his office early one morning, 
after a light fall of snow. Turning, he saw his two- 
year-old boy endeavoring to put his tiny feet in his own 
great footprints. The little fellowshouted: “ Goon, 
[’se comin,’ papa, I’se comin’ yight in ure tracks.”’ 

“He caught the boy in his arms and carried him to 
his mother, and started again for his office. 

His habit had been to stop on the way at a saloon 
for a glass of liquor. As he stood upon the thresh- 
old that morning he seemed to hear a sweet voice 
say: “ Goon, I’se comin’, papa, I’se comin’ yight in 
ure tracks.” 

He stopped, he hesitated, he looked the future 
squarely in the face. 

“IT cannot afford to make any tracks I would be 
ashamed or sorry to have my boy walk in,” he said de- 
cidedly, and turned away. 

Father, mother, neighbor, are your tracks true? 
Are they straight ? Can you turn to any walking be- 
hind you ana say: “ Follow me as I follow Christ ” ? 


82 SOWING AND REAPING 


Are you leading the little ones safe to the Great 
Shepherd ? 

The best time to sow the good seed is before Satan 
has scattered the tares. God has given numerous 
warnings and instructions to do it. “Seek ye first 
the Kingdom of God and his righteousness.”’ “ Train 
up a child in the way he should go.” “ Provoke not 
your children to wrath, but bring them up in the 
nurture and admonition of the Lord.” If a farmer 
neglects to plant in the spring-time, he can never 
recover the lost opportunity: no more can you, if you 
neglect yours. Youth is a seed-time, and if it is 
allowed to pass without good seed being sowed, weeds 
will spring up and choke the soil. It will take bitter 
toil to uproot them. 

An old divine said that when a good farmer sees a 
weed in his field he hasit pulled up. If it is taken 
early enough, the blank is soon filled in, and the crop 
waves over the whole field. But if allowed to run too 
late, the bald patch remains. It would have been 
better if the weed had never been allowed to get root. 

Young man, are you letting some secret sin get the 
mastery over you, binding you hand and foot? Itis 
growing. Every sin grows. When I was speaking 
to five thousand children in Glasgow some years ago, 
I took a spool of thread and said to one of the largest 
boys: | 

“ Do you believe I can bind you with that thread ?”” 

He laughed at the idea. I wound the thread 


SOWING AND REAPING 83 


around him a few times, and he broke it with a single 
jerk. Then I wound the thread around and around, 
and by and by I said: 

“ Now get free if you can.” 

He couldn’t move hand or foot. If you are slave 
to some vile habit, you must either slay that habit or 
it will slay you. 

My friend, what kind of seed are you sowing ? Let 
your mind sweep over your record for the past year. 
Have you been living a double life? Have you been 
making a profession without possessing what you pro- 
fess? If there is anything you detest it is hypocrisy. 
Do you tell me God doesn’t detest it also? If itisa 
right eye that offends, make up your mind that you 
will pluck it out; or if it is a right hand or a right 
foot, cut it off. Whatever the sin is, make up your 
mind that you will gain the victory over it without 
further delay. 

What kind of seed are you sowing, my friend, good 
seed or bad seed? There will be a harvest, and you 
are bound to reap, whether you want to or not. Tell 
me, how do you spend your spare time? ‘Telling vile 
stories, polluting the minds of others, while your own 
mind is also polluted? Do you read any literature 
that makes your thoughts impure? How do you 
spend the Sabbath? Boating, fishing, hunting, or on 
excursions? Do you think ministers are old fogies— 
that the Bible belongs te the dark ages? Tell me 
how you treat your parents, and I will tell you how 


84 SOWING AND REAPING 


a 


your children will treat you. A man was making 
preparations to send his old father to the poorhouse, 
when his little child came up and said: 

“ Papa, when you are old shall I have to take you 
to the poorhouse ?” 

Do you never write home to your parents? They 
clothed you and educated you, and now do you spend 
vour nights in gambling? You say to your godless 
companions that your father crammed religion down 
your throat when you were a boy. I have a great 
contempt for a man who says that of his father or 
mother. They may have made a mistake; but it was 
of the head, not of the heart. Ifa telegram was sent 
to them that you were down with smallpox, they 
would take the first train to come to you. They 
would willingly take the disease into their own bodies 
and die for you. If you scoff and sneer at your father 
and mother you will have a hard harvest; you will 
reap in agony. It is only a question of time. There 
is a saying— 

‘* The mills of God grind slowly, 
But they grind exceeding small.”* 

The Lord Jesus said, “ With what measure ye mete, 
it shall be measured to you again.” 

A man told me when I was last in London that 
England had the advantage of America in one respect. 
J asked how. He said: 

“We have more respect for our laws in England 


SOWING AND REAPING be 
— 
than you doin America. You don’t hang half your 
murderers, but all our murderers are hanged if they 
can be proved guilty.”’ 

I said: “ Neither country hangs its worst murder- 
ers. If my son wants to murder me, I would rather 
have him kill me outright than to take five years to 
doit. A young man who goes home late night after 
night, and when his mother remonstrates, curses her 
gray hairs, and kills her by inches, is the worst sort of 
a murderer.” 

That is being done all over the country. You may 
not be guilty of a sin as black and as foul as this, but 
I tell you, every sin grows, and if you have sin in your 
heart you cannot tell where it will land you. Noth- 
ing separates a son from his mother or a man from his 
wife like sin. The grace of God binds men together, 
but sin tears them apart and separates them. 

Come, my friend, what kind of seed are you sow- 
ing? What will the harvest be? Will it be a black 
harvest, or are you going to have a joyful harvest? 
If you think that, when you have sown tares, wheat 
will come up, you are greatly mistaken. If you think 
you can give a loose rein to your passions and lusts, 
and yet have eternal life, you are being deceived. 
For God says, “ He that soweth to his flesh shall of 
the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the 
Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.” 


66 SOWING AND REAPING 


CHOOSE CAREFULLY. 


I beg of you to choose carefully your path. The farmer 
is careful in the choice of seed. He does not want 
bad seed or inferior seed, because he knows that such 
will give a poor crop. He looks for the best seed he 
can buy. If you choose to sow to the flesh, you will 
have acorrupted harvest. Ifyou commit a sinful deed, 
it may land you into a dishonored grave. 

Choice is a solemn thing. You can make this mo- 
ment a turning-point in your life. Once during the 
conquest of Peru, Pizzaro’s followers threatened to de- 
sert him. They gathered on the shore to embark for 
home. Drawing his sword, he traced a line with it 
in the sand from east to west. Then turning toward 
the south he said: 

“Friends and comrades, on that side are toil, 
hunger, nakedness, the drenching storm, and death; 
on this side, ease and pleasure. There lies Peru with 
all its riches; here Panama and its poverty. Choose 
each man as becomes a brave Castilian. For my 
part, I go south.” 

So saying, he stepped across the line, and one after 
another his comrades followed him, and the destiny of 
South America was decided. 

Napoleon was once offered a position as officer in 
the Turkish artillery. He declined 't; but had he. 
chosen to accept it, the history of Europe would have 
been different. 


SCWING AND REAPING 87 


ee ce EE A 


On your choice in spiritual things depends your 
eternity. On the orte side there is Christ; on the other. 
the world. Between them youmust choose. Do not 
wish to grow both wheat and tares. Oh, choose 
Christ! Let there be no half-heartedness. Give Him 
your whole heart. He died to redeem you from the 
curse of sin, and He lives to save you from the power 
of sin. 

“ No man can serve two masters.’”’ You can not 
belong to two kingdoms at once. Lord Brougham 
grew to be so fond of Cannes that he sought to be nat- 
uralized as a Frenchman, but fouad it was impossible 
to be both a peer of England anda citizen of a French 
town; he must renounce the one to become the other. 

Now this is where she wz// comes in. It is easy to 
follow other people’s lead, to swim with the tide; but 
it requires character, moral back-bone, to stand against 
the current of popular opinion and practice. During 
the late war a deserter came into the Federal lines 
before Pittsburg. He was asked: 

“ What did you go into secession for ?’”’ 

His answer was: “ Because they all did.” 

That reason will account for many a man’s action. 
He will act according to the saying: ‘“ While you are 
in Rome, do as the Romans do,”’ neglecting to investi- 
gate and determine whether or not the Romans do 
right. If they do wrong, a man should stand against 
a whole nation, if need be, like another Daniel. 


BS SOWING AND REAPING 


Almighty God set two sides before the children 
of Israel, and I set them now before you. Remember, 
as you choose, that your eternity is in the balance. 

‘See, I have set before thee this day life and good, 
and death and evil; in that I command thee this day 
to love the Lord thy God, to walk in His ways, and to 
keep His commandments, and His statutes, and His 
judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply; and 
the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land whither 
thou goest to possess it. 

“ But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not 
hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other 
gods, and serve them: I denounce unto you this day 
that ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall not pro- 
long your days upon the land whither thou passest 
over Jordan to go to possess it. 

“ IT call heaven and earth to record this day against 
you, that I have set before you life and death, bless- 
ing and cursing: therefore CHOOSE LIFE that both 
thou and thy seed may live: that thou mayest love the 
Lord thy God, and that thou mayest obey His voice, 
and that thou mayest cleave unto Him: for He is thy ., 
life and the length of thy days.” 


FORGIVENESS AND 
RETRIBUTION, 


** Thou renderest to every man according to his work.”"—Psalms 
Ixil: 12. 

** For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; 
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according 
to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad," —II Cor, v: 10, 


ve ate AE 


CHAPTER VII. 


FORGIVENESS AND RETRIBUTION. 


I can imagine some one saying, “I attend church, 
and have heard that if we confess our sin, God will for- 
give us; now I hear that I must reap the same kind of 
seed that I have sown. How can I harmonize the 
doctrine of forgiveness with the doctrine of retribution? 
‘All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned 
every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on 
him the iniquity of us all.’ And yet you say that I 
must reap what I have sown.”’ 

Suppose I send my hired man to sow wheat. When 
it grows up, there are thistles mixed with the wheat. 
There wasn’t a thistle a yearago. I say to my man: 

“Do you know anything about the thistles in the 
field ?”’ 

He says: “ Yes, I do; you sent me to sow that 
wheat, and I was angry and mixed some thistles with 
the wheat. But you promised me that if I ever did 
wrong and confessed it, you would forgive me; now I 
hold you to that promise, and expect you to forgive 
ie.” 

“Yes,” I say, “you are quite right; I forgive you 
for sowing the thistles; but 1 will tell you what you 


e 


§2 SOWING AND REAPING 


must do—you must reap the thistles along with the 
wheat when harvest time comes.” 

Many a Christian man is reaping thistles with his 
wheat. Twenty years ago you sowed thistles with 
the wheat and are reaping them now. Perhaps it was 
an obscene story, the memory of which keeps coming 
back to distress you, even at the most solemn mo- 
ments. Perhaps some hasty word or deed that you 
have never been able to recall. 

I heard John B. Gough say that he would rather 
cut off his hand than have committed a certain sin. 
He didn’t say what it was, but I have always sup- 
posed it was the way he treated his mother. He was 
a wretched, drunken sot in the gutter when his mother 
died ; the poor woman couldn't stand it, and died of 
a broken heart. God had forgiven him, but he never 
forgave himself. A great many have done things that 
they will never forgive themselves for to their dying 
day. “At this moment,” said one, “from many a 
harlot’s dishonored grave there arises a mute appeal 
for righteous retribution. From many a drunkard’s 
miserable home, from heartbroken wife, from starv- 
ing children, there rings up a terrible appeal into the 
ears of God.”’ 

I believe that God forgives sin fully and freely for 
Christ’s sake ; but He allows certain penalties to re-W 
main. If a man has wasted years in riotous living, 
he can never hope to live them over again. If he has 
violated his conscience, the scars will remain through 


SOWING AND REAPING 93 


life. If he has soiled his reputation, the effect of it 
can never be washed away. If he shatters his body 
through indulgence and vice, he must suffer until 
death. As Talmage says, “ The grace of God gives 
a new heart, but not a new body.”’ VV 

“ John,” said a father to his son, “ I wish you would 
get me the hammer.” 

“yes: sir.” 

“* Now a nail and a piece of pine board.” 

“‘ Here they are, sir.”’ 

“ Will you drive the nail into the board?” 

It was done. . 

“ Please pull it out again.” 

“ That’s easy, sir.” 

“ Now, John,” and the father’s voice dropped to a 
lower key, “ pull out the nail hole.” 

Every wrong act leaves ascar. Even if the board 
be a living tree the scar remains. 

“For our worst sins there is plenteous redemption. 
My sin may become white as snow, and pass away 
altogether, in so far as it has power to disturb or sad- 
den myrelation to God. Yet our least sins leave in our 
lives, in our characters, in our memories, in our con- 
sciences, sometimes in our weakness, often in our 
worldly position, in our reputation, in our success, in 
our health, in a thousand ways leave their traces and 
consequences. (z0d will not put out His Jittle finger 
to remove these, but lets them stop. 

“Let no man fency tnat the Gospel which proe 


04 SOWING AND REAPING 


claims forgiveness can be vulgarized into a mere 
proclamation of impunity. Notso. It was to Chrisr- 
tan men that Paul said, ‘Be not deceived, God is not 
mocked: whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also 
reap.’ God loves us too well not to punish His chil- 
dren when they sin, and He loves us too well to anni- 
hilate (were it possible) the secondary consequences of 
our transgressions. The two sides of the truth must 
be recognized—that the deeper and (as we call them) 
the primary penalties of our evil, which are separa- 
tion from God and the painful consciousness of guilt, 
are swept away; and also that other results are al- 
lowed to remain, which, being allowed, may be blessed 
and salutary for the transgressors. 

MacLaren says, “If you waste your youth, no re- 
pentance will send the shadow back upon the dial, or 
recover the ground lost by idleness, or restore the 
constitution shattered by dissipation, or give back the 
resources wasted upon vice, or bring back the fleeting 
opportunities. The wounds can all be healed, for 
the Good Physiican, blessed be His name! has lancets 
and bandages, and balm and anodynes for the dead- 
liest; but scars remain even when the gash is closed.” 

God forgave Moses and Aaron for their sins, but both 
suffered the penalty. Neither one was permitted to 
enter the promised land. Jacob became a “ prince of 
God” at the ford of Jabbok, but to the end of his days 
he carried in his body the mark of the struggle. Paul’s 
thornin the flesh was not removed, even after most 


SOWING AND REAPING 95 
earnest and repeated prayer. It lost its sting, how. 
ever, and became a means of grace. 

Perhaps that is one reason why God does not re. 
move these penalties of sin. He may intend them to 
be used as tokens of His chastening. ‘“ Whom the 
Lord loveth He chasteneth.” And if the temporal 
consequences were completely removed we would be 
liable to fall back again into sin. The penalty isa 
continual reminder of our weakness, and of the need 
of caution and dependence upon God. 


One night in Chicago at the close of a meeting in a 


the Y. M. C. A. rooms, a young man sprang to his 
feet and said: “ Mr. Moody, would you let me speak a 
few words?” 

I said, “ Certainly.” 

_ Then for about five minutes he pleaded with those 
men to break from sin. He said: 

“Tf you have anyone who takes any interest in your 
spiritual welfare, treat them kindly, for they are the 
best friends you have. JI was an only child, and my 
mother and father took great interest in me. Every 
morning at the family altar father used to pray for me, 
and every night he would commend me to God. I 
was wild and reckless and didn’t. like the restraint of 
home. When my father died my mother took up the 
family worship. Many atime she came to me and 
said, ‘Oh, my boy, if you would stay to family wor- 
ship I should be the happiest mother on earth; but 
when I pray, you don’t even stay in the house.’ 


36 SOWING AND REAPING 
Sometimes I weuld go in at midnight from a night of 
dissipation and hear my mother praying for me. 
Sometimes in the small hours of morning I heard 
her voice pleading for me. At last I felt that I must 
either become a Christian or leave home, and one day 
I gathered a few things together and stole away from 
home without letting my mother know. 

“ Some time after I heard indirectly that my mother 
was ill. Ah, I thought, it is my conduct that is mak- 
ing her ill! My first impulse was to go home and 
cheer her last days; but the thought came that if I did 
I should have to become a Christian. My proud heart 
revolted and I said: ‘No, I will not become a Christ- 
ian.’ ” 

Months rolled by, and at last he heard again that 
his mother was worse. Then he thought: 

“If my mother should not live I would never for- 
give myself.” 

That thought took him home. He reached the old 
village about dark, and started on foot for the home, 
which was about a mile and a half distant. On the 
way he passed the graveyard, and thought he would 
go to his father’s grave to see if there was a newly- 
made grave beside it. As he drew near the spot, his 
heart began to beat faster, and when he came near 
enough, the light of the moon shone on a newly-made 
grave. With a great deal of emotion he said: 

“ Young men, for the first time in my life this ques- 
tion came over me—who is going to pray for my lost 


SOWING AND REAPING o7 


——— 


soul now? Father is gone, and mother is gone, and 
they are the only two who ever cared for me. If 1 
could have called my mother back that night and 
heard her breathe my name in prayer, I would have 
given the world if it had been mine to give. I spent 
all that night by her grave, and God for Christ’s sake 
heard my mother’s prayers, and I became a child ol 
God. But I never forgave myself for the way I treated 
my mother, and never will.” 
Where is my wandering boy to-night— 
The boy cf my tenderest care, 


The boy that was once my joy and light, 
The child of my love and prayer ? 


Mnce he was ys ure as morning dew, 
As he knelt at his mother’s knee; 

No face was so bright, no heart more true, 
And none was so sweet ashe. 


O, could I see you now, my boy, 
As fair as in olden time, 

When prattle and smile made home a joy, 
And life was a merry chime. 


Go for my wandering boy to-night, 
Go, search for him where you will; 
But bring him to me with all his blight, 
And tell him I love him still. 

My dear friends, God may forgive you, but the con- 
sequences of your sin are going to be bitter even i! 
you are forgiven. S 

A few years ago I was preaching in Chicago on that 
text, “Arise, go up to Bethel and dwell there.” 
After the meeting a man asked to see me alone. I 


oS SOWING AND REAPING 


went into a private room. The perspiration stood in 
beads on his forehead. I said: 

“ What is it?” 

He replied: “Iam a fugitive from justice. I am ip 
exile, in disguise. The government of my state has 
offered a reward for me. I have been hidden here 
for months. They tell me there is no hell, but it 
seems as though I have been in hell for months.” 

He had been a business man, and having, as he 
thought, plenty of money, he forged some bonds, 
thinking that he could give his check any time and 
call them in, but he got beyond his depth and fell. 

He said, “ I have been here for six months. I have 


a wife and three children, but I cannot write tothem | - 


or hear from them.” The poor man was in terrible 
mental agony. | 

I said, “ Why don’t you go back and give yourself 
ap and face the law, and ask God to forgive you?” 

He said, “I would take the first train to-morrow 
and give myself up, except for one thing. I have a 
wife and three children; how can I bring the disgrace 
upon them?” 

I, too, have a wife and three children, and when 
he said that, the thing looked very different. 

Ah! if we could do our own reaping, it would not 
be so bitter, but when we make our little children or 
the wife of our bosom, -or our old gray-haired mother, 
or our old father reap with us, isn’t the reaping pretty 
bitter? { don’t fear any pestilence or any disease as 


SOWING AND REAPING 99 


much as I fear sin. If God will only keep sin out of 
n:y family, I will praise Him in time and in eternity. 
lhe worst enemy that ever crossed a man’s path 
ig sin. 

If a man comes to me for advice I always try to put 
myself in the place of the one to whom I am talking, 
aad then to give the best advice I can. I said to this 
man, 

“I don’t know what to say, but it is safe to pray.” 

After I had prayed, I urged him to pray; but he 
said: 

“If I do, it means the penitentiary.”’ 

I asked him to come the next day at twelve. He 
met me at the appointed hour, and said: 

“Tt is all settled; if I ever meet the God of Bethel I 
must go through the prison to meet Him, and God 
helping me, I will give myself up. I am going back, 
and I should like to have you keep quiet until I give 
myself over into the hands of the law; then you may 
hold me upas a warning. Little did I think when 1 
started out in life that I was coming to this! Little 
did J think when I married a girl from one of the first 
families in the state that I should bring such disgrace 
on her,’ 

At four o’clock that afternoon he went back to Mis- 
souri. He reached home a little past midnight, and 
spent a week with his family. Ina letter he said that 
he didn’t dare let his children know he was there, lest 
they should tell the neighbor’s children. At night he 


100 SOWING AND REAPING 


would creep out and look at his children, but he 
couldn’t take them in his arms or kiss them. Oh, 
there is the result of sin! Would to God we could 
every one of us just turn from sin to-day! 

One day, when this man was in hiding, he heard 
his little boy say: 

“Mamma, doesn’t papa love us any more?” 

‘““Yes,’’ his mother replied. ‘“ Why do you ask?” 

“Why,” the little fellow said, “ he has been gone 
so long and he never writes us any letters and never 
comes to see us.”’ 

The last night he came out from hiding and took a 
long look at those innocent, sleeping children; then 
he took his wife and kissed her again and again, and 
leaving that once happy home he gave himself up te 
the sheriff. The next morning he pleaded guilty, and 
was sent to the penitentiary for nineteen years. I be- 
lieve that God had forgiven him, but he couldn’t for- 
give himself, and he had to reap what he sowed. I 
pleaded with the governor for mercy, and the man 
was pardoned. 

Some time ago I was telling this story, and some 
one doubted it, but the governor who pardoned him 
happened to be in the meeting, and rose and said, “I 
pardoned that man myself.”’ The governor pardoncd 
him, and he lived a few years, but from the time he 
committed that sin he had to reap. Oh, reader, I 
plead with you, aveicome ycur besetting sin, whatever 
it As 


SOWING AND REAPING 101 


FUTURE PUNISHMENT. 


Ican imagine some one saying, “J am glad Mr. 
Moody hasn’t tried to scare us about the future state. 
I agree with him that we shall receive all our reward 
and punishment in this life.”’ 

If you think I believe that, you are greatly mistaken. 
One sentence from the lips of the Son cf God in regard 
to the future state has forever settled it in my mind. 
“Tfye diein your sins, where Lam, there ye cannot go.” 
If a man has not given up his drunkenness, his pro- 
fanity, his licentiousness, his covetousness, heaven 
would be hell to him. Heaven is a prepared place 
for prepared people. What would a man doin heaven 
who cannot bear to be in the society of the pure and 
holy down here ? | 

It is not true that all reward and punishment is 
reaped in this life. Look how many crimes are com- 
mitted, and the perpetrators are never caught. It 
often happens that the worst criminal uses his exper- 
ience to escape detection, while a more innocent hand 
iscaptured. Amanruinsagirl. Does he always reap 
punishment here? No. He holds his head‘as high as 
ever in society, while the unfortunate victim of his lust, 
who, perhaps, was innocently beguiled into sin by him, 
becomes an outcast. His punishment, however is, at | 
the latest, only adjourned to another world. 


102 


SOWING AND REAPING 


ETERNITY ! 


Oh, the clanging bells of Time! 
Night and day they never cease; 

We are vearied with their chime, 
For they do not bring us peace. 

And we hush our breath to hear, 
And we strain our eyes to see 

If thy shores are drawing near— 

Eternity ! Eternity! 


Oh, the clanging bells of Time! 
How their changes rise and fall, 
But in undertone sublime, 
Sounding clearly through them all, 
Is a voice that must be heard, 
As our moments onward flee, 
And it speaketh aye one word—- 
Eternity! Eternity ! 


Oh, the clanging bells of Time 
To their voices loud and low, 
In a long, unresting line 
We are marching to and fro; 
And we yearn for sight or sound, 
Of the life that is to be, 
For thy breath doth wrap us round 
Eternity ! Eternity! 


Oh, the clanging bells of Time! 
Soon their notes will all be dumb, 
And in joy and peace sublime 
We shall feel the silence come ; 
And our souls their thirst will slake, 
And our eyes the King will see, 
When thy glorious morn shall break— 
Eternity! Eternity! 
—ELLen M., H 


» GATES. 


“* Take heed that no man deceive you.”—Matt. xxiv: 4. 

“ Christ in you, the hope of gluiy, wm we preach, warning 
very man, and leaching every man in al’ wisdom, that we may 
bresent every man perfect in Christ Jesus. —Col. i: 27, 28. 


CHAPTER VIII 


WARNING. 


Yo give a warning isa sign of love. Who warns 
like a mother, and who loves like a mother? Your 
mother, perhaps, is gone, and your father is gone. 
Let me take the place of those who have departed, 
and lift up a warning voice. With Paul I would say: 
“TI write not these things to shame you, but as my 
be:oved sons I warn you.”’ 

A pilot guiding a steamer down the Cumberland saw 
a light, apparently from a small craft, in the middle of 
the narrow channel. His impulse was to disregard 
the signal and run down the boat. As he came near, 
a voice shouted: “ Keep off, keep off.” 

In great anger he cursed what he supposed to be a 
boatman in his way. On arriving at his next landing 
he learred that a huge rock had fallen from the mount- 
ain into the bed of the stream, and that a signal was 
placed there to warn the coming boats of the unknown 
danger. Alas! many regard God's warnings in the 
same way, and are angry with any who tell them of 
the rocks in theircourse. They will understand better 
at the end. 

The children of Israel had no truer friend than 


106 SOWING AND REAPING 


Moses. They never went astray but he warned them; 
and trouble never came upon them except when his 
warnings were unheeded. Elijah was the best friend 
Ahab had. 

I wish I could warn as Jesus Christ did. As he 
went up Mount Olivet, His heart seemed to be greatly 
moved and He cried, “ Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou 
that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are 
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy 
children together, even as a hen gathereth her chick- 
ens under her wings, and ye would not!” Did He 
not warn? 

If a friend of mine were about to invest in a worth- — 
less silver-mine, do you think I would be true to him 
if I did not caution him against it? And do I show 
less love for him because I warn him against actions 
that will bring a harvest of misery and despair ? 

“ Whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and 
taketh not warning ; if the sword come, and take him 
away, his blood shall be upon his own head; he 
heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warn- 
ing ; his blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh 
warning shall deliver his soul.” 

Be sure that the seed you are sowing is good seed. 
Sow to the flesh, and a good harvest will be impossible. 
zood seed and bad seed cannot both succeed if al- 
So:wved to grow together. One prospers at the expense 
of the other; and the likelihood is that the bad will 


SOWING AND REAPING LG7 


get the upper hand. Weeds always seem to grow and 
spread more rapidly than good seed. 

The longer they live, the firmer hold the weeds 
are gaining. Delay is dangerous. In the year 1691,a 
proclamation was sent through the Highlands of Scot- 
land, that every one who had been guilty of rebellion 
against the constituted government would be pardoned, 
if, before the last day of the year, he laid down his arms 
and promised to cease his rebellion. Many did so; 
but one chief named Maclan put off submission from 
week to week, always intending to submit before it 
was too late. But when, at 'ast, he started to accept 
pardon, he was hindered by a great storm and did not 
arrive until the time had expired. The day of pardon 
had passed and the day of vengeance had come; Mac- 
lan and his men were put to death. 

Hence, it is wise to exterminate the weeds at once. 
And beware of remaining longer in sin. The deeper 
you sink, the more bitter will be your restoration. 
Why continue to sear you conscience, and sow the 
seeds of keener remorse? No matter how painful it 
may be, break with sin at once. Severe operations 
are often necessary, for the skilful surgeon knows that 
the disease cannot be cured by surface applications. 
The farmer takes his hoe and his spade and his axe, 
and he cuts away the obnoxious growths, and burns 
the roots out of the ground with fire. 

If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast 
it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that ome of 


108 SOWING AND REAPING 


ee 


thy members should perish, and not that thy whole 
iody should be cast into hell. And if thy right hand 
offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is 
profitable for thee that one of thy members should 
perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast 
into hell. 

Remember that the tares and the wheat will be sep- 
arated at the judgment day, if not before. Sowing to 
the flesh and sowing to the spirit inevitably lead in 
diverging paths. The axe will be laid at the root of 
the trees, and every tree that bringeth not forth good 
fruit will be hewn down and cast into the fire. The 
threshing-floor will be thoroughly purged, and the 
wheat will be gathered into the garner, while the chaff 
will be burned with unquenchable fire. 

Beware of your habits. A recent writer has said: 
“ Could the young but realize how soon they will be- 
come mere walking bundles of habits, they would give 
more heed to their conduct while in the plastic state. 
We are spinning our own fates, good or evil, and never 
to be undone. Every smallest stroke of virtue or of 
vice leaves its never so little scar. The drunken Rip 
Van Winkle, in Jefferson’s play, excuses himself for 
every fresh dereliction by saying, ‘/ won't count this 
time.’ Well, he may not count it, and a kind heaven 
may not count it, but it is being counted none the less. 
Down among his nerve cells and fibres the molecules 
are counting it, registering and storing it up, to be 
used against him when the next temptation comes. 


SOWING AND REAPING 108 


~~ 


Nothing we ever do is, in strict scientific literalness, 
wiped out. Of course, this has its good side as well as 
its bad one. As we become permanent drunkards by 
sO many separate drinks, so we become saints in the 
moral sphere, and authorities and experts in the prac- 
tical and scientific spheres, by so many separate acts 
and hours of work.” 

Beware of temptations. ‘ Lead us not into temp- 
tation,” our Lord taught us to pray: and again he said, 
“Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.”’ We 
are weak and sinful by nature, and it isa good deal bet- 
ter for us to pray for deliverance rather than for strength 
to resist when temptation has overtaken us. Preven- 
tion is better than cure. Hidden under the soil may 
be seeds of passion and wickedness that only wait for 
a favorable opportunity to shoot up. 

Young men pretend that it is necessary to see both 
sides of life. What foolishness! I am not called 
upon to put my har in the fire to see if it will burn. 

A steamboat was stranded on the Mississippi river, 
and the captain could not get her off. Eventually a 
hard-looking fellow came on board and said: 

‘Captain, I understand you want a pilot to take you 
out of this difficulty ?” 

The captain said, “ Are hae a pilot?” 

“ Well, they call me one.’ 

“Do you know where the snags and sand-bars 
arer”’ 

“No, sir.” 


110 SOWING AND REAPING 


“Well, how do you expect to take me out oi here if 
you don't know where the snags and sand-bars are?”’ 

“ T know where they ain’t !’’ was the reply. 

Begin to sow the good seed while the children are 
young, and thus prevent the weeds getting a start. 
Satan does not wait till they grow up, and no more 
should we. : 

There are many fishing nets so constructed as to al- 
low none but full grown fish to be caught, the imma- 
ture escaping. Satan has none such. He catches the 
weakest and youngest. 

“We must care for our boys or the devil will,” said 
a young Sabbath School teacher. 

“ The devil will care for them anyway,” answered 
the old superintendent: ‘ The devil will not neglect 
them even though we do.” 

It is a master-piece of the devil to make us believe 
that children can not understand religion. Would 
Christ have made a child the standard of faith if He 
had known that it was not capable of understanding 
His words? It is far easier for children to love and 
trust than for grown-up persons, and so we should set 
Christ before them as the supreme object of their 
choice. 

Do not neglect opportunities. Napoleon used to 
say: ‘“ There is a crisis in every battle—ten or fifteen 
minutes—on which the‘issue ot the battle depends. 
To gain this is victory; to lose it is defeat.” 

Beware of sin. Its wages are DEATH, and (as has 


SOWING AND REAPING iil 
been said) the wages have never been reduced. It 
deceives men as to the satisfaction to be found in it, 
the excuses to be made for it, and the certainty of 
the punishment that must follow. If it was not deceit- 
ful, it would never bedelightful. It comes in innocent 
guise, and saps the life blood, depriving one of the 
moral capacity to do good. Canon Wilberforce, 
walking *n the Isle of Skye, saw a magnificent 
roiden eagle soaring upward. He halted and watched 
‘its flight. Soon he observed something was wrong. 
It began to fall, and presently lay dead at his feet. 
Eager to know the reason of its death, he examined it 
and found no trace of gunshot wound; but he saw in 
its talons a small weazel, which, in its flight, drawn 
near its body, had sucked the life blood from the 
eagle’s‘breast. Such is the end of every one who per- 
sistently clings to sin. 

Do not be deceived by the attractiveness of this 
world. It will cheat you and destroy you. “ The 
Redoubtable’’ was the name of a French ship that 
Lord Nelson spared twice from destruction; and it was 
from the rigging of that very ship that the fatal bal! 
that killed him was fired. The devil administers 
many a sin in honey; but there is poison mixed with 
it. The truest pleasures spring from the good seed 
of righteousness—none else are profitable. 

Beware of ignorance and indifference. You can- 
not afford to neglect your soul. There is too much 
at stake. I never knew an idle man to be converted, 


42 SOWING AND REAPING 


————e 


Until he wakes up and realizes his lost and hopeless 
sondition, God Almighty will not reach down and 
take him by the hand. A ship was once in great 
danger at sea, and all but one man were on their 
knees. They called to him to come and join them 
‘n prayer, but he replied: 

“Not I; it’s your business to look after the ship. 
(’m only a passenger.”’ 

Remember that mere knowledge is not enough. 
Many a man knows the gospel precepts and promises 
by heart who is not touched by saving grace. 
Knowledge is often useless or positively harmful, and 
what we want is to know God’s will and observe it. 
Even good resolutions are not enough. No doubt 
they are helpful in their way, but the Bible does not 
lead us to believe that they can save a man. It does 
not say: “As many as resolved to recetve Him, to 
them gave He power to become the sons of God, even 
to them that resolve to believe on His name”; it says: 
“As many as rececved Him * * * 6eleve on His 
name.” 

Be watchful! There is constant need to be on 
guard lest we fall intosin. “ Set a double guard upon 
that point to-night,’’ was the commana of a prudent 
officer when an attack was expected. At the best there 
will be some tares among the wheat. We, all of us, 
carry around with us material that Satan can work on. 
Paul said: 

“For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh). 


SOWING AND REAPING lit 


— 


dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; 
but how to perform that whichis good I findnot. For 
the good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I 
would not, that Ido. Now if Ido that I would not, it 
is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. 
I find then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is 
present with me. For I delight in the law of God 
after the inward man: but I see another law in my 
members, warring against the law of my mind, and 
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in 
my members. O wretched man that I am! who shall 
deliver me from the body of this death ?”’ 

Blessed be God, he could add: “I thank God 
through Jesus Christ our Lord.” 

The issue that God has placed before us is clear- 
cut: ‘“ He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see 
life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.” There 
is no middle course—“ he that believeth ”—“ he that 
believeth not.’’ He leaves us to choose, and the re- 
sponsibility rests upon ourselves. 

It may cost you many-a sacrifice, and wrench many 
a heart-string to choose an,.1t, but I plead with you 
to take the decisive step now. The salvation of your 
soul outweighs all other considerations. Will you 
imperil your eternity for the sake of some present gain 
or pleasure? Bow your head and say: “ Heavenly 
Father, I now choose to come unto Thee as a poor, 
suppliant sinner. I believe on Thy Son, whom Thon 


i14 SOWING AND REAPING 


—— 


didst send to be my Savior; and trusting in the merits 
of His blood, which was shed as a propitiation for my 
sins, I rest in the assurance of sins forgiven.” 

There is hope for the vilest sinner. Wherever weeds 
grow, there is the possibility of good seed growing. 
The greater your need, the more welcome will you be 
to Jesus. The proud and the self-confident He know- 
eth afar off, but the faintest whisper of the contrite 
sinner commands His attention. 

Our Lord gave us a simple test to help us in our 
choice. He said, “ Every tree is known by its fruit. 
A good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit, neither 
doth a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.”” Many of 
us have not the time or ability to unravel intricate 
arguments, or grasp profound doctrines. Certain 
phases of truth are often inaccessible to the ordinary 
mind. But the test Christ gave is short and practical, 
and within the reach of any one of us. 

“Have you ever heard the gospel?” asked a mis- 
sionary of a Chinaman, whom he had not.seen in his 
mission before. 

“No,” he replied, “ but I have seen it. I knowa 
man who used to be the terror of his neighborhood. 
He was a bad opium smoker and dangerous as a wild 
beast; but he became wholly changed. He is now 
gentle and good and has left off opium.”’ 

Apply this test to infidelity. What are its fruits? 
Crime follows in its track. Society becomes dis- 
organized. Chastity, honesty and the other virtues 
are undermined. The whole life ts blighted. 


SOWING AND REAPING 115 


The following brief extract from a letter written in an 
English prison, is a tremendous arraignment of that 
system of belief which does not acknowledge God: 

“JY am one of thirteen infidels. Where are my 
friends? Four have been hanged. One became a 
Christian. Six have been sentenced to various terms 
of imprisonmont, and one is nowconfined in a cell 
just over my head, sentenced to imprisonment for 
lige.” 

With all reverence we may apply this text to our 
Lord Himself. We have His own authority for it. On 
one occasion when the jews cavilled at His actions, 
He said: “The works which the Father hath given 
me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of 
me, that the Father hath sent me.” On another 
occasion they gathered round Himand asked, “ How 
long dost thou hold us in suspense? If thou be the 
Christ, tell us plainly.” Jesus answered: “I told 
you, and ye believed not. The works that I do in my 
Father’s name, they bear witness of me. * * * If I 
do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But 
if I do, though you believe not me, believe the works: 
that ye may know and believe that the Father is in 
me, and] in Him.” Well might the ruler Nicodemus 
say, “ Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come 
from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou 
doest, except God be with him.” And Peter: “ Ye 
men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a 
man approved of God among you by miracles and 


116 SOWING AND REAPING 


wonders and signs, which God did by Him in the midst 
af you, as ye yourselves know.” 

What are the fruits of extravagance, of pride, of 
covetousness? And on the other hand, of prayer, of 
fearing God and doing His commandments? What 
are the fruits of heathenism? Look at Africa and 
China and India and the islands of the seas with their 
gods of wood and stone. What must be the intelli- 
gence and moral sense of people who will worship 
such things? | 

Even the best of non-Christian religions must always 
prove a failure. It cannot be denied that many of the 
highest virtues are enjoined in the writings of heathen 
philosophers. How could it be otherwise? Morality is 
universal as humanity, and it is only to be expected 
that here and there some thinker should pierce beyond 
the average and read deeper into the foundation-truths 
of ethics. This fact only proves, in my mind, the 
intimate connection between the human and the 
divine. Christianity never claimed to introduce a 
brand-new system of morality. 

Referring to another matter, Christ said: ‘Think 
not that I am come to destroy the law and the 
prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to ful- 
fill.’ And so the fulness and perfection of His own 
system could not fail to embrace many principles 
that had already appeared in heathen morality. But 
in the hands of our Savior they became broader and 
brighter and fuller of power and meaning. 


SOWING AND REAPING 11? 

Will these non-Christian religions bear the test ? 
Stoicism was perhaps the noblest of the Greek philoso- 
phies, but it rapidly developed into utter cynicism, 
and culminated in the asserted impossibility of attain- 
ing to virtue. Epicureanism started out fairly well, 
but its founder was not dead before it earned for itself 
the opprobrious epithet that it was a doctrine worthy 
only of swine. Look at Buddhism, with its filthy 
ceremonies and cruel tortures. All these systems ex- 
hibit a conflict between theory and practice. They 
failed in their object, because they approached the 
difficulty on the wrong side. They trimmed away at 
the branch, not recognizing that the tree was rotten 
at heart. 

Christianity alone will stand the test of raising 
man out of the pit. And how does it propose 
to doit? Not by minimizing the danger and need. 
It says: “ The whole head is sick, and the whole 
heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the 
head there is no soundness in it; but wounds and 
bruises and putrefying sores.”” It demands as ‘the 
first necessity a new birth, regeneration by the Holy 
Spirit. ‘“ Ye musT be born again.” It does not place 
sanctification before justification, but having first im- 
parted life from above, it throws around the redeemed 

sinner the love of Christ and the fellowship and guid- 
~ ance of the Holy Spirit. 

A converted Chinaman once said: “I was down 
in a deep pit, half sunk in the mire, crying for some 


= 


418 SOWING AND REAPING 


one to help me out. As I looked up I saw a verteér- 
able, yrayhaired man looking down at me. 

‘ly son,’ he said, ‘this is a dreadful place.’ 
ves,’ I answered, ‘I fell into it; can’t you help 
me out ?’ 

‘““ «My son,’ was his reply, ‘I am Confucius. If 
you had read my books and followed what they taught, 
you would never have been here.’ 

“«Yes, father,’ I said, ‘but can’t you help me 
out ?’ 

“As I looked he was gone. Soon I saw another 
form approaching, and another man bent over me, 
this time with closed eyes and folded arms. He 
seemed to be looking to some far-off place. 

““ «My son,’ Buddha said, ‘just close your eyes and 
fold your arms, and forget all about yourself. Get 
into a state of rest. Don’t think about anything that 
can disturb. Get so still that nothing can move you. 
Then, my child, you will be in such delicious rest as 
arin. 

“ «Yes, father,’ I answered, ‘I will when I am 
above ground. Can’t you help meout?’ But Buddha, 
too, was gone. 

“ T was just beginning to sink into despair when I 
saw another figure above me, different from the 
others. There were marks of suffering on His face. 
I cried out to Him: 

“<Q, Father! can you help me?’ 

* «My child,’ He said, ‘ what is the matter ?’ 


SOWING AND REAPING 113 

“ Before I could answer Him, He was down in the 
mire by my side. He folded His arms about me and 
lifted me up; then He fed me and-rested me. When 
I was well He did not say: ‘Now, don’t do that 
avain,’ but He said: ‘We will walk on together 
now’; and we have been walking together until this 
day. 

This was a poor Chinaman’s way of telling of the 
compassionate love and help of the Lord Jesus. 

I was reading, some time ago, of a young man who 
had just come out of a saloon, and had mounted his 
horse. As a certain deacon passed on his way to 
church, he followed and said, 

“ Deacon, can you tell me how far it is to hell?” 

The deacon’s heart was pained to think that a 
young man like that should talk so lightly ; he passed 
on and said nothing. When hecame round the corner 
. to the church, he found that the horse had thrown 
that young man, and he was dead. So you may be 
nearer the Judgment than you think. 

When I was in Switzerland many years ago, I 
learned some solemn lessons about the suddenness 
with which death may overtake us. I saw several 
places where land-slides had occurred, completely de- 
stroying whole villages; or where avalanches had 
swept down the mountain sides, leaving Jestruction in 
their wake. A terrible calamitv happened in the year 
1806 to a village, called Goldau, situated in a fertile 
valley at the foot of the Rossberg mountan. The 


120 SOWING AND REAPING 


season had been unusually wet, and this had made 
the crops all the more abundant. 

Early one morning a ycung peasant, passing the 
cottage of an old man whom he knew, saw him sit- 
ting at the door in the full rays of the sun. 

“Good morning, neighbor,” said he; “ we are 
likely to have a fine day.” 

‘Time we should have a fine day,” growled the old 
man; “it has been wet enough lately.” 

“Have you heard the report?” said the other. 
“ Those who were up the earliest this morning declare 
they saw the top of old Rossberg move.” 

“Indeed ! like enough,” said the old man. - “ Mark 
my words, and I have often said it before; I shan’t live 
to see it, but those who are now young will not live to 
be as old as I am before the top of yonder mountain 
lies at its foot.”’ 

“I hope it will not be in my day,” said the young 
man; and he passed on, little thinking how near the 
prediction was to a fulfilment, and that the ripening 
fields of corn and the abundant clusters of luscious 
grapes would never be gathered; but so it was. 

The springs of water in the mountain had been 
evercharged by the excessive rains, and these, in forc- 
ing their way to the surface and toward the valley 
below, had loosened the masses of rounded rock 
which had been cemented together by a kind of clay. 
of which material the upper part of the rmountain 
was formed. These huge masses at length gave way 


SOWING AND REAPING 12} 


and fell headlong into the valley, burying the entire 
village and about eight hundred of its inhabitants be- 
neath their weight. 

But what became of the old man? Alas! he did 
not escape. He believed the mountain would fall, but 
he did not think the fall was so near. He was sitting 
in his cottage, composedly smoking his pipe, when the 
young man came hastily back, and crying owt: 

“ The mountain ts falling |” 

The old man composedly rose from his seat, louked 
out at his door, and saying: 

‘“T shall have time to fill my pipe again,’”’ went back 
into his house. 

The young man was saved. The old man perished 
before he had left his cottage, it and its owner were 
crushed, and swept to the bottom of the valley. 

I was in the north of England, in 1881, when a fear- 
ful storm swept over that part of the country. A friend 
of mine, who was a minister at Eyemouth, had a great 
many of the fishermen of the place in his congregation. 
It had been very stormy weather, and the fishermen 
had been detained in the harbor fora week. One day, 
however, the sun shone out in a clear blue sky; it 
seemed as if the storm had passed away, and the boats 
starx_{ out for the fishing-ground. Forty-one boats 
left the harbor that day. Before they started, the 
harbor-master hoisted the storm signal, and warned 
them of the coming tempest. He begged of them not 
to go; but they disregarded his warning, and away they 


i) SOWING AND REAPING 


ince 


went. They saw no sign of the coming storm. Ina 
few hours, however, it swept down on that coast, and 
very few of those fishermen returned. There were five 
or six men in each boat, and nearly all were lost in 
that dreadful gale. In the church of which my friend 
was pastor, I believe there were three male members 
left. 

Those men were ushered into eternity because they 
did not give heed to the warning. I lift up the storm- 
signal now, and warn you to escape from the coming 
judgment! 

There was a man living near one of the great trunk 
roads a number of years ago, who one night saw that 
a landside had obstructed the track. He saw by the 
clock that he hadn’t time to reach the telegraph office 
to stop the night express, so he caught up a lantern 
and started up the track, thinking he might be in time 
to stop the train. As he ran he fell and put out his 
light. He hadn’t another match, and he could hear 
the train coming in the distance. He didn’t know 
what to do. As a last resort he stood on the bank, 
and the moment the train come abreast of him he 
hurled the lantern with all his might at the engineer. 
The engineer saw that something must be wrong, took 
the warning, whistled down the brakes, and stopped 
the train within a few yards of the obstruction. 

I throw the broken lantern at your feet now! I beg 
you to take warning, make a clear work of sin, cost 
what it may. Take warning! You must either give 


SOWING AND REAPING 128 


4p sin, or give up the hope of heaven. Put yoursclf 
in the way of being blessed. Make up your mind now 
that by the grace of God you will obtain the mastery. 


“ Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unright- 
eous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the 
Tord, and He will have mercy upon him; and to our 
wwod, for he will abundantly pardon.” 


Weighed and Wanting. 
Men of the Bible. 
Bible Characters. 
Select Sermons, 
Moody’s Anecdotes. 
The Overcoming Life. 
The Way to God, 
Thoughts for the Quiet 
Hour. 
Moody’s Latest Sermons 
Short Talks by D. L. 
Moody. 
Pleasure and Profit ia 
Bible Study. 
Sowing and Reaping. 
Heaven. 
Moody’s Stories. 
To the Work! 
Sovereign Grace. 
Prevailing Prayer. 
Secret Power, 


The above eighteen volumes 
are all by D. L. Moody, 
andare published as ‘‘The 
Moody Library,” in boxed 
set, net, $5.40. 


THE RED LIBRARY 


16M0O, CLOTH, EACH, NET, 30 CTS. 


The True Estimate of 
Life. 


By G. CAMPBELL MorGAN., 


All of Grace. 
By C. H. Spurceon. 


According to Promise. 
By C. H. SpurGEON. 
John Ploughman’s 
Talks, 
By C. H. SpurGEon, 


John Ploughman’s 
Pictures. 
By C. H. SpurGEon, 


Good Tidings. 
Recitation Poems. 
The Way of Life. 


Tales of Adventure 
from the Old Book. 


Resurrection. 


Select Poems for 
Silent Hour, 


Up from Sin. 
The Revival of a Dead 


Church. 


the 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 
CHICAGO NEW YORK TORONTO 
PUBLISHERS OF EVANGELICAL LITERATURE 


Ce 


PRACTICAL CHRISTIANITY 


4 


HAROLD BEGBIE 
Twice-Born Men 


A Clinic in Regeneration. 

12mo, cloth, net $1.25. 

_A footnote in narrative to Prof. Wm. James’ “The 
Varieties 3f Religious Experience.” 

_ Studies in the phenomena of conversion from the stand- 
point of the student of human nature. 

Prof, William James, of Harvard: “Mr. Begbie’s book is 

a wonderful set of stories splendidly worked up. It certainly 
needs no preface from me. JI might as well call my book a 
foot-note to his. J am proud of the dedication and of the 
references and I wish the book a great success.” 

.. Prof. George A. Coe, of Union Theological Seminary: “I 
like the hook greatly. It gives concrete data and that is 
what both the psychologist and religionist needs. As I read, 
I found myself marking the margins and singling out pass- 
ages for m3 own scientific use.” 


JAMES I. VANCE 


Tendency: The Effect of Trend and Drift 
in the Development of Life. 


Net $1.25. 

A series of discussions of formative influences in char- 
acter construction, from a practical and sympathetic stand- 
point. Dr. Vance’s work among young men enables him 
to speak authoritatively. To this he adds insight and sym- 


pathy. 
SIR_ JOSEPH COMPTON-RICKETT 
Origins and Faith 


8vo, cloth, net $1.50. 

A series of essays, philosophical and theological, written 
by this eminent statesman and layman on the fundamentals 
of belief. Jt is a frank examination and apologetic for 
Christianity, by one who is well known now as the author of 
the erstwhile anonymous books ‘‘The Christ That is to Be’’ 
and “Pro Christo et Ecclesia.” 


EDWIN F. HALLENBECK 
The Passion for Men 


16mo, cloth. net 4oc. 
A series of straightforward talks on the imperative duty 
of soul winning, by the recent associate pastor of the Fifth 
Avenue Presbyterian Church, New York. 


ESSAYS, ADDRESSES, Etc. 


— a 
— 


CHARLES F. AKED 
The Lord’s Prayer 


Its Meaning and Message To-day. Net $1.00. 


A series of seven sermons on the Lord’s Prayer showing 
the aptness of the requests to present day life. It is de- 
votional and expository and stimulating, but not exegetical 
nor technical. The application to modern conditions is ex- 
ceptionally good. 


J. REID HOWATT 
The Next Life 


Light on the Worlds Beyond. 12mo, cloth, net $1.00. 


A very practical discussion of the question of life be- 
yond the grave—what can be argued for it from life and a 
very dispassionate examination of what the scripture has 
to say on the subject without reference to traditional theories 
concerning it. It will be found a most helpful and reassur- 
Ane book, and will be welcomed by all who honestly seek 
ight. 


R. A. TORREY 
The Holy Spirit 


As Revealed in the Scriptures ana in Personal Experience. 
12mo, cloth, net $1.00 


Dr, Torrey hrs already written upon this theme, but 
never so fully as in this new volume. It will prove one of 
the author’s niost important contributions of devotional study. 


JAMES M. BUCKLEY 


The Wrong and Peril of Woman 
Suffrage 12mo, cloth, net 75c. 


‘Dedicated to men and women who look before they 


€ 
leap.’ 
“Dr. Buckley is dispassionate, calm and sane. He pre- 


sents it permanent form some of the most logical thoughts 
in opposition to*the clamor for suffrage.’’—Detroit Free Press. 


W.L. WATKINSON 
The Fatal Barter and Other Sermons 


Izmo, vioth, net $r.oo. 


Another volume of sermons by the ‘preachers’ preacher” 
along the lines he has made so distinctly his own; rich in 
illustration and quotation and both refreshing and illuminat 
ing. 


THE BLES &hb 
LIFE SERIES 


By THE REv. IXEY WoORDS or 


18M B. MEYER, BA. 


THER INNER LiFp 


CALVARY TO PEN= 
TECOST 


THH SHEPHERD 


PSALM. 


CHRISTIAN LIVING 


By THE REV. 
ANDREW 
MURRAY 


THE PRESENT 


TENSES OF THE 


BLESSED LIFE IIUMILITY 


I3n DicReEHKCT 


THEH FUTURE 
TENSES OF THR 


LET Us DRAW 


BLESSED LIFH 


NIGH t 


THROUGH FIRE 


WuHuy Do You Nor 


AND FLOOD 


BELIEVE? 


THE GLORIOUS 18mo, decorated cloth, each, 


3O cents, 


LorpD 


FLEMING II. REVELL COMPANY. 
CHICAGO NEW YORE TORCNTO 
PUBLISHERS OF EVANGELICAL LITERATURE 


