AL  [AW 


J  W<  ■ 


IN   THE 


URAL  Y^ORLD 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 

Straws 

©iptp.       _  yopgrig|i  f  o- 

Shelf ..JjL.%. 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


SPIRITUAL  LAW 


IN 


THE  NATURAL  WORLD: 


AN   ATTEMPT 
TO  DEVELOP,  ACCORDING  TO  SCRIPTURE-TRUTH, 


THE  IHTERP^ETATIOH  OF  N/TUl^E. 

BY  F.  W.  GRANT. 


'  But  ask,  now,  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach  thee ;  and  the  fowls' 

of  the  air,  and  they  shall  tell  thee ;  or  speak  to  the  earth, 

and  it  shall  teach  thee ;  and  the  fishes  of  the  sea 

shall  declare  unto  thee."  (Job  xii.  7, 8.) 


w  14  n 

NEW  YORK  : 
LOIZEAUX  BROTHERS,   PUBLISHERS, 

63  FOURTH  AVENUE. 


V 


\  %  ^v 


v* 


Gr* 


Copyright,  1891. 
By  Loizeaux  Brothers 


THE   BiBLE   TRUTH    PRESS,    C3    FOURTH    AVJ 


LC   Control   Number 


tmp96      027057 


CONTENTS. 


Page. 

Introduction 7 

Chap.     I. — The  Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knowledge.  17 

II._God's  Twofold  Witness 32 

III. — Nature  in  Scripture 39 

IV. — Natural  Mathematics 45 

V. — Spiritual  Mathematics 51 

VI. — Tones  and  Undertones ; 71 

VII.— The  Kingdoms  of  Nature 92 

VIII. — Animal  and  Human 101 

IX. — Classification 114 

X. — Among  the  Creatures 139 

XI. — Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle 167 


PKEFACE. 


THE  title  of  this  book  will  assure  the  reader  that 
its  subject,  at  least,  is  one  of  great  importance. 
It  is,  however  brief,  a  connected  argument  in 
behalf  of  the  positions,  first,  that  Nature  is,  in  its 
every  detail,  a  witness  for  God ;  secondly,  that  its 
teaching  is  symbolic,  as  largely  the  Old  Testament 
also,  the  first  written  revelation,  is  known  to  be; 
thirdly,  that  it  needs,  therefore,  an  interpreter,  as  it  is 
contrary  to  all  rules  of  hermeneutics  that  parables 
should  define  doctrine;  fourthly,  that  Scripture  must 
therefore  be  the  interpreter  of  Nature,  and  not  the 
reverse ;  fifthly,  that  if  Nature  be  indeed  a  witness  to 
God  and  yet  its  witness  be  of  this  character,  the 
thought  that  Scripture  is  not  intended  to  teach 
science  must  be  very  guardedly  applied. 

After  this,  the  way  being  opened  for  an  unpreju- 
diced appeal  to  it,  it  is  sought  to  show  that  there  is  in 
Nature,  as  in  Scripture,  a  numerical  system,  which, 
as  interpreted  by  Scripture,  speaks  with  no  uncertain 
sound  of  its  true  meaning, — mapping  out  its  divisions, 
defining  the  relation  of  one  to  another  and  to  the 
whole,  while  demonstrating  that  spiritual  law  reigns 
everywhere  in  the  natural  world,  and  that  Nature  not 
only  witnesses  to  God,  but  definitely  to  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  the  truth  of 
Scripture. 


6  Preface. 

As  to  the  result,  it  is  only  so  startling  as  on  that 
very  account  to  produce  a  feeling  of  incredulity  in 
most  minds.  It  is  as  if  one  should  claim  to  have  dis- 
covered a  manuscript  of  Aristotle,  and  should  produce 
something  written  in  good  modern  English.  Having 
myself  felt  the  full  force  of  this,  I  can  sympathize 
with  those  who  feel  it.  The  cases  are  of  course  in  no 
wise  parallel,  and  the  remedy  will  be  found  in  a  more 
thorough  scrutiny  of  the  basis  of  the  argument. 
Being  founded  on  a  simple  comparison  of  only  the 
most  familiar  facts  in  nature  with  that  which  can  be 
fully  tested  by  Scripture,  and  where  every  fresh  ap- 
plication of  the  one  to  the  other  is  a  new  verification, 
the  proof  submits  itself  to  the  judgment  of  every 
ordinary  mind. 

May  He  whose  law  nature's  law  is  be  with  all  that 
is  of  Himself— which  is  all  that  is  of  any  value — in 
what  is  now  sent  forth ! 

F.   W.  GRANT. 

Plainfield,  N.  J. 

March  19th,  1891. 


SPIRITUAL  LAW  IN  THE  NATURAL  WORLD: 

AN  ATTEMPT  TO  DEVELOP,  ACCORDING  TO  SCRIPTURE-TRUTH, 

THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  NATURE, 


INTRODUCTION. 

THE  title  of  the  book  which  is  before  the  reader 
will  prepare  him  to  find  in  it  a  certain  sym- 
pathy with  a  recent  one,  widely  known,  yet 
at  the  same  time  with  a  difference  of  method  which 
probably  will  account  for  a  very  different  result. 
And  yet  Prof.  Drummond  has  actually  in  his  intro- 
duction anticipated  that  definition  of  the  truth  as 
to  the  "Natural"  to  which  by  the  adoption  of  it  I 
have  committed  myself  here.     "  After  all,"  he  says, 

"  the  true  greatness  of  Law  lies  in  its  vision  of  the  Un- 
seen. Law  in  the  visible  is  the  Invisible  in  the  visible. 
And  to  speak  of  Laws  as  natural  is  to  define  them  in  their 
application  to  a  part  of  the  universe,  the  sense-part,  where- 
as a  wider  survey  would  lead  us  to  regard  all  Law  as  es- 
sentially spiritual.  To  magnify  the  laws  of  nature,  as 
laws  of  this  small  world  of  ours,  is  to  take  a  provincial 
view  of  the  universe.  Law  is  great,  not  because  the  phe- 
nomenal world  is  great,  but  because  these  vanishing  lines 
are  the  avenues  into  the  eternal  Order." 


8       Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

And  he  adds  further  on, — 

"How  the  priority  of  the  Spiritual  improves  the 
strength  and  meaning  of  the  whole  argument  will  be  seen 
at  once.  The  lines  of  the  Spiritual  existed  first,  and  it 
was  natural  to  expect  that  when  '  the  Intelligence  resident 
in  the  Unseen  '  proceeded  to  frame  the  material  universe, 
He  should  go  upon  the  lines  already  laid  down.  He  would, 
in  short,  simply  project  the  higher  laws  downward,  so 
that  the  natural  world  would  become  an  incarnation,  a 
visible  representation,  a  working  model  of  the  spiritual. 
The  whole  (?)  function  of  the  material  world  lies  here." 

Now  this  is  in.  the  main  so  true  and  good,  that 
one  might  wonder  that  the  author  should  after  all 
prefer  for  his  book  the  title  of  "Natural  Law  in  the 
Spiritual  World  "  rather  than  the  converse.  The 
fact  is  evidently  that  he  takes  the  two  propositions 
as  identical  ;  and  why  not,  if  natural  law  is  but 
spiritual  law  projected  downward  into  nature  ?  This 
really  spiritual  law  must  then,  of  course,  exist  in  the 
spiritual  world  !  Yet  it  is  no  wonder  if  he  is  a  little 
puzzled  about  the  limits  and  spirituality  of  the  law 
of  gravitation  !  Without  insisting  too  much  on  this, 
it  is  evident  that  the  title  he  has  chosen  implies  a 
method,  no  less  than  that  of  following  the  "  vanish- 
ing lines"  of  the  seen  into  the  unseen.  An  ambi- 
tious attempt  certainly  !  My  own  is  humbler  ;  and 
for  me  at  least  I  feel  safer.  His  method  is  to  take 
nature  to  interpret  Scripture;  and  I  fear  we  must 
even  say,  to  supplement  it.     On  my  part,  with  no 


Introduction.  9 

courage  but  such  as  the  child's  gained  from  the 
grasp  of  his  father's  hand,  I  can  only  seek  in  the 
light  of  Scripture  to  interpret  nature. 

Lest  I  should  be  thought  to  misconceive  Prof. 
Drummond  here, — a  thing  very  possible  to  anyr 
and  of  which  I  would  desire  to  remember  the  possi- 
bility,— I  shall  let  him  speak  for  himself,  and  as  his 
book  is  in  so  many  hands,  it  will  be  abundantly  easy 
to  verify  the  quotations.  At  the  very  outset  indeed 
he  tells  us  in  his  preface  expressly,  that  when  with 
him  "the  subject-matter  Religion  had  taken  on  the 
method  of  the  expression  of  Science,  and  I  discov- 
ered myself,"  he  says,  "enunciating  Spiritual  Law 
in  the  exact  terms  of  Biology  and  Physics,"  that 
"this  was  not  simply  a  scientific  coloring  given 
to  Religion,  the  mere  freshening  of  the  theological 
air  with  natural  facts  and  illustrations.  It  was  an 
entire  re-casting  of  truth.  My  spiritual  world  be- 
fore was  a  chaos  of  facts.  ...  It  was  the  one 
region  still  unpossessed  by  law.  I  saw  then  why 
men  of  science  distrust  theology  ;  why  those  who 
learn  to  look  upon  law  as  authority  grow  cold  to  it 
— it  was  the  great  Exception." 

It  is  true  that  he  has  said  just  before  this,  "I 
make  no  charge  against  theology  in  general.  I 
speak  of  my  own."  But  he  must  have  forgotten 
this  before  completing  the  paragraph  :  for  surely  it 
was  not  his  theology  only  that  he  says  the  men  of 


io      Spiritual  Law  in  tJie  Natural  World. 

science  distrusted,  nor  indeed  any  particular  the- 
ology, but  theology  as  a  whole.  And  this  distrust, 
he  tells  us,  is  chargeable,  not  to  any  thing  in  the 
men  of  science,  but  distinctly  to  theology  itself. 

While  his  spiritual  world  was  thus  a  chaos,  nature 
alone  appeared  to  him  firm  : — 

"  And  the  reason  is  palpable.  No  man  can  study  modern 
science  without  a  change  coming  over  his  view  of  truth. 
What  impresses  him  about  nature  is  its  solidity.  He  is 
there  standing  upon  actual  things,  among  fixed  laws." 
"  There  is  a  sense  of  solidity  about  a  law  of  nature,  which 
belongs  to  nothing  else  in  the  wrorld.  Here  at  last,  amid 
all  that  is  shifting,  is  one  thing  sure,  .  .  .  one  thing  that 
holds  its  way  tome  eternally,  uncorrupted  andundefiled." 
"  In  these  laws  one  stands  face  to  face  with  truth,  solid 
and  unchangeable. " 

This  is  plain  speaking  ;  and  surely  in  the  presence 
of  authority  such  as  this,  it  becomes  theology  to 
offer  her  neck  meekly  to  the  yoke,  and  accept  her 
master  :  every  natural  law  is  that !  But  when  she 
asks  humbly  to  be  shown  these  laws,  it  is  somewhat 
disappointing  to  be  told, — 

"The  laws  of  nature  are  simply  the  orderly  condition  of 
things  in  nature,  what  is  found  in  nature  by  a  sufficient 
number  of  competent  observers.  What  these  laws  are  in 
themselves  is  not  agreed.  That  they  have  any  absolute 
existence  even  is  far  from  certain  "  ! ! 

One  would  have  thought  that  here  there  might 
be  some  hope  of  escape  for  theology  after  all,  if  the 


Introduction.  1 1 

last  be  true  ;  but  the  first  sentence  was  evidently 
intended  to  cut  off  the  hope.  A  ''sufficient"  num- 
ber of  " competent"  observers  have,  we  suppose, 
undertaken  the  government  for  the  unseen  authori- 
ties and  are  themselves,  no  doubt,  authority  enough. 
What  observers  are  "  competent,"  and  how  many 
of  these  are  "  sufficient,"  would,  after  all,  perhaps, 
be  relevant  questions  still ;  but  they  are  unan- 
swered. Probably  this  reserve  is  to  increase  our 
respect  for  the  authorities,  a  thing  which  proverbi- 
ally, familiarity  does  not  always  do. 

This  government,  strange  to  say,  is  a  very 
modern  one.  Nature's  voice,  it  seems,  has  hither- 
to been  "muffled." 

M  But  now  that  science  has  made  the  world  around  articu- 
late, it  speaks  to  religion  with  a  twofold  purpose.  In  the 
first  place,  it  offers  to  corroborate  theology ;  in  the  second, 
to  purify  it." 

The  last  should  be  first  evidently  :  it  must  purify 
it  first,  or  else  in  the  nature  of  things  it  cannot  cor- 
roborate it.  It  is  only  the  revised  religion  that  it 
can  confirm ;  and  to  submit  to  be  revised  is  the 
first  necessity  for  confirmation.     Yea, — 

"and  while  there  are  some  departments  of  theology 
where  its  jurisdiction  cannot  be  sought,  there  are  others 
in  which  nature  may  have  to  define  the  contents  as  well  as 
the  limits  of  belief." 

Practically,  the  obedient  subjects  of  such  authority 


12      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

"  must  oppose  with  every  energy  they  possess  what  seems 
to  them  to  oppose  the  eternal  course  of  things/ ' 

Doubtless,  so  taught,  they  will  throw  sufficient 
energy  into  the  opposition.  And  no  wonder  if  by 
this  process  there  should  be  in  result  "  an  entire  re- 
casting of  truth."  "  The  old  ground  of  faith,  au- 
thority," he  says,  "is  given  up."  Yet  what  else  is 
the  testimony  of  a  "  sufficient  number  of  competent 
observers  "  ?  Is  it  impossible  that  Scripture,  with 
its  innumerable  lines  of  proof — "  many  infallible 
proofs  "  (Acts  i.  3,) — should  be  equally  trustworthy  ? 

Note  that  through  all  these  quotations  Scripture 
is  not  suffered  to  appear.  We  hear  of  Theology 
and  Religion,  the  last  a  term  vague  enough  to  be 
applied  to  the  worship  of  a  fetish  or  a  crocodile, 
the  former  an  extract  of  some  kind  from  Scripture, 
or  presumed  to  be  so,  but  in  the  form  given  it  by 
human  minds.  As  such  this  is  necessarily  fallible, 
— as  fallible  as  "  a  sufficient  number  of  competent 
(natural)  observers," — and  being  fallible,  can  be 
opposed  to  the  solidity  of  laws  of  nature,  without  its 
being  clear  that  in  fact  what  represents  these  laws 
of  nature  is  an  "-ology  "  as  much  as  the  other, — an 
extract  distilled  through  human  minds.  How  enor- 
mous is  the  blunder  here  !  Let  a  man  say,  if  he 
will,  that  Scripture  is  fallible,  but  man's  science  not, 
we  know  what  that  means  :  it  is  honest  and  straight- 
forward.    If  it  be   really  only  theology  that  is  in 


Introduction.  1 3 

question,  it  is  simple  enough  that  theology  may  be  as 
much  at  war  with  nature,  as  science  so-called  with 
Scripture.  There  is  nothing  very  brilliant  or  calcu- 
lated to  provoke  comment  in  so  trite  an  observation. 
Eloquent  as  the  Edinburgh  professor  is,  and  captiv- 
ating as  his  book  surely  is, — captivating  for  many  by 
the  truth  that  undoubtedly  is  in  it, — the  error  of  his 
method  manifests  itself  in  result  unmistakably.  And 
it  is  not  hard  to  judge  either  how  far  any  true 
science  is  from  justifying  his  results.  We  will  leave 
now  his  introduction,  from  which  we  have  hitherto 
quoted  almost  exclusively,  and  take  in  evidence  but 
two  or  three  passages  from  the  body  of  the  book. 
Here  is  a  very  positive  statement  from  his  paper  on 
"Conformity  to  Type"  (p.  297): — 

"We  should  be  forsaking  the  lines  of  nature  were  we 
to  imagine  for  a  moment  that  the  new  creation  was  to  be 
formed  out  of  nothing.  Ex  nihilo  nihil — nothing  can  be 
made  out  of  nothing.  Matter  is  uncreatable  and  indestruc- 
tible ;  nature  and  man  can  only  form  and  transform.' ' 

Notice  that  he  is  talking  here  of  new  creation — 
of  God's  work  in  the  soul.  And  yet  in  the  face  of 
this  he  quietly  says,  "matter  is  uncreatable."  Is 
then  this  new  creation  one  of  "  matter  "  ?  If  not, 
why  speak  of  this  ?  if  it  be,  then  that  which  Scrip- 
ture calls  creation  he  says  is  not  such  !  And  this 
must  be  held  if  we  would  not  forsake  the  lines  of 
nature!     "Nature  and   man   can   only   form    and 


14      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

transform."  Theology  certainly  never  taught  that 
nature  could  create:  does  science  teach  that  God 
cannot  ?  how  great,  to  be  sufficient,  must  the  number 
of  observers  be  to  prove  so  great  a  negative  ?  and 
what  observers  should  we  consider  " competent "  for 
this?  Is  this  not  a  wonderful  induction  from  the 
fact  that  it  is  not  in  man's  power  to  z//zcreate,  nor 
in  nature's  to  commit  suicide,  that  therefore  God 
cannot  create  ?  Is  it  not  rather  unspeakable  folly 
and  impiety,  let  who  will  be  guilty  of  it,  to  force 
nature  thus  into  blasphemous  revolt  against  her 
Maker  ?  Nay,  nature  will  not  be  forced  :  "  but  who 
art  thou,  O  man,  who  repliest  against  God  ? " 

Again,  in  his  paper  on  "  Eternal  Life,"  p.  236,  he 
quotes  approvingly  from  Reuss,  as  discovering  in 
the  apostle's  conception  of  life,  first, — 

"The  idea  of  a  real  existence,  an  existence  such  as  is 
proper  to  God  and  to  the  Word ;  an  imperishable  exist- 
ence— that  is  to  say,  not  subject  to  the  vicissitudes  and 
imperfections  of  this  finite  world.  This  primary  idea  is 
repeatedly  expressed,  at  least  in  a  negative  form ;  it  leads 
to  a  doctrine  of  immortality,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly, 
of  life,  far  surpassing  any  that  had  been  expressed  in  the 
formulas  of  the  current  philosophy  or  theology,  and  rest- 
ing on  conceptions  altogether  different.  In  fact  it  can 
dispense  both  with  the  philosophical  thesis  of  the  imma- 
teriality or  indestructibility  of  the  human  soul,  and  with 
the  theological  thesis  of  a  miraculous  corporeal  recon- 
struction of  our  person ;  theses,  the  first  of  which  is  alto- 


Introduction.  1 5 

g 'ether  foreign  to  the  religion  of  the  Bible,  and  the  second, 
absolutely  opposed  to  reason." 

Here  we  find  at  once  the  affirmation  of  the  ma- 
teriality of  the  soul,  and  the  denial  of  the  doctrine 
of  the  resurrection  :  with  the  last  of  which  the 
apostle  affirms  goes  overboard  the  entire  truth  of 
Christianity.  (1  Cor.  xv.  12-18.)  And  this  confirms 
the  worst  meaning  of  the  extract  made  before.  An- 
nihilation is  only  a  lesser  evil  accompanying  it,  and 
this  the  definition  of  eternal  life  which  he  accepts 
from  Herbert  Spencer  distinctly  corroborates,  for 
eternal  life  is  according  to  it  nothing  but  eternal 
material  existence,  and  the  whole  question  with 
Prof.  Drummond  in  his  essay  on  it  is,  how  to  escape 
extinction  at  death.  That  he  who  does  not  here  re- 
ceive eternal  life  must  become  extinct  without  a 
resurrection,  is  the  natural  corollary. 

One  more  extract  from  the  essay  on  "  Environ- 
ment "  (p.  281)  :— 

"  The  completion  of  life  is  now  a  supreme  question.  It 
is  important  to  observe  how  it  is  being  answered.  If  we 
ask  science  or  philosophy,  they  will  refer  us  to  evolution.' ' 

And  he  goes  on  to  speak  of  struggle  for  life,  etc., 
the  elements  of  the  most  extreme  Darwinian  form. 

Thus  it  is  plain  how  for  our  author  science  must 
purify  theology,  and  the  iron  yoke  which  we  are 
called  upon  thus  to  receive.  Yet  the  fascination 
even  for  Christians  of  a  book  that  contains  such 


1 6      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

things  is  a  proof  that  it  appeals  to  something  within 
us  which  needs  to  be  met,  and  that  it  contains  also 
truth  which  must  be  eliminated  from  the  error. 
Here  as  elsewhere  we  must,  as  God  by  Jeremiah 
warns  us,  "  take  forth  the  precious  from  the  vile," 
that  we  may  be  as  His  mouth.  (Jer.  xv.  19.)  The 
vitiation  of  the  conclusion  wTith  Prof.  Drummond 
may  be  plainly  traced  to  error  in  the  method.  That 
here  pursued  is,  as  will  at  once  be  seen,  entirely 
different.  I  accept  as  truth,  and  have  done  long 
before  his  book  appeared,  that  the  natural  world  is, 
in  the  whole  of  it,  as  it  were,  an  incarnation,  a 
visible  representation  of  spiritual  things.  Nature 
I  accept  as  I  do  Scripture  as  a  witness  for  God  of 
the  most  precious  kind.  But  here  Scripture  it  is, 
not  nature,  that  is  decisively  His  revelation.  By 
His  Word  alone  can  we  rightly  understand  His 
works  ;  and  here  we  have  a  most  fruitful  principle, 
which  needs  only  fully  to  be  believed  and  followed, 
to  show  how  fruitf.ul  and  valuable  it  is.  But,  first, 
it  needs — and  it  is  strange  that  it  should  need, 
among  any  who  accept  Scripture  as  of  God, — to  be 
clearly  stated,  and  justified  from  suspicion,  before 
we  look  at  the  results  to  which  we  shall  be  led  by  it. 


*7 


CHAPTER  I. 

Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knowledge. 

OUR  method  at  least  is  a  very  simple  one.  It  is 
to  appeal  to  Scripture  freely,  and  in  the  first 
place,  seeking  to  use  it  according  to  its  full 
value,  in  faith  that  it  has  the  highest  possible  value ; 
in  short,  that  upon  whatever  it  may  speak,  it  will 
give  us,  as  the  Word  of  God  must,  truth  without 
any  mixture  of  error,  truth  that  will  bear  the  utmost 
scrutiny,  and  stand  every  possible  test.  It  would 
be  a  grand  thing,  would  it  not  ?  to  have  such  a 
standard  of  appeal,  if  it  could  only  be  proved  that 
we  have  such  !  Yes,  indeed,  if  it  could  be  proved  ! 
But  has  not  Prof.  Drummond  told  us,  "The  old 
ground  of  faith,  authority,  is  given  up"?  And  is 
not  this  appeal  considered  by  many  as  only  the 
refuge  of  weakness,  a  credulity  which  stultifies 
reason,  and  would  stop  the  onward  march  of  scien- 
tific achievement,  even  if  it  did  not  put  Galileo  once 
more  into  the  hands  of  the  inquisitors,  and  burn 
Giordano  Bruno  at  the  stake  ?  Of  the  last,  there  is 
perhaps  no  immediate  danger ;  but  it  is  plain  that, 
in  opposition  to  the  modern  one,  with  all  its  glory 
of  brilliant  discovery  upon  it,  the  method  we  are  to 


i3      Spiritual  Laiv  in  the  Natural  World. 

pursue  will  seem  antiquated,  worn  out,  with  none  of 
the  vital  energy  of  youth  in  it,  and  one  which  has 
been  losing  ground  for  long  continually  in  its 
conflict  with  the  scientific, — "  extinguished  theolo- 
gians/' so  it  has  been  told  us,  "  lying  about  the 
cradle  of  every  science  as  the  strangled  snakes 
beside  that  of  Hercules/'  Happily  for  the  theolo- 
gians, it  is  generally  found  that  the  precocious 
infants  get  to  be  of  milder  manners  after  they 
have  left  the  cradle,  or  no  doubt  the  race  would  be 
extinct. 

Is  the  old  ground  of  faith,  authority,  given  up  ? 
And  have  people  learnt,  with  Prof.  Huxley,  for  jus- 
tification by  faith  to  substitute  justification  by  veri- 
fication? Then,  if  the  verification  is  meant  to  be, 
as  of  course  it  should  be,  personal,  it  will  go  hard 
with  much  that  we  have  counted  knowledge.  How 
many  have  verified  for  themselves  the  leading  facts 
and  principles  of  any  one  of  the  sciences?  And  if, 
as  Mr.  Lewes  says,  and  as  we  all  know,  "the  psy- 
chological law  that  we  only  see  what  interests  us, 
and  only  assimilate  what  is  adapted  to  our  condi- 
tion, causes  the  mind  to  select  its  evidence,"  then 
what  hope  is  there  of  attaining  truth  by  means  of 
evidence  gathered  in  this  way  by  those  for  whose 
power  to  see  aright  it  is  wholly  impossible  to 
answer  ? 

Says  St.  George  Mivart :— 


Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knozuledge.       19 

"  Believers  have  been  warned,  usque  ad  nauseam,  that  a 
wish  to  believe  vitiates  all  their  arguments.  But  what 
weight  can  we  attach  to  conclusions  such  as  those,  e.g., 
of  Prof.  Huxley,  who  tells  us,  with  regard  to  the  doctrine 
of  Evolution,  the  position  of  complete  and  irreconcilable 
opposition  which  in  his  opinion  it  occupies  to  the  Church 
is  'one  of  Us  greatest  merits  in  my  eyes.'1  A  similar,  though 
less  striking,  theological  prejudice  is  also  exhibited  by 
Mr.  Darwin  himself.  He  tells  us  himself,  in  his  'Descent 
of  Man,'  that  in  his  'Origin  of  Species'  his^rs*  object  was 
'to  show  that  species  had  not  been  separately  created;' 
and  he  consoles  himself  for  admitted  error  by  the  reflec- 
tion that  '  I  have  at  least,  as  I  hope,  done  good  service  in 
aiding  to  overthrow  the  dogma  of  separate  creations.'  " 

If  others,  then,  are  to  verify  for  us  what  certainly 
we  cannot  all  verify  for  ourselves,  what  is  this  but 
the  bringing  back  again  of  " authority"  for  the 
mass,  and  the  establishment  of  a  board  of  directors 
only  instead  of  Scripture, — Huxley  and  Darwin 
instead  of  Peter  and  Paul  ?  But  why,  then,  the 
refusal  on  the  one  hand  of  what  they  contend  for 
on  the  other?  Is  it  even  sincere?  Nay,  does  not 
the  special  use  of  this  doctrine  of  verification 
appear  as  something  "  one  of  whose  greatest  merits  " 
is  that  it  shuts  off  even  inquiry  about  heaven  or 
hell  or  a  future  life,  things  which,  in  the  way  con- 
tended for,  nobody  can  verify? 

Every  one  that  cares  may  know  that  Prof.  Huxley 
puts  inquiries  of  this  kind  on  the  same  level  with 


20      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

"  lunar  politics,"  and  that  to  make  the  little  corner 
of  the  world  in  which  one  lives  a  little  less  miserable 
and  ignorant,  as  his  duty  is,  "it  is  necessary  to  be 
fully  possessed  of  only  two  beliefs :  the  first,  that  the 
order  of  nature  is  ascertainable  by  our  faculties  to 
an  extent  which  is  practically  unlimited;  the  second, 
that  our  volition  counts  for  something  as  a  condi- 
tion of  the  cause  of  events.  Each  of  these  beliefs," 
he  says,  "can  be  verified  experimentally,  as  often 
as  we  like  to  try."  Beyond  this,  he  conceives  we 
have  but  the  Maya  of  the  Buddhist — illusion.  And 
a  writer  in  The  Westminster  Review  generalizes  this 
as  the  conviction  of  the  scientific  man,  of  whom  he 
says,  "Above  all  things,  he  is  silent  in  the  presence 
of  truths  (or  falsehoods)  which  he  has  ascertained 
to  be  beyond  his  reach.  And  he  commands  equally, 
in  respect  of  these,  silence  on  all  others  of  mankind." 
Thus  it  is  very  clear  how  a  board  of  such  direct- 
ors would  extinguish  the  theologians.  And  the 
very  ignorance  as  to  all  that  it  imports  man  most 
to  know,  and  of  what  in  general  he  craves  most  to 
know,  that  very  ignorance  which  pleads  so  strongly 
for  the  need  (and  so  the  fact)  of  revelation,  is  made 
the  all-sufficient  argument  against  it.  The  learned 
scientists  of  the  agnostic  school — in  plain  English, 
the  school  of  ignorance — know,  by  reason  of  their 
oivn  ignorance,  that  while  all  other  instincts  are  pro- 
vided for,  this  one,  as  strong  as  any,  has  and  can 


Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knowledge.       21 

have  no  provision  made  for  it.  And  the  One  whom 
they  have  decreed  to  be  the  Unknowable,  by  that 
very  decree  they  declare  they  know  so  well  as  to 
know  that  He  cannot  (or  will  not)  reveal  Himself  to 
man  !  For  if  He  be  the  Unknown,  they  cannot  even 
pronounce  Him  the  Unknowable  ;  and  if  He  is  not 
the  Unknown,  then  the  Unknowable  He  cannot  be. 
Bat  are  faith  and  verification  really,  then,  so  far 
asunder?  Is  there  no  possibility  of  reconciliation 
between  the  two  ?  Must  the  most  absolute  faith 
even  be  credulity?  or  can  there  be  no  verification 
of  authority  itself,  so  as  to  justify  the  simplest  faith 
in  it?  How,  then,  are  we  to  verify  the  board  of 
directors?  though  indeed  we  are  ready  to  confess 
that  an  enigma  most  insoluble  to  the  most  thinking 
man.  But  in  the  case  of  revelation,  if  it  be  possible 
to  verify  this  as  the  word  of  God,  will  any  one  say 
that  God  is  to  be  trusted  only  so  far  as  we  can 
verify  His  word  as  true, — that  is,  not  so  much  as 
one  would  trust  a  man  of  the  most  ordinary  repute 
for  veracity  ? 

Scripture  does  surely  not  refuse  to  submit  itself 
(in  this  manner)  to  verification, — nay,  it  appeals  to 
it.  Who  can  be  so  credulous  as  to  believe  that  it 
requires  "blind"  faith,  or  would  be  honored  by  it? 
who  that  has  ever  read  it, — aye,  and  who  that  knows 
whereof  he  speaks  would  dare  to  affirm  that  its 
principal  proof  even  is  (according  to  Mr.  Huxley's 


22      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

sneer,)  that  its  "  verity  is  testified  by  portents  and 
wonders/'  when  its  solemn  attestation  is,  that  if 
men  "  believe  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither 
will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the 
dead"? 

Scripture  itself  is  in  fact  one  of  the  very  greatest 
"portents  and  wonders"  to  those  who  will  give  it 
that  patient  and  reverent  examination  which  its 
claim  demands.  And  for  this  it  offers  itself,  not 
merely  to  the  trained  man  of  science,  or  to  the  man 
with  abundant  means  and  leisure  to  investigate.  Its 
gospel  is  preached  to  the  poor.  Like  the  light  which 
is  its  emblem,  it  shines  as  directly  down  upon  the 
rustic  as  on  the  philosopher.  "Light  is  come  into 
the  world,"  says  He  who  brought  it.  And  the  con- 
viction of  light  is  something  simple  and  immediate 
for  those  who  have  eyes  to  see.  It  is  not  the  result 
of  a  long  process  of  reasoning,  where  the  chain  is 
no  stronger  than  its  weakest  link,  but  of  a  true  veri- 
fication, by  the  illumination  of  what  it  shines  on  : 
"  that  which  doth  make  manifest  is  light."(Eph.v.  13.) 

Grant  this,  and  who  will  protest  against  its  au- 
thority, or  deny  its  absoluteness?  Is  not  light  for 
the  man  of  science,  as  for  the  peasant,  authoritative? 
And  here  is  that  in  which  men  of  all  color,  caste, 
and  social  standing  rejoice  together.  Light,  true 
and  beneficent  autocrat  as  it  is,  is  at  the  same  time 
the  greatest  leveler :  one  of  those  free  gifts  of  God 


Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knowledge,       23 

which  in  their  common  diffusion  would  proclaim  all 
men  His  offspring  ;  one  of  those  silent  witnesses 
against  the  pretension  of  agnostic  imbecility  which, 
as  it  proclaims  darkness  to  be  light,  would  quench 
the  true  light  in  darkness.  How  thankful  beyond 
expression  may  we  be  to  escape  the  board  of  direc- 
tors, and  receive  our  light  from  heaven  rather  than 
from  the  "  Sufficient  Number  of  Competent  Ob- 
servers "  Gas  Company  advertised  by  Prof.  Drum- 
mond  !  Yes,  note  it,  ye  natural  observers,  ye  dis- 
ciples of  physical  science,  here  is  a  law  of  nature, 
something  in  which  we  "stand  face  to  face  with 
truth,  solid  and  unchangeable,''  a  veritable  "spirit- 
ual law  in  the  natural  world  " — all  the  light  of  the 
world  is  from  heaven. 

Test  it,  as  much  as  you  will ;  put  it  to  use,  and  it 
will  light  up  every  thing  it  shines  on.  Do  not  fear 
that  it  will  leave  you  timidly  groping  in  the  dark, 
still  less  put  out  your  eyes  ffiat  you  may  see  the 
better.  There  never  was  a  book  more  fully  sub- 
mitting itself  to  investigation,  never  a  book  that  so 
looked  you  in  the  face  while  speaking  to  you,  never 
one  with  the  marks  upon  it  of  such  absolute  truth- 
fulness. Simply  and  unadulterated,  the  priestcraft 
with  which  men  would  confound  it  dares  not  use  it 
for  its  evil  purposes.  The  man  who  does  use  it 
truly  and  reverently  may  be  trusted  as  true  and 
reverent.      Mark  out  on  your  map  of  the  world  the 


24      Spiritual  Lazv  in  the  Natural  World. 

regions  of  what  even  the  agnostic  would  call  the 
fullest  light,  and  you  will  mark  out  the  regions 
of  an  open  Bible.  And  this  is  mere  trite  common- 
place, thank  God  :  that  is  to  say,  every  one  is 
witness  that  the  light  shines  ! 

We  are  not,  however,  studying  Scripture  evi- 
dences :  we  are  merely  pointing  out  their  nature. 
The  evidence  will  come  when  we  have  to  show  the 
light  that  Scripture  throws  upon  nature.  But  it  is 
wise  to  move  step  by  step  here,  planting  each  firmly 
before  we  take  another.  Every  step  is  contested, 
not  only  from  without,  but,  alas !  also  from  within 
professing  Christianity  itself ;  and  to  move  surely 
we  must  move  slowly.  Nature  is  above  all  that 
which  many  professed  believers  are  yet  very  chary 
in  admitting  to  be  even  very  accurately  represented 
in  Scripture,  and  if  so,  of  course  we  need  not  ex- 
pect any  light  upon  it  from  this  source.  The  man 
of  science  is  met  half-way  by  the  concessions  of  the 
theologian,  who  thinks  to  save  the  centre  of  his 
battle  by  handing  over  his  right  wing  to  the  enemy. 
No  wonder  if  even  an  infant  science  should  "  extin- 
guish" such  defenders.  We  would  gladly  aid  it 
even  to  accomplish  this,  assured  that  it  would  be  an 
immense  good  if  Christians  were  made  to  realize 
the  only  possible  conditions  of  successful  conflict. 
By  all  means  let  Hercules  extinguish  the  "  snakes/' 
though  that  is  Huxley's  comparison,  not  ours,  for 


Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knowledge.       25 

we  do  not  in  the  least  insinuate  falsehood  or  treach- 
ery in  the  men  who  do  this,  although  it  is  certain 
they  are  playing  Satan's  game. 

What  is  it  to  attribute  inaccuracy  to  Scripture, 
but  to  say  we  must  no  longer  speak  of  it  as  the 
Word  of  God?  Satan  "is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of 
it."  God  is  no  more  "a  man  that  He  should  lie," 
than  He  is  "the  son  of  man,  that  He  should  re- 
pent." And  this  applies  equally  to  all  subjects. 
He  could  no  more  give  me  false  physics  than  false 
arguments, — untrue  statements  as  to  sun  or  moon 
or  firmament,  than  as  to  Christ  or  to  salvation. 
Once  admit  a  possibility  of  error,  though  it  be  in- 
finitesimal, it  must  shake  conviction  as  to  the  whole. 
And  the  Lord  Himself  puts  His  reliability  as  a 
Teacher  precisely  on  this  ground.  "  If  I  have  told 
you  earthly  things^  and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye 
believe  if  I  tell  you  of  heavenly  things?"  Take 
away  the  truth  of  Scripture  in  matters  in  which  it 
can  be  tested,  how  shall  we  accredit  it  in  those  where 
it  cannot  be  tested  ?  "  He  that  is  faithful  in  that 
which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in  much ;  and  he  that 
is  unjust  in  the  least  is  unjust  also  in  much."  Such 
are  the  moral  principles  of  the  Author  of  Chris- 
tianity ;  and  by  these  we  for  our  part  are  entirely 
willing  that  it  should  be  judged.  For  with  the 
Word  of  God  what  may  be  pleaded  for  man  may 
not  be   pleaded.      Man    is    fallible   and    ignorant, 


26      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

where  yet  he  may  be  honest  and  true ;  but  we  can- 
not plead  a  mistake  of  the  Omniscient,  and  call  him 
who  makes  the  mistake  omniscient  any  longer. 

Of  course  it  will  be  said  that,  all  this  depends 
upon  certain  views  of  inspiration,  and  (some  will 
think)  views  in  our  day  sufficiently  disproved.  It 
pleased  God  to  take  up  men  as  instruments  to  de- 
clare His  truth,  and  inspiration  guarded  them  at 
most  only  with  regard  to  their  special  subject.  It 
did  not  make  them  competent  as  men  of  science,  or 
in  ways  irrelevant  to  this.  And  as  to  the  last,  it 
may  be  fully  granted.  Nor  would  any  proficiency  in 
science  have  enabled  Moses  to  write  the  first  chap- 
ter of  Genesis, — a  table  of  contents,  as  it  may  be 
shown  to  be,  of  the  whole  Bible.  Yet  he  writes  as 
one  thoroughly  at  home  in  his  subject,  with  an  ease 
and  confidence,  yet  a  most  natural  simplicity, 
which,  without  laboring  to  do  so,  impresses  one 
with  the  assurance  of  absolute  truthfulness.  Tak- 
ing it  at  its  full  worth,  as  far  even  as  known,  natural 
fact  and  spiritual  type,  as  it  is,  combined,  one  would 
not  hesitate  to  rest  the  whole  argument  as  to  the 
truth  of  Scripture  upon  the  proof  in  that  first  page 
of  it  alone. 

Yet  no  doubt  Moses  knew  as  little  of  what  full- 
ness of  meaning  is  contained  in  these  words  of 
his  as  the  prophets  did  of  their  prophecies,  which 
Peter  witnesses  they  had  to  search  in  order  to  find 


Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knozv ledge.       27 

in  them  the  assurance  of  things  beyond  their  ut- 
most searchings:  "  Searching  what  or  what  manner 
of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did 
signify,  when  it  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings 
of  Christ,  and  the  glories  that  should  follow ;  unto 
whom  it  was  revealed  that  not  unto  themselves 
but  unto  us  they  did  minister  the  things  which 
are  now  reported  unto  you  by  them  that  have 
preached  the  gospel  unto  you  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven  ;  which  things  the 
angels  desire  to  look  into." 

Here,  assuredly,  were  men  not  merely  doing  the 
best  they  could,  but  better  than  they  knew,  things 
which  were  consciously  beyond  themselves,  and 
worthy  of  angels'  occupation  ,  and  this,  though 
spoken  directly  of  prophecy,  shows  how  "holy  men 
of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  of  the  Holy 
Ghost."  And  why  should  it  be  confined  to  proph- 
ecy? Historical  events,  if  we  may  believe  the 
apostle,  things  that  "happened  unto"  Israel,  "hap- 
pened unto  them  for  types,  and  are  written  for  our 
admonition," — so  that  these  also  as  types  are  pro- 
phetic !  And  why  should  this  be  confined  to 
prophecy?  Who  shall  presume  to  draw  the  line  be- 
tween what  was  necessary  and  what  unnecessary, 
in  the  divine  design  for  us,  so  as  to  be  able  to  say, 
Here  absolute  truth  had  to  be  insured,  and  here 
men  could  be  left  to  their  unassisted  wisdom  ?   The 


28      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

purpose  of  Scripture  is  larger  and  more  various 
than  we  can  divine ;  and  who  can  affirm  even  that 
such  and  such  facts  of  science  may  not  be  necessary 
to  be  revealed  in  order  to  its  full  accomplishment? 
Is  it  not  humbler  to  inquire  what  God  has  told  us, 
than  to  speculate  upon  what  He  means  to  teach  us? 
If  nature  be  in  any  way  His  lesson-book  for  us,  why 
should  it  not  be  part  of  His  design  to  help  us  to  read 
its  lessons  ?  Nay,  would  we  not  in  fact  expect  this  ? 
and  would  not  this  modify  to  a  large  extent  the 
conclusion  (or  assumption)  that  Scripture  was  not 
intended  to  teach  us  science  ? 

"Which  things  we  speak/'  says  the  apostle,  "not 
in  the  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth."  Even  here  it  is 
asserted  that  there  is  no  claim  of  verbal  inspiration. 
It  has  been  said,  "  The  term  here  is  logos,  which 
denotes  rather  propositions  than  mere  '  words.'  "  But 
suppose  this  so,  if  propositions  are  (all  of  them)  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  do  the  words  have  nothing  to  do 
with  the  propositions  ?  would  not  the  words  used  be 
those  best  suited  to  define  the  propositions  ? 

But  the  citations  of  the  story  of  Melchisedek, 
which  we  find  in  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  carry 
us  far  beyond  this,  and  show  the  extent  to  which  it 
is  to  be  taken.  Here  the  very  o?nissions  of  the  his- 
tory are  insisted  on  as  having  significance,  as  well 
as  what  is  actually  stated,  and  the  whole  argument 


Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knowledge.       29 

is  a  pregnant  instance  of  that  use  of  the  microscope 
in  Scripture  which  is  quite  as  brilliant  in  result  as 
it  is  known  to  be  in  natural  science.  "  For  this 
Melchisedek,  king  of  Salem,  priest  of  the  Most 
High  God,  who  met  Abraham  returning  from  the 
slaughter  of  the  kings,  and  blessed  him,  to  whom 
also  Abraham  gave  the  tenth  part  of  all,  first,  being 
by  interpretation,  'king  of  righteousness,'  and  then, 
after  that,  king  of  Salem,  that  is,  'king  of  peace/ 
without  father,  ivithout  mother,  without  descent,  hav- 
ing neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  life,  but 
made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God,  abideth  a  priest 
continually."  (Chap.  vii.  1-3.)  Now  it  is  evident 
that  the  main  force  of  the  interpretation  depends 
upon  the  points  which  I  have  emphasized,  and  it 
should  be  as  evident  that  these  points  depend  upon 
what  we  should  be  apt  to  call  mere  gaps  in  the 
record.  It  has  been  indeed  supposed  by  some, 
from  the  statements  made  by  the  apostle,  that  Mel- 
chisedek was  the  Son  of  God  Himself ;  but  this  the 
very  words,  "  made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God " 
forbid. 

Here,  along  with  the  interpretation  of  the  gaps, 
we  have  that  of  the  names,  and  the  order  of  the 
names,  and  the  whole  woven  into  precise  argument 
as  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  priesthood. 

It  is  plain,  then,  that,  according  to  this,  he  who 
wrote  the  history  of  Genesis  has  been  guided  by  a 


30      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

wisdom  far  beyond  his  own,  and  in  matters  of 
minute  detail,  in  such  a  case  as  we  might  have  im- 
agined could  not  have  required  it.  Who  shall 
decide,  then,  in  any  case  that  it  did  not  ?  Another 
instance,  in  which  we  have  the  authority  of  the  Lord 
Himself,  is  perhaps  however  even  more  decisive  ; 
for  here  no  type  is  in  question,  but  the  simple  use 
of  a  term — a  very  strong  term,  we  should  be  apt  to 
say, — for  the  judges  in  Israel,  whom  the  eighty- 
second  psalm  calls  "  gods  "  as  representing  God  : 
"I  have  said,  ye  are  gods."  In  the  tenth  chapter 
of  John's  gospel  the  Lord  quotes  this  to  the  Jews  : 
"Is  it  not  written  in  your  law,  4I  said,  ye  are 
gods  '  ? "  and  then  founds  upon  it  an  appeal,  "  If  He 
called  them  ' gods'  unto  whom  the  word  of  God 
came,"  and  then  adds  His  seal  to  the  absolute 
authority  of  that  from  which  he  quotes  : — "And 
Scripture  cannot  be  broken!' 

Surely  nothing  can  be  more  positive,  nothing 
wider  in  reach  than  this  :  "  Scripture  " — not  merely 
this  or  that  passage,  specially  guided  or  guarded, 
because  of  special  importance,  but  Scripture,  as 
Scripture, — "  Scripture  cannot  be  broken."  Is  it 
then  the  statement  that  "  In  six  days  the  Lord 
made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  in 
them  is,"  or  any  other,  however  insignificant  it  may 
seem  to  us,  if  Scripture  makes  it,  then  its  truth  is 
guaranteed — "  Scripture  cannot  be  broken." 


Scripture  as  a  Source  of  Knowledge.       31 

Difficulties  of  course  may  be  pressed,  nor  is  it 
here  the  place  to  examine  them.  Solve  a  hundred 
to-day,  another  hundred  may  be  found  for  solution 
to-morrow.  As  to  what  principle  of  science  is  it 
pretended  that  all  difficulties  are  removed  ?  and  who 
waits  for  this  before  he  thinks  of  certainty  ?  How 
much  less  does  the  Word  of  God  need  to  wait  for 
this,  a  requirement  which  would  destroy  the  possi- 
bility of  certainty  as  to  any  thing  whatever. 

That  "  Scripture  cannot  be  broken  "  is  the  divine 
axiom  with  which  we  set  out,  and  in  this  way  what 
a  field  for  examination  does  it  present  to  us.  True, 
we  have  had  it  in  our  hands  for  eighteen  centuries, 
yet  how  fresh  is  it  to-day  !  how  little  exhausted  !  in 
some  directions  how  little  even  explored  !  and  cer- 
tainly in  few  less  than  that  which  we  propose,  in 
dependence  upon  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  only  suffi- 
cient Teacher,  now  to  explore.  Throughout  we 
desire  to  take  the  attitude  and  possess  the  spirit  of 
learners  while  we  do  so,  and  so  to  proceed  step  by 
step,  patiently  acquiring  what  we  may,  and  owning 
the  gaps  in  our  knowledge  where  they  exist. 


32 


CHAPTER  II. 
God's  Twofold  Witness. 

"npHE  testimony  of  two  men  is  true,"  says  the 
"  Faithful  Witness."  He  appeals  to  the 
law  for  this,  and  the  law  speaks  as  follows : 
"One  witness  shall  not  rise  up  against  a  man  for 
any  iniquity,  or  for  any  sin,  of  all  that  one  sinneth  : 
at  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses  or  at  the  mouth  of 
three  witnesses  shall  a  matter  be  established."  (Deut. 
xix.  15.)  The  apostle  also  cites  this  law  of  witness, 
to  which  God  has  very  plainly  conformed  His  man- 
ifestation of  Himself  to  man.  For  nature  and 
Scripture  are  just  this  twofold  testimony  in  its 
full  breadth  ;  while  yet  He  has  so  constructed  His 
Word  as  to  be  itself  twofold,  and  so  sufficient.  The 
Old  Testament  thus  unites  with  the  New,  and 
who  that  has  considered  it  in  the  least  but  must 
appreciate  the  power  of  this  for  conviction  ?  For 
such  power  in  twofold  witness  proceeds  largely 
from  the  diversity  of  character  and  interest  that 
they  present.  They  are  otherwise  different, — con- 
trasted ;  yet  here  they  agree  :  different  in  such  sort 
that  you  realize  there  is  no  collusion  between  them, 
— no  treachery  ;  nothing  but  the  necessary  unity  of 


God's  Twofold  Witness.  33 

truth  could  made  them  one.  And  how  will  this  be 
strengthened  in  proportion  as  the  contrast  is  mani- 
fold, and  yet  the  unity  pervasive  :  and  this  in  the 
two  Testaments  is  what  so  demonstrates  them  to  be 
of  God. 

The  Old  Testament  is  in  Hebrew,  the  language 
of  a  special  people,  with  whose  history  it  has  grown 
up,  and  to  whom  it  addresses  itself.  It  is  the  relig- 
ion of  a  nation,  one  of  the  families  of  the  earth,  its 
horizon  earthly,  its  sanctuary  a  worldly  one,  its 
services  ritualistic,  ornate,  elaborate,  intrusted  to  a 
special  priesthood.  God  is  here  behind  a  vail  which 
none  can  penetrate  ;  man — all  men — are  shut  out ; 
none  can  see  Him  and  live ;  for  merciful  as  He  is, 
He  cannot  clear  the  guilty,  and  who  (let  him  do  his 
best)  is  not  guilty? 

This  legal,  sacerdotal,  exclusive  system,  the  incar- 
nation of  conscience,  but  a  bad  conscience,  in  what 
utter  contrast  is  it  to  the  free,  spiritual,  all-embrac- 
ing spirit  of  Christianity!  "The  Lord  hath  said 
that  He  would  dwell  in  thick  darkness,"  says  Solo- 
mon on  the  day  of  the  dedication  of  the  temple. 
(1  Ki.  viii.  12.)  "We  walk  in  the  light,  as  God  is 
in  the  light,"  answers  the  apostle.  (1  Jno.  i.  7.)  "Who 
can  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty,"  says  the  Old 
Testament  voice.  (Ex.  xxxiv.  7.)  "That  justifieth 
the  ungodly,"  says  again  the  New  Testament. 
(Rom.  iv.  5.)     "  No  man  can  see  Me  and  live,"  is 


34      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

the  elder  utterance.  (Ex.  xxxiii.  20.)  "  He  that  hath 
seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father,"  are  His  words  who 
is  Himself  the  spirit  incarnate  of  the  New.  (Jno. 
xiv.  9.) 

Here  are  two  witnesses  how  diverse  :  can  it  be 
that  after  all  under  these  statements,  so  seemingly 
conflicting,  there  is  nevertheless  a  perfect  unity  ? 
can  there  be  a  fullness  of  truth  which  embraces  and 
harmonizes  all  ?  Yes,  surely :  admit  what  the  New 
Testament  so  abundantly  affirms  and  illustrates,  the 
essential  opposition  between  law  and  grace,  and  yet 
that  the  first  is  handmaid  to  the  other  ; — then,  on 
the  basis  of  law,  all  the  Old-Testament  utterances 
are  but  the  sentence  of  God  upon  the  self-right- 
eousness of  man  ;  while  the  New  Testament  re- 
veals the  heart  of  God  in  grace,  upon  the  basis 
of  a  righteousness  by  which  the  law  also  is  mag- 
nified and  made  honorable,  and  able  to  forego  its 
penal  claim. 

Thus  they  can  be  reconciled  ;  but  is  this  recon- 
ciliation an  after-thought  ?  Is  it  perhaps  a  human, 
though  wonderfully  wise,  contrivance  for  adjusting 
matters  between  them  ?  Are  there  perhaps  yet  two 
authors  instead  of  one ;  and  these  still  human,  not 
divine  ?  This  question,  so  necessary  to  be  an- 
swered, receives  from  the  Old  and  New  Testaments 
together  its  full  and  entire  satisfaction  in  the  con- 
sideration   of   that   typical  system  which  pervades 


God's  Twofold  Witness.  35 

everywhere  the  former,  while  it  anticipates  and 
prophesies  the  latter. 

This  typical  system  is,  all  through  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, the  complement  and  corollary  of  the  strictly 
legal  part  If  a  soul  stricken  with  the  conviction 
of  sin  sought  for  relief  and  acceptance  from  God,  it 
was  shut  up  to  sacrifice,  the  ordained  way  of  ap- 
proach for  every  one  who  would  draw  near  to  Him; 
and  here  he  found  what,  except  in  its  typical  teach- 
ing, contained  no  ray  of  light.  Why  should  the  blood 
of  an  animal  shed  by  the  hand  of  the  offerer  avail 
before  God  for  the  sin  of  him  who  shed  it  ?  You 
must  illumine  that  with  the  light  of  the  gospel  before 
you  can  understand  it.  Understood,  it  is  then  the 
illumination  of  all  else:  it  is  the  establishment  of 
law ;  it  is  the  vindication  of  grace  ;  it  is  the  heart 
of  God  bursting  out  over  all  the  barriers  that  man's 
sin  could  oppose  to  it, — God  who  is  light,  now  in  the 
light,  revealed. 

Yes,  the  witnesses  are  one  ;  their  testimony  is 
one ;  they  have  one  Author ;  grace  is  no  after- 
thought The  later  word,  addressed  in  his  own  lan- 
guage to  the  Gentile,  is  but  the  necessary  develop- 
ment and  issue  of  the  earlier  one.  The  earlier  is 
interpreted  by  the  later  :  the  typical  communication 
by  the  plain  speech  now. 

Thus,  then,  as  to  the  testimony  of  the  written 
Word.     But  now  if  there  be  another  testimony  to 


36      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

God,  and  the  book  of  nature  be  also  His  book, — and 
Scripture  itself  affirms  this,  yea,  who  that  believes  in 
God  could  deny  it  ? — then  these  two  witnesses  must 
also  agree  in  one,  and  that  which  is  enigmatical 
and  obscure  be  interpreted  by  the  clearer, — the 
earlier,  therefore,  once  more  by  the  later,  and  not 
the  reverse.  Notice,  too,  that  there  is  no  ground 
for  wonder,  if  the  two  should  seem  not  only  diverse 
in  character,  as  they  are,  but  contradictory  even, 
which  they  are  not.  We  might  expect  this  ;  while, 
by  the  analogy  of  Scripture,  we  may  expect  also 
that  this  apparent  contradiction  will  end  in  clearer 
agreement  at  last,  and  in  greater  breadth  and  full- 
ness of  testimony. 

Even  as  we  consider  this  now,  the  reality  of  the 
analogy  between  the  book  of  Nature  and  the  Old 
Testament  comes  into  fuller  light,  and  gains  assur- 
ance. If  the  Old  Testament  be  the  proclamation 
of  law,  and  this  be  its  supreme  characteristic,  how 
easy  it  is  to  see  that  Nature  is  even  more  emphatic- 
ally in  some  sense  the  kingdom  of  Law.  This  is,  in 
the  eyes  of  more  than  Prof.  Drummond,  what  gives 
to  it  order  and  solidity.  Grace  here  assuredly 
seems,  at  first  sight,  to  have  no  place,  nay,  to  be  in 
contradiction,  until  we  are  reminded  that  in  the 
elder  book  of  Revelation  it  is  in  symbol  and  type 
that  we  find  the  teaching  of  this,  and  are  led  to 
realize  that  Nature  itself,  more  entirely  even  than 


God's  Twofold  Witness.  37 

the  Old  Testament,  is  an  object  lesson,  a  divine 
hieroglyph,  a  type-teaching.  This  it  surely  is;  and 
although  as  a  whole  we  may  not  as  yet  have  the 
full  key,  yet  in  all  ages  nevertheless  its  lessons 
have  been  taught  and  learnt, — in  the  earliest 
perhaps  most  simply.  As  we  grow  older  we  lose 
the  unsuspecting  faith  of  childhood,  which  in  many 
respects  is  the  truest  wisdom ;  our  very  language, 
which  was  at  first  pictorial,  becomes  hard  and 
abstract,  its  symbols  merely  arbitrary  and  alge- 
braic, divested  of  the  heart  and  pathos  which 
men  drank  in  first  from  nature's  breast,  and 
now  have  learnt  to  be  ashamed  of  as  the  babble 
of  the  nursery. 

But  we  are  coming  back  to  Nature  !  perhaps  : 
yea,  to  such  extreme  faith  in  it  that  now  our  one 
knowledge  is  to  be  that  of  natural  science,  and  be- 
yond it  we  are  agnostics — know-nothings,  If  that 
were  so,  it  would  be  but  the  surest  proof  that  the 
old  faith  in  nature  nevertheless  is  dead.  I  may  use 
the  words,  but  scarcely  realize  the  thing  y  when  I 
speak  of  faith  in  laws,  or  faith  in  a  machine.  Here, 
too,  "the  law  is  not  of  faith."  The  factory-rattle 
reason  may  interpret  perhaps  ;  but  faith  is  of  the 
heart,  and  there  is  no  heart.  We  have  got  back  to 
the  old  mythology,  and  understand  how  Chronos 
(Time)  produces  and  devours  again  his  children  ; 
but  do  not  ask  me,  then,  to  confide  in  Chronos. 


38      Spiritual  Lazv  in  the  Natural  World. 

No:  vanity  of  vanities,  all   is  vanity.    -Let  us  eat 
and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die. 

Yet  here  a  hint  from  that  old  Jewish  law  in  which 
we  have  already  found  the  character  of  a  true  witness 
may  appeal  to  us.  It  was  when  man  found  himself 
as  it  might  seem,  in  the  grip  of  the  law,  and  without 
hope  from  it, — when,  though  with  the  consciousness 
of  sin  upon  him,  he  sought  in  his  distress  to  God, — - 
the  law  itself  referred  him  to  that  typical  system, 
in  which  the  heart  he  sought  in  God  was  found. 
Is  it  not  so  again,  that  when  we  turn  to  Him 
it  is,  and  only  so,  that  nature  reveals  her  really 
illuminated  side,  and  warms  and  kindles  as  with  a 
summer  breath  ?  Assuredly,  it  is  so :  and  reason 
itself  cannot  rest  satisfied  short  of  that  which  satis- 
fies heart,  conscience,  mind  alike — not  a  part  only, 
but  the  whole  of  man 


39 


CHAPTER  III. 

Nature  in  Scripture. 

IF  the  work  of  God  in  nature,  then,  is  admitted  to 
to  be  any  testimony  to  God  at  all,  that  is  noth- 
ing else  but  folly  which  lies  hid  under  what  is 
supposed  to  be  a  self-evident  truth,  that  "the  Bible 
was  not  intended  to  teach  us  science."  For  if 
science  be  nothing  else  than  reasoned  knowledge, 
and  if  it  be  of  importance  that  Nature  should  give 
true  witness  to  her  God,  who  shall  presume  to  say 
that  Scripture  will  not  give  us  help  in  such  a  matter? 
Is  it  not,  on  the  other  hand,  rather  to  be  expected 
that  it  would  do  so?  If  its  own  question  be,  "Doth 
not  nature  itself  teach  you  ? "  and  if,  after  all,  this 
teaching  be  not  always  so  clear  and  explicit  as  to 
need  no  help  to  understand  it, — (if  it  were,  we 
could  hardly  put  the  doubt,) — then  we  should  surely 
expect  that  at  least  the  data  for  true  science  should 
be  furnished  us  abundantly.  That,  after  what  men 
have  decided,  seems  a  bold  thing  to  say ;  to  many, 
no  doubt,  even  to  be  evidently  contrary  to  the  fact. 
If  so,  we  shall  refute  ourselves,  before  we  have 
traveled  a  good  half  our  proposed  journey.  The 
answer  will  be  found,  then,  as  we  proceed  with  it. 


40      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

Scripture  being  witness  however,  nature  does 
teach.  "The  invisible  things  of  Him  are  clearly 
seen,  being  known  by  the  things  that  are  made, 
even  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead."  (Rom.  i.20.) 
"  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
firmament  showeth  His  handiwork."  (Ps.  xix.  1.) 
The  work  must  needs  declare  the  Artificer  ;  and  the 
Worker  is,  we  are  assured,  He  who,  because  He  is 
the  Revealer,  is  called  the  "Word  of  God."  (Jno.  i. 
1-3.)  Creation  must  be,  then,  part  of  this  revela- 
tion. 

The  parables  and  types  of  Scripture  take  up, 
therefore,  and  use  Scripture  to  this  end.  They  are 
not  merely  an  adaptation  of  what  has  strictly  an- 
other meaning.  Rather,  they  develop  what  is  there. 
It  is  in  this  way  that  they  become  so  significant  for 
the  interpretation  of  nature.  Analogies  of  this  kind 
we  argue  from  constantly  without  apology,  and 
without  suspicion  of  deception.  They  are  the 
marks  of  the  One  Mind  which  everywhere  delights 
to  show  itself  to  us,  and  thus  would  make  all 
things  intelligent  to  creature  intelligence.  The 
proof  is  that  it  really  does  this  :  as  light,  it  illum- 
ines. 

The  men  of  science  have  a  name  for  a  principle 
which  underlies  this.  They  call  it  the  "  principle 
of  continuity."  Of  this  Prof.  Drummond  has  well 
said  : — 


Nature  in  Scripture.  41 

"  Probably  the  most  satisfactory  way  to  secure  for  one's 
self  a  just  appreciation  of  the  principle  of  continuity  is  to 
try  to  conceive  the  universe  without  it.  The  opposite  of 
a  continuous  universe  would  be  a  discontinuous  universe, 
an  incoherent  and  irrelevant  universe — as  irrelevant  in  all 
its  ways  of  doing  things  as  an  irrelevant  person.  In  effect, 
to  withdraw  continuity  from  the  universe  would  be  the 
same  as  to  withdraw  reason  from  an  individual.  The 
universe  would  run  deranged ;  the  world  would  be  a  mad 
world.  .  .  .  The  authors  of  The  Unseen  Universe  con- 
clude their  examination  of  this  principle  by  saying  that 
*  assuming  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Governor  of  the 
Universe,  the  principle  of  continuity  may  be  said  to  be  the 
definite  expression  in  words  of  our  trust  that  He  will  not 
put  us  to  permanent  intellectual  confusion,  and  we  can 
easily  conceive  similar  expressions  of  trust  with  regard  to 
the  other  faculties  of  man.'  " 

Now,  if  this  be  true,  as  it  surely  is,  the  continuity 
of  Nature  and  Revelation  is  assured.  It  does  not 
imply,  as  our  author  would  seem  to  make  it,  that 
the  book  of  nature  will  be  the  simpler  to  read,  the 
surer  to  follow,  therefore  in  fact  the  more  authori- 
tative, but  the  reverse.  For  if  nature-teaching  be 
essentially  that  of  parable,  no  parable  is  primarily 
authoritative  as  to  doctrine  ;  and  though  still  of  an 
importance  hard  to  be  exaggerated,  it  leaves  Scrip- 
ture as  that  in  which  alone  God  speaks  to  us  "face 
to  face." 

Yet  nature  remains  unfallen  from  its  place  as  the 
eldest  of  revelations.     There  is  nothing  fallen  but 


42     Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

man,  and  even  his  fall  has  only  in  a  sense  confirmed 
its  witness  to  us  as  from  Him  to  whom  man's  ruin 
is  no  surprise,  and  redemption  no  after-thought. 
Assuredly,  such  a  world  of  conflict  and  destruction, 
beast  preying  upon  beast,  down  to  the  minutest 
being  that  comes  under  the  microscope,  would  be  to 
an  unfallen  being  an  inharmonious  and  incongruous 
mystery.  How  striking,  then,  that  we  find  the  yet 
unfallen  parents  of  our  race  shut  off  from  it  in  a 
specially  prepared  and  sheltered  garden  of  delight, 
which  might  be  for  them  a  better  witness  of  Creat- 
ing Love, — a  memory  of  blessing  to  them  when 
fallen.  Then,  when  at  last  sent  forth  into  the  earth, 
with  the  new  strife  that  had  been  awakened  in  their 
souls,  they  could  find  from  the  conflicting  elements 
around,  with  which  they  were  in  so  manifest  sympa- 
thy, the  assurance  of  omniscient  foresight  unde- 
ceived and  undethroned. 

Has  science  done  aught  but  deepen  this  thought, 
when  it  bids  us  note  that  the  very  ground  they  trod 
upon  was  already  the  wreck  of  former  worlds?  yet 
that  mountain-upheaval,  and  glacier-plow,  and  the 
long  list  of  catastrophic  forces  had  been  used  of 
Him  whom  Scripture  reveals  as  the  God  of  resurre- 
tion,  to  prepare  and  fertilize  and  beautify  their  yet 
wondrous  dwelling-place? 

And  this  Scripture  also  confirms,  even  though  we 
may  have  been  a  long  time  coming  to  read  it  right, 


Nature  in  Scripture.  43 

and  for  this  too  are  indebted,  as  they  say,  to  science. 
Science  did  not,  however,  put  it  in  the  book  of  Gen- 
esis, that  while  God  in  the  beginning  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  before  the  first  day's  work 
the  earth  was  waste  and  empty,  and  darkness  on  the 
face  of  the  deep.  Then  the  Spirit  of  God  and  His 
Word  bring  in  the  light,  and  the  work  of  renewal 
begins. 

Here  the  analogy,  then,  is  perfect.  The  history 
of  the  earth  is  the  prophecy  of  the  man  who  is  to  be 
put  upon  it ;  and  this  prophecy  proceeds  step  by 
step  with  the  history  of  the  six  days,  creation  being 
the  type  of  new  creation,  until  the  Man  comes  for 
whom  all  is  destined,  the  first  man  here  the  type  of 
the  Second,  Christ,  who  is  the  Heir  of  all.  This 
can  be  shown  even  minutely,  though  here  is  neither 
time  nor  place ;  and  the  spiritual  significance  is  the 
seal  of  the  natural,  the  perfect  assurance  of  whose 
inspiration  has  guided  Moses.  But  we  must 
pass  on. 

Spiritual  law  then  governs  the  natural  world. 
God,  the  Creator,  is  the  "  Father  of  spirits,'*  and  to 
spirits  He  speaks  in  it.  Nature  is,  to  him  who  has 
the  key  of  it,  one  vast  object-lesson  of  spiritual 
things.  Did  we  know  it,  what  a  different  world 
would  the  world  be  to  us  !  How  full  of  reason 
would  all  things  become  !  How  should  day  to  day 
utter  speech,  and  night  to  night  tell  knowledge ! 


44      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

How  would  we  realize  in  our  daily  toil  the  presence 
of  God  !  How  would  all  the  natural  sciences  be- 
come Christian  sciences,  and  only  what  was  un- 
natural be  at  last  unchristian  !  A  dream,  you  say? 
Well,  then,  at  any  rate,  suffer  a  little  while  the 
dream ;  and  if  it  should  after  all  be  found  so  ra- 
tional as  to  fill  all  else  with  reason,  so  lightlike  as 
to  fill  the  whole  landscape  with  color,  warmth,  and 
beauty,  so  spiritual  as  to  connect  all  things  with 
God,  then  it  will  be  worth  while,  surely,  to  inquire 
how  far  the  realism  of  such  a  dream  can  differ  from 
reality  itself. 

We  take  Scripture  with  us  as  we  go  forward — 
Scripture  that  cannot  be  broken,  the  true  Ithuriel's 
spear  by  the  touch  of  which  all  falsehood  is  discov- 
ered ;  Scripture,  not  as  the  poor  thing  that  men  have 
made  it,  a  rush  that  one  cannot  lean  upon,  a  sensi- 
tive plant  that  shrinks  from  contact  with  the  realities 
around,  but  as  the  weapon  of  the  Spirit,  sharper 
than  any  two-edged  sword  ;  as  the  staff  of  the  pil- 
grim, more  trusted  the  more  used  ;  yea,  as  the  word 
of  Him,  from  whom  nothing  is  hid,  and  of  that 
Spirit  who  "searcheth  the  deep  things  of  God." 

There  are  wide  fields  before  us,  reader.  Let  us 
go  forth. 


45 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Natural  Mathematics. 

MATHEMATICS  give  us  the  " exact  sciences." 
"Solid"  as  Prof.  Drummond  tells  us  the 
laws  of  nature  are,  in  mathematics  at  least 
they  are  so,  beyond  the  possibility  of  intelligent 
question.  No  one,  that  I  am  aware,  has  ever  ac- 
cused them  of  poetic  license,  although  poetry  on  her 
side  does  not  refuse  their  alliance.  And  as  we  build 
our  foundations  of  what  we  can  find  most  solid,  it 
need  be  no  wonder  that  in  proportion  as  we  go 
down  to  the  foundations  of  the  earth,  so  do  we  find 
mathematics  more  and  more  revealing  themselves 
in  proportional  numbers  and  in  geometric  forms. 
Chemistry  has  become  in  our  day  penetrated  with 
arithmetic ;  and  chemistry  deals  with  those  element- 
ary principles,  the  combination  of  which  gives  us 
the  material  world.  "Chemistry,"  says  Herschel, 
"is,  in  a  most  pre-eminent  degree,  the  science  of 
quantity ;  and  to  enumerate  the  discoveries  which 
have  arisen  for  it  from  the  mere  determination  of 
weights  and  measures  would  be  nearly  to  give  a 
synopsis  of  this  branch  of  knowledge." 

What  is  this  but  as  if  you  were  to  go  into  some 


46      Spiritual  Laiv  in  the  Natural  World. 

ancient  structure,  as  the  pyramids,  and  find  upon 
the  stones  the  builder's  hieroglyph  ?  We  have  been 
only  learning  to  find  deeper  truth  than  we  were  at 
all  aware  of  in  the  prophet's  challenge,  "  Who  hath 
measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand,  and 
meted  out  heaven  with  a  span,  and  comprehended 
the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a  measure,  and  weighed  the 
mountains  in  scales,  and  the  hills  in  a  balance?" 
(Is.  xl.  12.)  What  science  of  the  day  in  which  that 
question  was  asked  knew  any  thing  about  such 
measurement?  How  many  centuries  has  it  taken 
to  bring  man's  tardy  feet  to  where  the  prophet 
stood  ?  But  we  are  able  now  to  see  that  wre  may 
take  this  as  true  in  the  most  absolute  way,  that 
every  bit  of  the  earth's  dust  is  weighed  and  meas- 
ured. 

11  The  law  of  simple  numerical  ratios,"  says  Dr.  Cooke, 
"is  the  fundamental  law  of  crystallography,  and  gives  to 
the  science  a  mathematical  basis.  Similar  numerical  re- 
lations appear  when  we  study  the  formation  of  chemical 
compounds.  I  have  already  defined  a  chemical  element  as 
a  substance  which  has  never  as  yet  been  decomposed, 
and  all  the  matter  with  which  man  is  now  acquainted  is 
composed  of  one  or  more  of  at  most  seventy  elementary 
substances.  When  two  of  these  elements  unite  together 
to  form  a  compound  body,  the  proportions  in  which  they 
combine  are  not  decided  by  chance.  You  cannot  unite 
these  elementary  substances  in  any  proportion  you  please. 
The  proportion  in  each  case  is  determined  by  an  unvary- 


Natural  Mathematics,  47 

ing  law,  and  the  amounts  required  of  either  substance  are 
weighed  out  by  nature  in  her  delicate  scales  with  a  nicety 
which  no  art  can  attain.  Thus,  for  instance,  23  ounces 
of  sodium  will  unite  with  exactly  35.5  ounces  of  chlorine; 
and  if  you  use  precisely  these  proportions  of  the  two  ele- 
ments, the  whole  of  each  will  disappear,  and  become 
merged  in  the  compound  which  is  our  common  table  salt. 
But  if,  in  attempting  to  make  salt,  we  bring  together 
clumsily  23.5  ounces  of  sodium  and  35.5  ounces  of  chlorine, 
Nature  will  simply  put  the  extra  half-ounce  of  sodium  on 
one  side,  and  the  rest  will  unite.  This  law  which  governs 
all  chemical  combinations  is  known  as  '  the  law  of  definite 
proportions.' 

11  Tables  will  be  found  in  works  on  chemistry,  which 
give,  opposite  to  the  name  of  each  elementary  substance, 
a  numerical  value,  usually  called  its  atomic  weight,  and 
and  in  all  cases  where  the  elements  are  capable  of  com- 
bining with  each  other,  they  either  unite  in  the  exact  pro- 
portions indicated  by  these  numbers,  or  else  in  some 
simple  multiple  of  these  proportions." 

Thus  these  elements  are  themselves  manufac- 
tured articles,  and  are  stamped  indelibly  with  the 
Manufacturer's  name.  For  nothing  addresses  it- 
self more  to  mind  as  from  mind  than  just  such  rela- 
tions as  are  discovered  here.  As  another  has  said, 
"The  most  careful  structure  of  brown  stone  is  not 
so  precise  in  number,  relation,  and  dimensions  of  its 
blocks  as  are  molecules,  the  first  terms  in  matter,  in 
their  atomic  formation. "  It  should  be  as  easy,  then, 
to  refer  the  natural  product  to  the  workmanship  of 


48      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

eternal  mind,  as  the  recent  structure  to  man's  hand 
and  mind.  And  who  would  have  a  doubt  as  to  the 
latter  ? 

Having  got  so  far,  moreover,  ought  we  not  to  be 
able  to  go  further?  ought  not  these  numbers  individu- 
ally to  have  a  voice  for  us,  and  in  their  relation  to 
one  another  also  ?  If  all  things  are  full  of  reason, 
is  it  too  much  to  expect  that  these  proportions 
have  a  reason  too?  Oh,  for  some  interpreter  here  ! 
some  master  mind,  lowly  and  reverent  enough  to 
follow  out  this  clue,  and  tell  us  whither  it  leads ! 
But  we  must  not  expect  these  elements  to  speak  yet 
clearly.  Pythagoras  has  given  place  to  Darwin  ; 
and  final  cause  to  formal  cause  ;  and  we  must  wait 
for  the  wheel  to  come  round  again. 

As  to  relations  as  indicated  by  the  numbers  we 
have  just  a  hint : — 

"Attempts  have  been  made  in  the  same  science,"  say 
M'Cosh  &  Dickie,  in  their  work  on  "  Typical  Forms," 
"to  form  bodies  into  groups  or  congeners.  M.  Dumas, 
in  particular,  has  detected  a  number  of  triads,  or  series  of 
three  bodies,  which  have  analogous  properties,  and  show- 
ing a  singular  numerical  profession  in  their  equivalent 
weights ;  the  equivalents  of  two  of  these  added  together, 
and  divided  by  two,  giving  approximately  the  equivalent 
of  the  third,  thus : — 

Chlorine    35  )  Potassium  40  ) 

Bromine  >  80  Sodium  >  24 

Iodine      125  )  Lithium        7  ) 


Natural  Mathematics.  49 

Calcium      20  \  Sulphur      16  ) 

Strontium       v  44  Selenium         >  40 

Barium       69  )  Tellurium  64  ) 

111  Regarding,'  says  Faraday,  i  chlorine,  bromine,  and 
iodine  as  one  triad,  it  will  he  seen  that  between  the  first 
and  the  last  there  is  recognizable  a  well-marked  progres- 
sion of  qualities.  Thus  chlorine  is  a  gas,  under  ordinary 
temperatures  and  pressures ;  bromine,  a  fluid ;  and  iodine, 
a  solid ;  in  this  manner  displaying  a  progression  in  the 
difference  of  cohesive  force.  Again,  chlorine  is  yellow; 
bromine,  red;  iodine,  black,  or  in  vapor,  a  reddish  violet.'  " 

This  glimmer  of  light  seems  to  have  well-nigh 
gone  out.  The  atomic  weight  of  some  of  these  has 
been  since  doubled,  and  of  others  more  or  less 
changed.  At  the  best,  it  carries  us  but  a  little  way 
upon  the  road  we  seek.  None  the  less  sure  is  it 
that  there  is  a  numerical  impress  upon  all  nature. 

"Indeed,"  says  Sir  John  Herschel  again,  "it  is  a  char- 
acter of  all  the  higher  laws  of  nature  to  assume  the  form 
of  a  precise  quantitative  statement." 

And  Humboldt  declares, — 

"It  may  be  said  that  the  only  remaining  and  widely 
diffused  hieroglyphic  characters  still  in  our  writing — num- 
bers— appear  to  us  again  as  powers  of  the  cosmos,  al- 
though in  a  wider  sense  than  that  applied  to  them  by  the 
Italian  school." 

Much  more  might  be  said  here,  but  it  needs  not 
to  try  more  to  establish  what  no  science  of  the  day 
will  attempt  to  dispute.  It  is  the  meaning  of  ad- 
mitted facts  that  we  are  seeking ;  and  this  is  just 


50      Spiritual  Lazv  in  the  Natural  World. 

what  is  so  hard  to  reach.  Save  in  their  testimony 
to  an  Author  of  nature,  they  are  yet  dumb  and  un- 
spiritual :  how  shall  we  spiritualize  them?  Is  it  not 
possible — yea,  rather,  may  we  not  expect,  that  God 
has  given  us  somewhere  some  clue  to  their  interpre- 
tation, by  which  we  may  follow  on  to  find  ourselves 
more  in  the  presence  of  the  King?  Nature  seems 
to  us  as  yet  dumb,  and  God,  if  we  own  Him  there, 
yet  distant;  where  shall  we  find,  then,  the  inter- 
preter we  seek,  if  not  in  Revelation  ? 


5i 


CHAPTER  V. 

Spiritual  Mathematics. 

THAT  in  her  great  typical  system  numbers  have 
a  place  will  be  acknowledged  by  every  stu- 
dent of  Scripture.  How  far,  however,  both 
types  and  numbers  pervade  the  whole  is  little 
understood,  and  will  by  many  be  with  difficulty 
credited.  It  would  lead  us  a  long  way  round  to  try 
and  prove  it  here,  even  though,  I  doubt  not,  the 
proof  is  most  important.*  We  must  content  our- 
selves here  with  the  proof  of  that  which  lies  directly 
before  us — the  meaning  of  the  numerals  ;  and  even 
here  be  briefer  than  we  would,  content  to  know  that 
the  best  proof  of  a  key  is,  that  it  unlocks  the  door, 
the  best  proof  of  a  light,  that  it  gives  light.  Our 
proof,  after  all,  will  be  that  the  meanings  of  the 
numerals  gathered  from  Scripture,  and  of  course 
illustrating  Scripture-truth,  will  yet  be  found  to 
throw  a  new  light  upon  Nature. 

It  should  be  no  abatement  of  the  value  of  this 
process  if  Nature  be  found  by  it  to  speak  Scripture- 

*  For  the  proof  in  brief,  I  would  refer  my  readers  to  "  The  Numerical 
Structure  of  Scripture,"  published  by  Loizeaux  Brothers,  63  Fourth 
Avenue,  New  York ;  for  the  proof  at  large,  to  "  The  Numerical  Bible," 
publishing  quarterly  by  the  same. 


52     Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

truth,  and  the  result  should  be  in  some  sense  the 
opposite  of  that  which  (by  an  opposite  process) 
Prof.  Drummond  seems  to  have  reached  ;  so  that  I 
may  transfer  a  page  of  his  preface  to  my  own  book, 
and  appropriate  it,  only  making  Science  and  Relig- 
ion to  change  places.    Let  us  see  how  it  would  look. 

11  They  lay  at  opposite  poles  of  thought ;  and!  for  a  time 
I  succeeded  in  keeping  the  Science  and  the  Religion  shut 
off  from  one  another  in  two  separate  compartments  of  my 
mind.  Bnt  gradually  the  wall  of  partition  showed  symp- 
toms of  giving  way.  The  two  fountains  of  knowledge  also 
slowly  began  to  overflow,  and  finally  their  waters  met  and 
mingled.  The  great  change  was  in  the  compartment  that 
held  the  [Science].  It  wras  not  that  the  well  there  was 
dried ;  still  less  that  the  fermenting  waters  were  washed 
away  by  the  flood  of  [Scripture].  The  actual  contents 
remained  the  same.  But  the  crystals  of  former  doctrine 
were  dissolved;  and  as  they  precipitated  themselves  once 
more  in  definite  forms,  I  observed  that  the  Crystalline 
System  was  changed.  ...  In  other  words,  the  subject- 
matter  [Science]  had  taken  on  the  method  of  expression 
of  [Scripture],  and  I  discovered  myself  enunciating 
[Natural]  Law  in  the  exact  terms  of  [Inspiration]  and 
[Revealed  Truth]. 

"  Now  this  was  not  simply  a  [scriptural]  coloring  given 
to  [Nature] — a  mere  freshening  of  the  [scientific]  air  witk 
[spiritual]  facts  and  illustrations.  It  was  an  entire  re- 
casting of  truth.  And  when  I  came  seriously  to  consider 
what  it  involved,  I  saw,  or  seemed  to  see,  that  it  meant 
essentially  the  introduction  of  [Spiritual]  Law  into  the 
[Natural]  World." 


Spiritual  Mathematics.  53 

I  trust  Prof.  Drummond  will  forgive  the  changes 
I  have  made  in  his  statements  here.  I  am  sure  that 
they  are  serious ;  I  only  would  that  he  might  yet  be 
able  to  adopt  them  for  his  own.  Christians  may 
well  long  for  him  that  he  may  find  spiritual  truth 
conveyed  in  more  "  exact  terms  "by  Paul  and  Peter 
than  by  Spencer  and  Huxley ;  and  natural  truth 
also  sweeter  from  the  lips  of  one  with  whom  God 
spake  face  to  face,  than  from  his  with  whom  the 
only  knowledge  of  Him  is  that  He  is  unknowable. 

Let  us  take  up  our  numerals,  then.  Scientists 
have  told  us  that  they  pervade  nature  :  surely  we 
need  not  wonder  if  they  have  an  important  place  in 
Scripture,  or  that  being  there  they  should  speak 
there.  Surely  it  is  not  unreasonable  that  the  use  of 
them  should  have  its  reason, — that  He  who  has  for- 
bidden idle  words  should  Himself  not  speak  one ! 

The  great  proof  in  an  explanation,  as  I  have  said, 
is,  that  it  explains.  And  yet  there  is  that  which,  in 
the  Scripture-meaning  of  numbers,  commends  itself 
to  us  at  the  outset,  and  that  is,  that  it  is  natural. 
The  God  of  nature  uses  things  according  to  their 
nature.  He  does  not  use  water  to  regenerate  a  soul. 
He  does  not  change  bread  into  something  that  to 
look  and  touch  and  taste  remains  the  same  but  is 
not.  And  so  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  numerals 
also  has  its  roots  in  nature.  This  rule  observed 
helps  greatly  to  restrain  the  mere  lawlessness  of  the 


54      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

imagination,  of  which  we  do  well  to  be  afraid.  We 
can  hardly  go  astray  when  all  meanings  of  the 
number  i  must  come  under  its  cardinal  form  as 
unity,  or  under  its  ordinal,  as  primacy.  Yet  this 
number  has  the  widest  range  of  meaning  of  any. 
No  doubt,  it  is  also  the  simplest ;  but  in  each,  some 
natural  thought  governs  or  leads  to  the  spiritual, — 
already  a  hint  as  to  nature-teaching  ;  for  the  natu- 
ral is  no  more  alien  to  the  spiritual  than  the  body 
to  the  soul  which  it  enshrines  and  expresses. 

The  numerical  series  is  also  a  very  brief  one.  As 
in  music  seven  notes  in  their  combinations  furnish 
all  our  wealth  of  harmony,  so  seven  numbers  give 
the  whole  range  of  choral  anthem  which  all  nature 
sends  up  to  God.  These  added  to  or  multiplying 
one  another  can  produce  all  else.  And  that  the 
series  really  ends  with  this,  Scripture  makes  plain 
by  its  use  of  7  always  for  that  which  is  in  some 
sense  perfect,  though  it  may  be  evil  as  well  as  good. 
The  number  has  thus  its  root-meaning  in  nature 
clearly,  wThich  Scripture  only  takes  up  and  confirms. 
How  plainly  is  it  shown  us,  thus,  that  the  whole 
series  is  a  harmony,  and  that  in  it  Nature  finds  her 
voice  in  praise !  A  good  thought  to  begin  with,  is  it 
not?  We  find  it  confirmed  in  this,  that  the  number 
8  is  always  significant  of  a  new  start — a  new  begin- 
ning, as  the  eighth  day  is  the  beginning  of  a  new 
week.      8  is  the  spiritual  chord — the  octave,  just 


Spiritual  Mathematics.  55 

marking  in  its  fresh  commencement  that  the  former 
series  is  complete. 

Let  us  test  these  things  by  some  examples.  Seven 
times  God  pronounces  His  work  at  the  beginning 
good  ;  and  on  the  seventh  day  He  rests,  and  sanc- 
tifies it.  Here  is  evidently  the  foundation  of  its 
meaning  in  Scripture.  From  this  first  week  Israel 
derived  her  weeks  of  days  and  years,  and  weeks  of 
weeks  of  years,  or  jubilee  periods.  The  trumpet  of 
the  jubilee  sounded  in  the  seventh  month  of  the 
year,  upon  the  day  of  atonement.  In  Revelation, 
seven  seals  secure  completely  the  book  taken  by  the 
Lamb  ;  seven  candlesticks  present  the  Church  as 
the  light  of  the  world  in  the  night  of  the  Lord's 
absence  ;  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning  before  the 
throne  picture  the  " seven  spirits  of  God" — the 
various  energy  of  the  one  Spirit  of  God.  Later,  in 
the  seven  vials  poured  out  upon  the  earth  is  "  filled 
up  the  wrath  of  God." 

The  connection  of  the  numbers  7  and  8  is  illus- 
trated by  examples  which  depend  for  their  force 
upon  no  recondite  typical  significance.  Thus  the 
Lord  represents  the  unclean  spirit  who  returns  to 
the  man  out  of  whom  he  had  gone,  with  seven  other 
spirits  more  wicked  than  himself.  But  this  makes 
eight,  and  brings  about  the  "last  state"  which  "is 
worse  than  the  first." 

So  the  "ten  horns"  of  Daniel's  fourth  bea$t  have 


56      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

three  rooted  up  before  the  eleventh  "  little  horn," 
and  become,  therefore,  with  this,  eight ;  and  then 
results  the  last  state  of  the  beast,  in  which  judgment 
falls  upon  it.  In  Rev.  xvii.,  where  from  another 
side  the  same  things  are  seen,  the  eighth  head  gives 
to  the  beast  its  last  blasphemous  form,  and  "  goeth 
into  perdition. " 

The  types  of  the  Old  Testament  have  many  sim- 
ilar examples,  which  a  very  little  examination  will 
reveal  to  the  inquirer.  We  need  not  perhaps  pro- 
duce more  here.  Another  and  very  striking  proof 
of  the  concord  between  nature  and  Scripture  has 
now  to  be  considered. 

Scripture  has  its  own  methods  of  division  of  the 
numerals  it  employs,  and  the  number  7  is  no  excep- 
tion to  this.  As  being  a  prime  number,  it  cannot, 
of  course,  be  subject  to  true  division,  but  is  well 
known  by  many  to  be  divided  in  Scripture  almost 
uniformly  into  4  +  3.  Thus  in  the  sevenfold  view 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  the  thirteenth  chapter 
of  Matthew,  the  first  four  parables  are  spoken  to 
the  multitude  at  large,  the  last  three  to  the  disciples 
in  the  house  ;  and  this  corresponds  to  a  real  differ- 
ence of  application, — the  first  four  giving  the  ex- 
ternal view  of  the  kingdom,  patent  to  the  world  at 
large,  while  the  last  three  give  the  internal  and 
divine  view. 

Again,  in  the  opening  of  the  seven  seals  in  Reve- 


Spiritual  Mathematics.  57 

lation,  the  first  four  are  introduced  by  the  cry  of 
the  living  creatures,  "Come,"*  and  in  each  case  a 
horseman  answers  to  the  call ;  the  last  three  have 
no  such  introduction. 

In  the  trumpet-series,  the  last  three  are  marked 
off  from  the  first  four  as  special  "woes;"  and  the 
division  is  strongly  emphasized. 

In  the  addresses  to  the  seven  churches,  the  same 
division  is  found,  but  less  manifest ;  and  in  Scrip- 
ture generally  there  are  numbers  of  similar  septen- 
ary series  divided  after  the  same  manner,  the  proof 
of  which  would  require  more  space  than  is  available 
for  us  now. 

There  is  meaning,  of  course,  in  this  division.  We 
have  assumed  it  at  least  as  a  principle, — the  only 
one  that  could  be  at  all  fruitful  in  an  inquiry  like 
the  present,  that  whatever  is,  whether  in  nature  or 
the  Word  of  God,  has  its  raison  d'etre, — can  give 
some  intelligible  account  of  itself;  otherwise,  why 
look  for  it?  And  it  is  just  because  things  are  so 
little  sought  for  that  they  are  so  little  found.  To 
find  the  meaning  here,  we  must  anticipate,  however, 
what  has  not  yet  been  brought  out,  but  what  we 
shall  have  shortly  to  look  at,  so  that  it  will  be  only 
slightly  out  of  place  to  produce  it  here. 

Four,  then,  we  shall  see  shortly  to  be  the  world- 
number,    or   that   which    speaks   of   the   creature; 

*The  most  approved  reading. 


58      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

proof  will  be  full  as  we  advance  ;  three  is  the  number 
of  manifestation, — that  of  the  Trinity,  in  which  God 
is  alone  fully  manifest.  The  4  +  3,  then,  into  which 
a  septenary  series  is  so  often  divided,  combining 
these  meanings,  speaks  of  the  creature  as  that  in 
His  relation  to  which  now  God  is  manifested ;  and 
thus  it  completely  answers  to  its  end.  God  rests, 
therefore,  in  satisfaction  with  His  work,  on  the 
seventh  day. 

If  clearness  and  consistency  can  avail  to  make  it, 
this  interpretation,  then,  may  be  allowed  to  stand. 
But  we  have  now  a  strange,  even  startling,  corre- 
spondence from  the  side  of  nature,  which  will  de- 
velop more  significance  as  we  proceed.  If  the  seven 
notes  of  music  are  the  natural  root  of  the  Scripture 
meaning,  it  is  to  music  we  may  look  for  any  obtain- 
able help  further.  How  striking,  then,  is  the  division 
of  these  notes  in  music  !  Upon  the  key-board  of  a 
piano  we  find  them  arranged  thus  : — 


TTTTT 

12  3  4  5  6  7 


B 


D 


the  five  black  notes  are  grouped  as  3  and  2  :  three 
black  notes  divide  four  white  ones ;  and  again,  two 


Spiritual  Mathematics.  59 

black  notes  divide  three  white  ones.  The  seven 
white  notes  accept  the  scriptural  division  into  4 
and  3  ! 

Here  is  a  clue  which  we  must  follow ;  but  we  are 
not  prepared  to  do  so  yet.  We  shall  have  first  to 
inquire  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  other  numbers, 
which  it  is  plain  we  can  now  arrange  upon  the  key- 
board without  difficulty.  As  yet,  indeed,  they  do 
not  speak ;  but  they  have  at  least  approached  articu- 
late utterance.  They  seem  already  to  intimate  their 
accord  with  Scripture  when  it  tells  us  that  in  rela- 
tion to  the  creature  God  shall  be  manifested.  Will 
they  do  more  than  this  ?  We  will  go  on  and  see,  at 
least. 

One. 
It  has  been  said  that  the  first  number  has  really 
but  two  thoughts  fundamental  to  it.     As  a  cardinal 
number,  it  speaks  of  unity;  as  an  ordinal,  of  primacy. 
No  proof  is  needed  that  of  these  it  does  speak. 

But  the  application  of  these  thoughts  may  be 
wide  and  far-reaching.  With  regard  to  unity,  this 
may  exclude  a  second,  or  exclude  simply  difference ; 
and  the  latter  may  be  either  external  or  internal. 
"The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord"  excludes  abso- 
lutely another  Lord  ;  and  this  implies  on  His  part 
sufficiency  which  needs  no  other,  and  independency 
which  admits  no  other.  And  these,  again,  imply 
His  eternity. 


60      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

Or  it  may  exclude  external  difference ;  and 
speak  thus  of  identity,  identification ;  or  simply 
of  peace. 

Or  it  may  exclude  internal  difference,  as  where 
Joseph  says,  "The  dream  is  one."  It  may  thus 
speak  of  harmony  of  parts  or  attributes, — of  con- 
sistency, congruity.  Or  else  of  individuality, — in 
the  highest  way,  personality;  in  the  lowest,  perhaps, 
of  life,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  true  individuality, 
Integrity,  again,  is  "wholeness,"  oneness. 

Now,  as  an  ordinal  number,  the  first,  the  begin- 
ning :  He  who  is  in  true  active  energy  the  begin- 
ning, is  Creator,  Life-giver,  Father ;  counsel  and 
election  connect  with  it ;  and  sovereignty  is  implied 
in  all  of  this. 

Two. 

The  number  2  is  the  contradiction  of  the  first 
number  :  there  is  now  another.  In  a  good  sense,  it 
speaks  of  addition,  increase,  growth;  and  so  of  help, 
confirmation,  fellowship.  Our  word  "seconding  '' 
expresses  these  latter  thoughts.  (Comp.  Eccles.  iv. 
9-12.)     Here  we  have, — 

1.  Confirmation  in  the  way  of  testimony:  "The 
testimony  of  two  men  is  true."  And  we  have  seen 
that  the  power  of  this  confirmation  depends  much 
on  the  diversity  of  the  witnesses  (2  being  the  ex- 
pression  of  difference). 


Spiritual  Mathematics.  61 

2.  Salvation,  help. 

3.  Dependence,  humilation,  service:  "  seconding  " 
again  assists  the  thought. 

Notice,  now,  that  in  Christ,  the  second  Person  of 
the  Godhead,  all  these  thoughts  unite.  Twofold  in 
nature,  who  can  unite  in  one  person  such  diversity 
as  He  ?  He  is  the  Second  Man.  He  is  the  true 
Witness  and  the  Word  of  God.  He  is  the  Saviour. 
He  was  the  dependent,  lowly  Man,  humbling  Him- 
self even  to  death  for  our  salvation.  This  whole 
meaning,  thus  far,  attaches  to,  and  holds  forth  to 
us,  Christ. 

But  on  the  other  side,  as  the  number  of  difference, 
and  the  first  number  that  divides,  the  number  2 
speaks  of  contrast,  contradiction,  conflict,  enmity, — 
of  separation,  death,  which  is  that  and  the  "last 
enemy."  Yet  here  again,  as  if  Christ  must  be 
everywhere  Master,  the  cross,  in  which  the  conflict 
between  good  and  evil,  the  enmity  of  man's  heart, 
the  power  of  the  enemy,  death  in  its  most  awful 
form,  are  found, — is  once  again  salvation.  Nowhere 
is  the  contrast  so  great,  the  contradiction  so  ex- 
treme, as  in  the  cross. 

Two  is  naturally  also  woman's  number,  and  she 
illustrates  it  well.  Full  again  of  contradictions, — 
dependent  on  man,  yet  his  helpmeet ;  and  yet  again 
the  one  through  whom  the  breach  came  ;  the  type 
of  increase,  yet  through  whom  came  death,  and  then 


62      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

once  more,  through  her  victorious  "Seed,"  salva- 
tion.    Surely  these  numbers  speak  ! 

Three. 
We  come  now  to  3  :  and  for  what  does  3  stand  ? 
Plainly  it  is  the  symbol  of  cubic  measure — solid 
measure — the  measure  of  content.  "  Take  any  two 
dimensions,  and  multiply  them  together:  what  have 
you  ?  A  measure  of  surface  merely.  Take  a  third 
dimension  ;  now  you  have  more  than  surface :  this 
third  dimension  strikes  in  deep  below  the  surface, 
and  gives  you  a  measure  of  solidity.  3  stands,  then, 
for  what  is  solid,  real,  substantial.  What  are  length 
and  breadth  without  thickness?  A  line  that  you 
can  draw  upon  paper  is  more  than  that." 

Three  is  the  number  of  Persons  in  the  Godhead, 
— of  the  divine  fullness,  therefore, — and  until  we 
reach  this,  God  is  not  fully  manifested.  It  is 
evidently  the  number  of  actualization,  realization, 
manifestation.  It  is  the  number  of  the  Spirit,  who 
realizes  in  the  creature  the  counsels  of  God. 

"When  the  deep  lay  over  the  waste  and  desolate 
earth,  the  Spirit  of  God  brooded  upon  the  face  of 
the  waters.  When  men  are  born  again  to  God,  the 
gospel  comes  to  them,  not  in  word  only,  but  in 
power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  is  sanctifica- 
tion — the  work  of  the  Spirit — but  that  in  which 
salvation  is  realized  in  the  soul  ?  Without  the  work 
of  the  Spirit,  there  is  nothing  but  outside  work  : 


Spiritual  Mathematics.  63 

'that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit;'  this  is 
that  third  dimension  which  every  saint  has." 

Beautifully,  therefore, — one  of  those  deep  harmo- 
nies of  Scripture  which,  lying  everywhere  under  the 
surface,  give  such  full  attestation  of  its  truth, — the 
sanctuary  in  Israel,  God's  dwelling-place  among 
them,  was  a  cube, — of  ten  cubits  in  the  tabernacle, 
twenty  in  the  temple  ;  while  the  new  Jerusalem,  the 
final  city  of  God,  which  the  glory  of  God  lightens, 
is  a  cube  also:  "the  length  and  the  breadth  and 
the  height  of  it  are  equal."  Here  all  the  counsels 
of  God  have  realized  themselves  at  last.  Here  the 
holiness  long  sought  for  from  man  is  at  last  attained. 

In  the  sanctuary  God  manifests  Himself.  Res- 
urrection too,  always  connected  in  Scripture  with 
the  third  day,  is  that  in  which,  when  all  mere  human 
hope  is  at  an  end,  God  manifests  Himself.  Christ 
was  "declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power, 
according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  resurrection 
of  the  dead."  (Rom.  i.  4,  R.  V.) 

Revival,  restoration,  recovery,  connect  themselves 
with  this ;  and  all  this  man's  sanctification  is.  It  is 
his  resurrection  out  of  that  state  of  spiritual  death 
in  which  naturally  men  are.  Once  again,  let  us 
note,  how  perfect  are  these  harmonies  !  and  how 
they  attest  the  truth  of  that  in  which  they  are  found  ! 

The  underlying  thought  in  sanctification  is,  a  sep- 
aration to;  and  so  even  Christ,  going  back  to  the 


64      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

Father,  but  as  Man  to  take  a  new  position  for  men 
with  God,  says,  "  And  for  their  sakes  I  sanctify 
Myself,  that  they  also  may  be  sanctified  by  the 
truth."  So  were  the  priests  of  old  sanctified  or  set 
apart  to  the  work  of  the  priesthood.  And  this 
thought  of  setting  apart  to  some  special  office  we 
shall  find  most  important  in  the  application  of  this 
number  to  natural  things.  For  the  present,  we  are 
confining  ourselves  to  Scripture,  as  that  in  which 
these  numbers  first  find  voice ;  we  are  learning  the 
language  of  that  which  is  then  to  be  our  interpreter 
in  another  sphere. 

Four. 
We  come  now  to  4,  a  number  in  which  we  find 
the  first  that  is  capable  of  true  division.  It  is  a 
number,  therefore,  which  naturally  suggests  passivity 
and  weakness;  and  as  we  have  now  got  beyond  the 
numbers  which  speak  of  Deity,  we  naturally  connect 
this  with  the  thought  of  the  creature, — the  material 
which  submits  itself  to  the  divine  hand,  and  may 
(alas !)  to  another.  Notice,  again,  that  it  is  2,  the 
first  number  which  divides,  that  divides  it ;  and 
here  we  have  seen  what  speaks  often  of  the 
enemy's  work. 

Scripture  justifies  this  application  fully.  Four  is 
recognized  in  Scripture  as  the  world-number, — that 
of  the  "four  corners"  of  the  earth,  of  earthly  com- 
pleteness and  universality,  which  has  thus  on  it, 


Spiritual  Mathematics.  65 

however,  the  stamp  of  weakness,  whatever  man 
may  boast.  It  is  the  number  of  the  four  winds  of 
heaven,  the  various  and  opposing  influences  which 
show  the  divided,  diverse  conditions  to  which  the 
earth  is  subject,  and  which  make  it  the  place  of  such 
various  experience,  and  practical  testing  for  man. 
And  this,  too,  opens  the  way  once  more  to  the 
thought  of  failure.  The  fourth  book  of  Moses — 
Numbers,  as  the  history  of  Israel's  journey  through 
the  wilderness,  type  of  our  own  world-warfare  and 
pilgrimage,  illustrates  all  these  thoughts. 

We  shall  find  this  number  stamped  upon  nature 
in  her  four  kingdoms,  which  a  science  based  upon 
what  is  wholly  material  would  reduce  to  three,  thus 
taking  away  man's  birthright,  and  sending  him  out, 
Nebuchadnezzarlike,  among  the  beasts.  But  this 
in  him  was  madness,  and  under  divine  judgment, — 
thank  God,  temporary  also  :  Scripture  and  nature 
both,  if  they  are  listened  to,  will  restore  him  to  his 
place. 

Five. 
The  next  two  numbers  have  more  difficulty.     Let 
us  pause  briefly  to  connect  what  we  have  ascertained 
as  to  the  whole  series,  and  to  gather  what  hints  we 
may  as  to  what  yet  remains. 

We  have  seen  that  the  whole  number  is  7,  the 
number  of  perfection  ;  and  that  this  number  is 
composed  of  4  and  3.     These  numbers  also  have 


66      Spiritual  Lazv  in  the  Natural  World. 

been  investigated,  and  their  meaning  read,  if  it  be 
but  partially.  Four  we  have  seen  to  be  the  number 
of  the  world,  or  of  the  creature,  the  first  three 
numbers  those  which  speak  of  God.  It  is  striking 
here  that  in  Scripture  4  is  often  thus  divided  in  its 
peculiar  way,  and  not  by  mere  arithmetical  rules, 
as  3  and  1,  Take  the  four  gospels  as  an  example, 
where  the  first  three  have  been  called,  from  their 
accordant  view,  the  " synoptic"  gospels,  while 
John's,  in  its  many  marked  peculiarities,  stands  in 
a  division  apart.  It  is  the  divine  nature  of  Christ 
upon  which  he  characteristically  dwells,  as  is  evi- 
dent, and  this  dominates  and  differentiates  the 
whole  book. 

But  this  3  and  1  have  again  their  meaning,  and, 
as  combining  in  4,  speak  of  the  creature  as  manifest- 
ing (3)  the  Creator  (1).  And  this  is  evidently  what 
— at  least  according  to  Scripture — creation  does. 
This  the  numbers  as  a  whole  suggest.  The  4  +  3 
which  make  up  7  we  have  already  interpreted 
almost  similarly.  What  is,  in  fact,  the  difference  ? 
If  these  meanings  and  distinctions  of  meaning  be 
indeed  of  God,  they  will  sustain  the  fullest  investi- 
gation, and  be  helped  by  it :  what  difference,  then, 
do  these  numbers  naturally  suggest  ?  Is  it  not  this, 
that  in  the  one  case  (as  3  -f  1  =4)  the  manifesta- 
tion of  God  is  in  the  creature  ;  while  in  4  +  3>  the 
fuller  numbers,  and  the  way  in  which  they  appear 


Spiritual  Mathematics,  67 

side  by  side,  suggest  the  whole  relationship  of  God 
to  the  creature  as  that  which  manifests  Him?* 

At  any  rate,  it  seems  evident,  from  this  division 
of  the  whole  series  into  4  and  3,  that  we  are  now  to 
take  this  4  as  a  whole  number — that  of  the  creature, 
to  which,  to  make  up  the  last  three,  we  are  to  add 
once  more  the  divine  ones.  Five  will  be  thus  a 
4  -f-  1  ;  6,  a  4  -|-  2  ;  and  7,  what  we  have  seen  it  to 
be.  Nature,  as  we  have  seen  also,  in  the  last  case 
justifies  this  thought :  what  will  it  do  as  to  the  pre- 
ceding numbers  ? 

Now  the  most  familiar  5  that  occurs  to  me  is 
found  in  the  human  hand.  How  striking,  then,  to 
find,  at  the  first  glance  here,  the  division  into  4  and 
1  !  Look  narrowly, — the  more  narrowly  the  better. 
These  four  fingers,  how  clearly  in  themselves  they 
imply  weakness  !  Think  what  these  fingers  would 
be  without  the  thumb  !  And  then  this  opposing 
thumb  itself,  strong  and  single,  as  if  it  would  rep- 
resent the  help  of  the  One  God  ministered  to  the 
weakness  of  His  creatures, — may  it  not  remind  us 
that  this  human  capacity  of  which  the  hand  speaks 
is  just  weakness  itself  except  the  power  of  God  go 
with  it?    Are  these  things  mere  imaginings,  morbid 


*This  view  is  only  suggested  as  a  deduction  from  the  numbers 
themselves.  The  testing  of  it  by  Scripture  involves  more  research 
than  I  have  yet  been  able  to  give ;  and  only  the  confidence  gained 
from  an  acquaintance  of  years  with  this  method  and  its  results 
could  embolden  me  to  offer  it. 


68      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

broodings  of  the  theological  mind  ?  Why,  then,  do 
they  seem  so  singularly  to  unite  together?  Why 
are  the  dreams  so  consistent  ? 

But  the  measure  of  capacity  is  the  measure  of 
responsibility,  and  here  the  4  +  1  once  more  speak 
of  the  creature  in  relation  to  the  Creator, — of  the 
government  of  God  as  approached  from  the 
creature-side.  "And  the  throne  of  God  thus 
approached  is  encompassed  with  clouds  and  dark- 
ness. The  divine  ways  with  him  give  him  constant 
and  needed  exercise,  though  the  throne  is  there, 
steadfast  and  towering  above  the  clouds.  Five  will 
be  found  [in  Scripture]  constantly  associated  with 
this  thought  of  exercise  under  responsibility  j  but  also 
with  the  kindred  one  that,  under  God,  the  way, 
according  to  its  character,  leads  to  a  corresponding 
end.  This  whole  lesson  Deuteronomy,  the  fifth 
book  of  Scripture,  enforces  throughout." 

Thus  far,  then,  the  meaning  which  has  been 
suggested  as  to  these  last  three  numbers  is  con- 
firmed by  the  present  one  :  "the  creature  in  relation 
to  the  almighty  Creator "  seems  its  fundamental 
thought. 

Six. 
Six  is  another  number  which  seems  to  speak  of  re- 
lation to  God,  but  a  very  different  relation.   It  is  the 
number  of  the  days  of  man's  work-day  week,  the 
appointed  term  of  his  labor,  type  of  his  life-labor, 


Spiritual  Mathematics.  69 

his  "  few  and  evil  days,"  limited  because  of  sin.  It 
is  the  second  number  which  is  not  a  prime.  Di- 
vided as  4  and  2,  it  is  the  creature  in  relation  to 
him  who  has  wrought  in  it  disaster  and  ruin,  but 
on  the  other  hand  to  Him  who  is  the  Deliverer 
from  it.  Thus  it  is  the  number  which  shows  the 
creature  as  &  fallen  creature,  and  God's  victory  over 
the  evil,  by  which  He  is  gloriously  displayed. 

In  its  use  in  Scripture  it  implies  sin  in  its  full 
development,  limited  and  controlled  by  God,  who 
thus  glorifies  Himself  in  the  issue  of  it.  The 
number  of  the  beast  in  Revelation  is  a  striking  and 
well-known  instance  of  the  use  of  this  number,  666, 
— evil  in  fullest  activity,  yet  its  feebleness  ever 
apparent,  and  God's  hand  imposing  its  limit.  Its 
number  is  the  number  of  its  name — stamps  it,  that 
is,  as  what  it  is,  and  is  only  "the  number  of  a  man," 
though  vainly  and  impiously  aspiring  to  be  as  God. 

In  the  field  which  we  propose  to  traverse,  we 
shall  find  little  of  this  number ;  and  that,  I  think, 
for  obvious  reasons,  which  only  confirm  the  mean- 
ing of  it ;  but  on  that  account  it  need  be  the  less 
dwelt  on  now.  Here,  then,  our  brief  glance  at  the 
numbers  ends  ;  for  of  7  all  is  probably  said  that 
need  be.  We  have  therefore  now  our  vocabulary 
ready,  which  is  to  be  employed  in  the  translation  of 
language  still  more  hidden.  Nature  keeps  well  her 
secrets,  and  yet  keeps  them  after  all  to  reward  the 


yo      Spiritual  Lazv  in  the  Natural  World. 

diligent :  as  the  wise  man  says,  "  It  is  the  glory  of 
God  to  conceal  a  thing,  but  the  honor  of  kings  to 
search  out  a  matter."  (Prov.  xxv.  2.)  And  "  through 
wisdom  is  a  house  builded,  and  by  understanding  it 
is  established  ;  and  by  knowledge  shall  the  cham- 
bers be  filled  with  all  precious  and  pleasant  riches.,, 
(Chap.  xxiv.  3,  4.) 


7i 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Tones  and  Undertones. 

WE  now  proceed  directly  to  the  interpretation 
of  nature  in  the  light  of  Scripture.     And 
here  the  first  question  must  be,  as  to  the 
light  itself  :  is  it  truly  this  ?     Does  Nature,  read  by 
Scripture,  speak  as  Scripture  does  ?     Are  these  two 
witnesses  accordant  ? 

We  have  not  undertaken  to  verify  Scripture  ac- 
cording to  the  ordinary  methods.  We  assume  for 
the  present  also  that  what  ordinary  evangelical 
orthodoxy  holds  for  truth  is  in  its  main  features  a 
fair  representation  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible.  We 
are  entitled  to  do  this,  because  what  we  propose  is 
(though  much  more  than  this,)  a  method  of  verifi- 
cation. We  are  going,  not  to  argue  about  the  light, 
but  to  use  it.  It  is  wonderful  how  little  argument 
of  this  kind  there  is  in  the  Bible,  and  how  much 
more  convincing  and  universal  is  its  appeal  to  men 
on  that  account. 

If  numbers  are  being  made  to  appear  as  "  powers 
of  the  cosmos," — and  if  all  the  higher  laws  of  nature 
are  more  and  more  finding  numerical  expression, — 
then  it  is  natural  to  seek  here  in  an  especial  way  the 


72      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

mind  in  Nature,  mathematics  bearing  so  strongly 
the  impress  of  mind.  And  if  the  laws  of  harmony 
are  clearly  pervaded  by  mathematics,  and  the  dia- 
pason actually  govern  in  turn  the  numerical  system 
of  the  Bible,  then  here  we  should  appear  to  have 
found  the  most  hopeful  direction  for  discovery  of 
the  kind  we  are  seeking.  Moreover,  we  have  made 
at  least  one  discovery,  that  would  seem  a  most,  en- 
couraging one,  that  in  its  primary  division  the 
Scripture-series  is  one  with  the  harmonic.  May  we 
not  trust,  then,  to  find  it  even  wholly  so,  and  by 
this  door  to  reach  an  assured  and  open  road  to  the 
region  we  desire  so  earnestly  to  examine  ? 

The  division  of  the  7  into  4  and  3  has  done  more 
than  discover  to  us  the  harmony  thus  far  between 
Nature  and  Scripture.  It  enables  us  to  give  every 
note  of  the  series  its  numerical  place,  in  which  F 
stands,  therefore,  as  the  first,  and  E  as  the  final 
note.  Without  this,  we  could  not  proceed  a  step ; 
and  the  help  given  by  this  discovery  is  thus  indeed 
a  great  one. 

But  what  of  the  black  notes  upon  the  board? 
Have  they,  it  may  be  asked,  no  title  to  be  reckoned  ? 
If  all  this  is  to  have  voice,  ought  not  they  also  to  be 
heard  ?  or  will  it  not  be  caprice  to  listen  to  some 
witnesses  and  to  reject  others  whose  testimony,  if 
but  negative,  must  be  of  very  great  importance? 
The   black    notes   are,  of   course,  semitones, — the 


Tones  and  Undertones.  73 

notes  half  way  between  those  on  either  side,  and 
which  are  sharp  in  reference  to  those  which  precede, 
and  flat  in  regard  to  those  which  follow  them.  But 
thus  it  is  evident  that  five  semitones  are  to  be  added 
to  the  original  seven  notes  in  order  to  get  the  full 
compass  of  the  diapason.  Here,  then,  it  seems  as 
if  we  must  first  ask  ourselves,  what  is  meant  by  this 
new  enumeration  ?  Has  it  any  meaning  that  we 
can  discover?  And  is  it  in  contradiction  to  what 
we  seemed  just  now  to  have  reached  ?  or  may  it  still 
by  any  possibility  be  consistent  with  it  ? 

It  is  encouraging  indeed  to  have  to  answer,  It  is 
even  more  than  consistent  with  it, — it  is  confirma- 
tory of  the  meaning  before  gathered  from  the  sep- 
tenary arrangement  and  its  division,  and  endows  it 
only  with  fuller  meaning  ! 

As  for  the  septenary  notation,  let  the  key-board 
speak.  Its  presence  there  attests  its  practical  reality 
and  value  to  the  musician.  Its  correspondence  with 
Scripture  gives  it  twofold  witness.  Why,  then,  the 
12,  which  has  also  reality,  and  should,  one  would 
say,  have  meaning,  no  less  than  the  other  ? 

Now  in  taking  this,  for  settlement,  to  Scripture, 
we  shall  make  this  new  discovery,  that  7  and  12  -are 
numbers,  according  to  it,  most  intimately  allied. 
12,  wherever  it  is  found  as  a  series  in  Scripture,  is 
found,  perhaps  without  exception,  to  be  divided  into 
4  times  3,  as  7  is  into  4  and  3.     The  factors  are  the 


74      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

same,  although  differently  combined.  As  I  have 
elsewhere  said  of  it,  "  It  is  only  in  the  relation  of 
the  two  numbers  to  one  another  that  it  differs  from 
7  :  the  number  of  the  world  and  that  of  divine 
manifestation  characterize  it ;  but  these  are  not  side 
by  side  merely.  It  is  God  manifesting  Himself  in 
[relation  to]  the  world  of  His  creation,  as  7  is,  but 
now  in  active  energy  laying  hold  of  and  transform- 
ing it.  Thus  12  is  the  number  of  manifest  sover- 
eignty, as  it  was  exercised  in  Israel  by  the  Lord 
in  the  midst  of  them,  or  as  it  will  be  exercised 
in  the  world  to  come." 

Turn  now  to  the  complete  rest  of  the  people  of 
God, — to  that  new  Jerusalem  which  has  the  glory 
of  God,  whose  light  God  is,  and  the  Lamb  the  lamp 
of  it;  to  which  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the 
Lamb  are  the  temple.  Here  perfection  and  rest 
are  found  if  any  where,  the  thought  connected,  as 
is  abundantly  plain,  with  7  :  yet  what  do  we  find  ? 
Look  at  the  foundations  of  the  city  :  they  are  twelve 
in  number.  Look  at  the  gates:  there  are  twelve  gates. 
Measure  the  city:  its  length  and  breadth  and  height 
are  equal, — twelve  thousand  furlongs  each.  Meas- 
ure the  height  of  the  wall :  a  hundred  and  forty-four 
cubits — 12  x  12.  Behold  the  tree  of  life,  planted 
by  the  river  that  issues  from  the  throne  of  God  :  it 
bears  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and  yields  its  fruit 
every  month.    Everywhere  this  number  12  meets  us 


Tones  and  Undertones.  75 

where  we  might  expect  the  7.  It  has  the  factors  of 
7  :  it  is.  as  it  were,  the  expansion  of  the  7  ;  and  the 
spiritual  idea  which  shines  through  it,  that  God  is 
everywhere  the  manifest  Ruler,  what  does  it  speak 
of  to  our  hearts  but  complete  subjection  to  Him, 
the  perfection  of  the  creature,  and  its  rest  ? 

Thus  the  12  is  indeed  the  expanded  7  ;  and  the 
musical  scale,  as  interpreted  by  Scripture,  is  in  its 
every  aspect,  as  in  its  internal  meaning,  really  one. 

We  may  go  on,  then,  with  increased  confidence, 
to  that  for  which  it  will  be  indeed  taxed  to  the 
utmost :  not  because  of  scanty  results  accruing 
from  our  search,  but  rather  from  the  contrary.  The 
new  language  we  are  learning  will  seem  to  lead  into 
such  quaint  lore  from  Nature's  library  that  we  shall 
be  tempted  to  think  we  are  dreaming,  or  in  the 
hallucination  of  disease  :  we  shall  need  to  probe 
ourselves  with  sharp  inquiry,  to  see  it  we  are  awake, 
and  to  examine  our  road,  to  see  if  it  be  on  solid 
earth,  or  marsh.  Yet  what  is  more  certain  than 
that  the  numbers  of  which  we  speak  are  really  in 
nature?  and  what  more  simple  than  to  gage  the 
value  of  each  by  what  we  find  in  Scripture,  free  as 
it  must  be  from  all  suspicion  of  bribed  witness? 
Then,  if,  after  all,  they  tell  a  consistent  story,  why 
should  we  refuse  it,  even  though  it  should  speak 
more  theologically  than  for  some  reason  we  have 
concluded  it  to  have  the  right  to  speak  ? 


76      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

We  come,  then,  in  the  next  place,  to  consider  the 
keys.  They  are  of  three  kinds — sharps  or  flats 
mainly,  with  one  natural  key,  which,  save  as  acci- 
dentals, has  neither  sharps  nor  flats.  The  sharp 
keys  raise  certain  notes  regularly  half  a  tone;  the 
flats,  on  the  other  hand,  lower  them  half  a  tone. 
The  one  represent,  therefore,  a  forward  and  upward 
tendency;  the  other,  a  downward  and  backward 
one.  The  natural  key  represents  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other,  but  a  condition  of  rest  between  the 
two.  Every  key,  moreover,  has  its  special  key-note, 
the  fundamental  one,  to  which  all  its  melodies  con- 
duct, and  where  they  rest  at  last.  What,  then,  is 
the  key-note  of  the  natural  key,  the  equilibrial  an- 
them, the  motion  which  is  repose  ?  It  is  C  of  the 
musical  scale,  5  of  the  numerical  series.  And  to 
what  does  this  answer  scripturally  ?  We  have  only 
to  compare  our  table.  The  fundamental  thought 
connected  with  5  is  "  the  creature  in  relation  to  the 
Creator,"  or  what  is  signified  by  the  prophetical 
name  of  Him  who,  to  fulfill  it,  was  called  "  Jesus" 
— " Emmanuel,"  "God  with  us." 

This  is  the  central  note  of  the  musical  scale — the 
rest-note,  one  may  say,  of  the  whole.  From  this 
the  sharp  keys  stretch  upward,  the  flats  measure 
downward.  Could  any  thing  be  more  appropriate, 
more  beautiful,  than  this,  if  the  whole  of  the  scale 
had  been  planned  by  some  fanatic  spiritualist,  eager 


Tones  and  Undertones.  JJ 

to  press  the  universe  into  the  service  of  the  gospel  ? 
Find  me,  in  the  range  of  this  numerical  series,  any 
number  that  shall  be  so  justly  the  centre  and  meet- 
ing-place of  all  spiritual  harmonies  as  this,  in  which 
God  and  man  meet  together,  and  the  "  Father  of 
eternity"  is  a  " child  born"  whose  name  is  "The 
Mighty  God"? 

Here  God  is  God  indeed,  and  man  is  only  rightly 
man.  Each  is  in  his  place, — man  in  the  weakness 
which  so  claims  God,  and  God  in  the  almightiness 
which  can  meet  creature-need  with  unexhausted 
fullness.  It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  a  fifth  should 
be  both  the  measure  of  the  steps  by  which  the  sharp 
keys  rise  from  the  central  note,  and  the  measure 
also  by  which  the  flat  keys  descend  from  it.  But 
what,  then,  do  these  movements  represeut  ?  As 
God  and  man  are  both  together  at  the  centre,  it 
seems  as  if  God's  action  might  be  represented  in 
the  one  of  the  two,  man's  action  in  the  other.  And 
this  action  backward  as  well  as  downward  seems 
well  fitted  to  be  man's  as  that  upward  and  forward 
is  of  God. 

But  they  have  met  in  the  centre  :  are  they,  then, 
now  separating  from  one  another  ?  God  forbid  !  all 
here  is  order,  not  disorder, — harmony,  not  discord. 
The  keys  stretch,  but  do  not  separate,  from  the 
centre :  they  remain  ever  in  perfect  relation  to  it. 
It  is  in  this,  we  may  say,  they  have  their  root,  even 


78      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

as  where  God  and  man  are  not  together  we  can 
have  no  music.  And  in  the  gospel  God  has  shown 
us  how  possible  it  is  to  meet  Him,  and  find  Him  for 
us,  when  as  yet  we  realize  nothing  but  ungodliness 
and  impotence:  "When  we  were  yet  without 
strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly;" 
and  "to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  on 
Him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted 
for  righteousness." 

From  this  point  there  is  yet,  therefore,  progress, 
upward  and  downward, — upward,  for  the  purpose 
of  God  is  man's  exaltation;  downward,  for  "he  that 
humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  Thus  both  these 
series,  the  upward  and  the  downward,  may  have 
reference  to  man  ;  and  yet  the  upward  speak  none 
the  less  of  divine  action  :  for  God  alone  can  exalt, 
and  it  is  in  His  dealings  with  His  creatures  that  He 
glorifies  Himself.  Each  step  of  progress  in  both 
directions  is  marked  by  this  number  5,  for  the 
central  thought  is  thus  sustained  all  through. 
Throughout,  God  and  man  are  still  together ;  and 
throughout,  each  still  keeps  his  place.  It  is  the 
only  possible  way  of  blessing  that  this  should  be  so. 

Let  us  follow  the  descending  series  first.  Here, 
in  the  flat  keys,  we  have  really  but  one  series  of 
numbers,  while  in  the  sharps  we  have  a  double  series. 
The  reason  is,  that  in  the  flats,  the  key-note  always 
coincides  with  the  flat  added  the  previous  time<  We 


Tones  and  Undertones.  79 

have  thus  but  a  single  series  of  notes  or  numbers, 
which,  if  the  suggestion  above  be  right,  we  must 
interpret  throughout  as  relating  to  man  and  not  to 
God.  Let  us  put  them  as  a  series,  applying  our  key, 
as  we  best  may.     We  have,  then, — 


The  key  of  one  flat, 

F 

(1) 

"integrity." 

two  flats 

,B 

W 

"weakness." 

three  " 

E 

(7) 

"rest  in  perfection." 

four   " 

A 

(3) 

"sanctiflcation." 

five     " 

D 

(6) 

"victory  over  evil." 

six     " 

G 

00 

"service." 

seven" 

C 

(5) 

"reward." 

We  close  with  the  seventh  key  because  of  the 
number  itself,  as  we  know  it,  and  because  we  have 
gone  through,  thus,  all  the  numbers.  The  final  key 
certainly  yields  a  very  appropriate  number  for  the 
end  of  the  series, — a  somewhat  remarkable  series, 
even  at  first  sight,  although  it  may  not  seem  to 
present  the  regular  "pilgrim's  progress,"  which  we 
might  suppose  it  would.  I  believe  a  close  compari- 
son with  the  stages  of  the  divine  work  in  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis,  type  as  it  is  of  that  in  the  indi- 
vidual soul,  would  develop  a  very  striking  corre- 
spondence, which  it  would  require,  however,  many 
pages  to  bring  out.  A  main  difficulty  is,  that  with 
the  great  diversity  of  experiences  among  Christians 
of  which  we  must  be  conscious,  there  is  so  little 
agreement  as  to  the  order  of  attainment  and  the 
meaning  of  most  important  terms.     What,  for  in- 


80      Spiritual  Lazv  in  the  Natural  World. 

stance,  is  "  sanctification  "?  How  differently  do 
sincere  Christians  write  and  speak  of  this !  I  shall 
make,  therefore,  but  few  and  brief  remarks  upon 
what  is  before  us. 

As  the  basis  of  all  Christian  experience,  we  must 
have  come  to  God  in  Christ, — a  thing  already  indi- 
cated for  us,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  key-note  of  the 
natural  scale,  the  point  of  departure  for  the  whole 
series.  We  meet  Him  with  no  consciousness  but 
that  of  sin,  are  justified  as  ungodly;  not  as  having 
worked  for  it,  but  receiving  it  as  grace,  through 
faith.  Thus  brought  to  God,  the  grace  we  have 
realized  to  be  in  Him  operates  to  divorce  us  from 
sin,  and  to  beget  in  us  the  guileless  spirit  which 
according  to  the  Psalmist  accompanies  forgiveness. 
(Ps.  xxxii.  2.)  There  is,  for  the  first  time  in  any 
true  sense, — 

INTEGRITY 

before  God.  "  Now  to  be  Thine,  yea,  Thine  alone," 
is  the  longing  desire  of  the  heart ;  and  this  is 
plainly  the  first  necessity  for  growth.  A  "  double- 
minded  man"  lacks  every  condition  for  progress, 
plainly. 

But  with  the  heart  thus  right,  the  desire  and  in- 
tention of  obedience  implanted  in  it,  there  will  be 
naturally  at  first  no  proper  consciousness  of  the 
impotence  in  us  which  may  accompany  a  right  will. 
The  apprehension  of — 


Tones  and  Undertones.  81 

WEAKNESS 

has  to  be,  as  the  apostle  shows  us  it  is,  the  condition 
of  strength.  The  path  of  progress  is  here  a  steep 
descent  into  the  valley  of  humiliation.  "  No  confi- 
dence in  the  flesh  "  has  to  be  learnt,  and  that  all 
^//"-confidence,  even  in  the  Christian,  is  confidence 
in  the  flesh.  Holiness  is  not  to  be  attained  by  self- 
occupation,  nor  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
found  for  self-complacency  and  Pharisaism.  Here 
the  scriptural  remedy  is  most  simple,  yet  too  little 
known, — the  cross  of  Christ,  as  the  judgment  of  all 
that  we  are  in  nature  and  practice,  so  that  we  can 
turn  away  from  ourselves  to  Him  who  is  before  God 
for  us,  and  in  whom  we  are,  "  accepted  in  the  Be- 
loved." In  Christ  we  can  see  ourselves  without  the 
least  stain  or  touch  of  sin,  we  can  be  occupied  with 
ourselves  without  self-occupation  ;  "in  Christ" thus, 
we  can  realize  that  "old  things  are  passed  away, 
and  all  things  are  become  new,"  and — 

REST    IN    PERFECTION 

outside  ourselves,  yet  ours.  Nothing  will,  nothing 
ought  to,  satisfy  us  but  perfection.  To  find  it  in 
ourselves  would  be  to  lose  it;  to  find  it  in  Christ  is 
to  find  it  available  for  all  our  need,  but  leaving  us 
to  glory  in  Him  only.  "  We  are  the  circumcision, 
who  worship  God  in  the  spirit,  and  glory  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh" 
The  result  is,  practical — 


82      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

SANCTIFICATION, 

for  Christ  is  "  made  of  God  to  us  sanctification." 
"  We  all  with  open  face  beholding  the  glory  of  the 
Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory 
to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Lord  the  Spirit."  A  heart 
upon  a  heavenly  object  means,  of  necessity  a  heart 
outside  the  world.  He  who  could  say,  "To  me,  to 
live  is  holiness  "  would  leave  out  Christ.  He  who 
can  with  the  apostle  say,  "To  me,  to  live  is  Christ" 
will  of  necessity  be  holy. 

How  simple,  how  blessed,  then,  is  God's  way  of 
sanctification  !  But  it  is  the  way  too  of  all  success. 
How  mighty  in  prayer  will  he  be  to  whom  to  live  is 
Christ !     How  quiet  and  assured  may  he  be  as  to 

VICTORY    OVER    EVIL 

who  is  thus  linked  in  heart  with  Christ! 

"He  always  wins  who  sides  with  God: 
To  him  no  chance  is  lost : 
God's  will  is  sweetest  to  him  when 
It  triumphs  at  his  cost." 

Christ's  banner  never  floated  yet  in  an  uncon- 
quered  field. 

Thus  far,  then,  there  has  been  in  this  series  a  real 
and  connected  progress  of  thought.  We  have  had 
no  difficulty  in  tracing  it ;  and  it  seems  already  to 
be  in  some  sense  complete.  Yet  the  two  closing 
members  of  it  could  hardly  be  omitted  without  loss, 
and  they  come  in  with   undeniable  fitness  where 


Tones  and  Undertones.  83 

they  do.     Who  would  leave  out  of  this  catalogue  of 
blessing,  brief  though  it  be, — 

service  ? 
and  who  can  separate  it  from  that  which  divine 
love  has  ordained  to  follow  it, — 

reward  ? 
Thus  our  pilgrim  has  got  within  the  gate.     The 
series  is  manifestly  complete. 

What  shall  we  say  of  it,  now  that  it  has  ended  ? 
Is  it  any  thing  more  than  an  ingenious  play  of  fancy  ? 
Can  we  reckon,  after  all,  this  theological  lesson  as 
among  the  certainties  of  science  ?  We  neither  have 
the  will  nor  the  power  to  decide  this  for  our  readers. 
That  the  numbers  to  be  interpreted  are  there 
seems  evident ;  that  their  interpretation  is  by  a 
table  of  meanings  which  have  their  roots  in  nature 
itself  seems  equally  so  ;  that  Scripture  sustains  and 
verifies  these  meanings  is  capable  of  receiving  ex- 
tended proof,*  There  we  must  for  the  present 
leave  it ;  but  our  search  in  this  direction  is  not 
yet  over :  we  have  still  to  consider  the  sharp 
keys. 

Here  we  have  a  movement  upward  and  forward, 
with  halts  at  the  same  intervals  of  a  fifth  as  before, 
by  which  the  5  which  is  our  starting-point  is  carried 
continuously  with  us.  Here  the  key-note  lies  next 
beyond  the  added  sharp ;  so  that  we  have  a  double 
*  See  "  The  Numerical  Bible,"  passim. 


84      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

series,  of  sharps  and  key-notes,  to  consider.     Let 
us  construct  our  table. 

SHARPS.  KEY-NOTE. 

1  "  F  (1)  The  Father;  G  (2)  Christ. 

2  "  C  (5)  Divine  governm't;  D  (6)  Victory  over  evil. 

3  "  G  (2)  Christ;  A  (3)  Sanctification  (by  blood 

and  Spirit) . 

4  "  D  (6)  Conqueror;  E  (7)  Perfection  and  rest. 

5  "  A  (3)  Holy  Spirit;  B  (4)  Weakness  of  creature. 

6  "  E  (7)  Perfect  work;         F  (1)  Kingdom  of  the  Father. 

This  table  is  naturally  more  complex  than  the 
former  one.  Note  that  the  spiritual  movement 
indicated  we  have  already  suggested  as  one  from 
God  to  man,  and  that  this  governs,  therefore,  in  the 
interpretation  of  the  numbers.  Note  also  that  with 
the  sixth  key  (which  is  the  last  generally  recognized 
in  music)  we  have  returned  again  to  the  point  from 
which  we  set  out ;  the  cycle  is  complete  :  we  set  out 
from  God  and  have  returned  to  God  again. 

Not  simply  from  God  either,  but  from  the  Father. 
Notice,  once  more,  that  our  series  follows  the  order 
of  Scripture  and  of  the  creeds :  the  first  double  pair 
of  numbers  speaks  of  the  Father;  the  second,  of  the 
Son;  the  third,  of  the  Spirit;  and  the  numbers 
themselves  bind  us  to  this, — we  have  no  alternative  ! 
Yet  why  should  the  numbers  be  as  they  are?  All 
but  one  are  represented  here,  and  how  is  it  that 
every  one  turns  up  in  its  necessary  place  to  work  out 
this  result?     If  it  be  chance,  how  slender  a  chance 


Tones  and  Undertones,  85 

was  there  of  such  a  thing  !  the  law  of  probabilities 
would  say,  at  least,  millions  to  one  against  it. 

But  this  is  not  all.  Among  these  seven  numbers, 
six  of  which  have  found  their  place,  there  is  just  one 
which,  if  it  had  come  in  in  the  first  row,  would  have 
spoiled  all.  This  is  4,  the  number  of  the  creature, 
and  which  in  a  movement  from  God  to  man  would 
have  been  in  this  place  an  absolute  negation  of  such 
meaning.  It  should  not  therefore  appear,  and  it  is 
the  only  number  which  should  not.  It  should  not, 
and  it  does  not.  Is  all  this  still  chance  ?  Add  all 
that  we  have  seen  before.  Surely  all  sober  reason- 
ing is  against  the  thought  of  any  possible  delusion 
in  following  these  things  to  their  full  result. 

In  any  movement  from  God  to  man,  we  begin, 
then,  scripturally  and  necessarily,  with  the — 

FATHER. 

"To  us,"  says  the  apostle,  " there  is  but  one  God, 
the  Father,  of  whom  are  all  things."  And  in  His 
counsel  toward  man  there  is  but  one  word  that 
explains  the  whole — is  the  true  key-note,  Every 
Christian  heart  knows  it,  and  it  is  affirmed  here  by 
nature  and  in  song :  it  is — 

CHRIST. 

"  The  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the 
world."  Well  may  this  be  the  first  note  here  :  what 
other  could  take  its  place  ? 

In  the  second  pair  of  numbers  we  have  the  first 


86      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

two  repeated,  with  the  creature  one  prefixed.  They 
are  therefore  a  confirmatory  testimony  to  the  same 
truth, — not,  of  course,  a  mere  repetition  of  it.  The 
number  5  speaks,  as  we  have  seen,  of — 

DIVINE    GOVERNMENT, 

of  those  governmental  ways  of  which  Christ  is  still 
the  key.  And  the  number  which  is  in  relation  to 
this  here  shows  what  is  the  end  of  it  in  blessing  for 
us,  in  that  glorious  and  eternal — 

VICTORY    OVER    EVIL 

of  which  the  cross  is  the  great  pledge  and  prelude, 
and  in  which  God  manifests  Himself,  to  the  joy  and 
worship  of  His  creatures.  Here  the  end  is  reached 
naturally  of  the  first  division.     The  second  shows 

CHRIST 

Himself  in  the  accomplishment  of  His  work  in 
behalf  of  men.  Here  it  will  seem  to  many,  at  first 
sight,  that  the  result  of  His  work  would  be  better 
expressed  in  some  other  way  than  as — 

SANCTIFICATION, 

which  they  are  accustomed  to  ascribe  definitively  to 
the  Spirit.  Scripture,  however,  is  larger  in  its 
thought  than  this.  Thus  in  Hebrews,  for  instance, 
we  find  sanctification  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  or 
"through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  once  for 
all,"  the  blood  "  perfecting  forever  them  that  are 
sanctified."     Thus  we   have  "the  heart  sprinkled 


Tones  and  Undertones,  87 

from  an  evil  conscience,"  and  are  enabled  to  draw 
near  to  God  in  "  full  assurance  of  faith. " 

Again,  Christ  is  "made  of  God  unto  us  sanctifica- 
tion,"  having  "sanctified  Himself" — set  Himself 
apart  in  the  place  He  has  assumed  for  us  in  heaven 
— that  we  also  might  be  "sanctified  through  the 
truth."  Thus  as  an  Object  for  our  hearts  in  heaven 
He  draws  the  hearts  of  His  people  from  the  earth, 
and  gives  them  what  is  true  power  for  holiness  in 
"the  joy  of  the  Lord." 

Thirdly,  He  is  also  the  giver  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
who  takes  of  the  things  that  are  Christ's  to  show 
them  to  us.  Perhaps  no  one  word,  then,  would 
convey  the  fullness  of  His  work  for  us  so  well  as 
that  of  "sanctification." 

But  again,  the  number  6  recalls  us  to  the  thought 
of  Him  as — 

CONQUEROR. 

He  is  to  come  again,  and  to  have  all  things  put 
under  His  feet.  By  His  blood  He  reconciles  all 
things  that  are  in  heaven  or  on  earth;  and  when  He 
takes  the  throne  at  last,  it  is  to  subdue  all  to  God. 
"  Then  cometh  the  end,  when  He  shall  have  deliv- 
ered up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father ; 
when  He  shall  have  put  down  all  rule,  and  all 
authority  and  power :  for  He  must  reign  till  He 
have  put  all  enemies  under  His  feet,"  And  then 
what?     Why,— 


88      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

PERFECTION    AND    REST. 

"And  when  all  things  shall  be  subdued  under 
Him,  then  shall  the  Son  Himself  also  be  subject 
unto  Him  that  put  all  things  under  Him,  that  God 
may  be  all  in  all."  Here,  therefore,  the  second 
series  within  the  series  comes  to  an  end. 

The  third  begins  with  the  number  of  the — 

HOLY    SPIRIT, 

which,  however,  is  connected  with  one  which  may 
at  first  seem  to  be  little  in  place.  It  is  the  number 
which  speaks  of  the — 

WEAKNESS    OF    THE    CREATURE. 

We  expect,  rather,  perhaps,  something  that  speaks 
of  strength  or  fruitfulness ;  but  here,  indeed,  when 
we  are  made  thoroughly  conscious  of  it,  is  the 
secret  of  both.  The  creature  leaving  its  creature- 
place,  seeking  to  be  as  God,  fell  into  ruin.  The 
way  back  is  simply  to  take  humbly,  in  true  repent- 
ance toward  God,  the  creature-place.  "Out  of 
of  weakness"  are  we  "made  strong."  Self-abased, 
we  can  be  exalted.  A  whole  book  of  Scripture 
gives  us  the  story  of  a  "  perfect "  man,  who  learns 
by  most  painful  discipline,  and  now  with  his  eyes 
seeing  God,  to  "abhor  himself,  and  repent  in  dust 
and  ashes."  Then,  as  in  a  moment,  he  is  lifted  up 
out  of  the  dust,  and  blest.  How  simple  is  the 
lesson  !  how  strange  the  difficulty  of  learning  it ! 
Once  be  but  His  creature,  God  will  be  your  God : 


Tones  and  Undertones.  89 

to  one  with  his  body  now  dead  is  made  the  revela- 
tion of  the  almighty  God,  and  to  "  walk  before " 
Him  is  to  "be  perfect." 

Thus  now  we  have  the  number  which  speaks  of 
this ;  the — 

PERFECT    WORK 

of  the  Spirit  in  us  being  that,  which,  when  all  things 
are  indeed  subdued,  ends,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the 

KINGDOM    OF    THE    FATHER, 

where  the  subjects  are  all  children,  obedience  but  a 
deep  delight,  and  the  eternal  day  is  sanctified  in  the 
Sabbath-rest  of  the  children  of  God. 

Here,  then,  we  have  reached  the  end  of  these 
harmonic  series, — as  far,  at  least,  as  I  am  able  to 
interpret  them.  Better  theology  I  know  not, — more 
concise  simple  teaching  of  it  I  have  yet  to  find. 
Strange  indeed  it  is,  no  doubt,  to  find  it  here ;  but 
once  again  we  are  reminded  of  what  has  passed  into 
a  proverb,  that  "truth  is  stranger  than  fiction.,, 
Strange  as  it  is,  though,  there  is  nothing  about  it 
uncouth,  fantastic,  or  bizarre.  It  is  but  a  natural 
type  read  by  Scripture  ;  and  why  should  not  Nature 
have  her  types  thus,  waiting  Scripture-exposition  ? 
Is  there  any  thing  much  stranger  in  it  than  that  the 
things  that  "happened  unto  Israel"  should  have 
"happened  unto  them  for  types "  ? 

The  real  question  lurking  in  our  minds  is,  I  doubt 
not,  one  akin  to  what  was  once  plainly  put  by  those 


go     Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

who  saw  the  box  of  ointment  broken  above  their 
Master's  head.  It  would  be,  "Cut  bono  ?  "  "  To  what 
purpose  is  this  waste?"  Why  should  theology  be 
hid  in  music?  and  hid  so  securely  that  it  should 
take  nineteen  centuries  to  bring  it  out? 

Well,  if  it  be  there,  let  us  take  the  shame  of  not 
having  found  it :  what  has  barred  the  way  to  our 
possession  of  these  things,  but  little  diligence  to 
explore  God's  Word — little  belief  of  what  was  there 
for  us  ?  The  knowledge  needed  to  explore  it  is  not 
very  deep, — the  skill  to  bring  it  out  not  any  thing 
wonderful.  No  :  we  have  simply  never  looked  for 
it ;  and  "he  that  seeketh  findeth." 

Well;  but  still,  cut  bono 2  Why  should  it  not  be 
enough  to  find  theology  in  Scripture  ?  why  should 
we  think  of  it  or  find  it  in  the  laws  of  harmony  ? 
Well,  why  should  Israel's  history  teach  us  what  we 
know  without  it?  Perhaps,  after  all,  because  we 
would  not  thus  know  it  so  well.  Perhaps  because, 
if  even  man  will  not  hear,  God  will  accumulate  His 
testimonies,  and  heaven  and  earth  be  made  to  wit- 
ness against  him.  Perhaps  because  His  delight  in 
Christ  is  such  that  He  must  everywhere  express  it. 
Perhaps  to  tell  us  where  lies  the  soul  of  all  true 
harmony,  and  that  with  Him  alone  are  the  pleasures 
which  are  at  His  right  hand  for  evermore. 

For  us  now  also  it  may  testify  that  the  "crystals" 
of  theology  will   neither  be  "washed   away"  nor 


Tones  and  Undertones.  91 

" changed"  by  the  inlet  into  it  of  the  "  flood  "  of 
science.  This  thought  is  only  the  result  of  the 
waters  not  being  yet  sufficiently  settled  to  discern 
rightly  what  is  going  on.  The  sciences,  in  the  un- 
wisdom of  their  babyhood,  may  strive,  no  doubt,  to 
extinguish  the  theologians  ;  but  before  they  are 
half-grown,  they  will  be  sitting  at  their  feet.  At 
their  Master's  feet,  at  least,  all  Nature  sits  in  the 
hush  of  worship. 


92 


w 


CHAPTER   VII. 

The  Kingdoms  of  Nature. 

"E  have  as  yet,  however,  not  entered  upon  the 
field  of  science  proper.  We  are  about  to 
do  so,  and  to  inquire  what  help  may  be 
gained  from  Scripture  for  the  detailed  study  of 
nature.  In  this  numerical  system,  of  which  both 
Scripture  and  nature  are  immensely  fuller  than  has 
been  thought,  we  ought  to  find  a  wonderful  help,  if 
it  be  (as  we  have  essayed  to  show,)  the  same  system 
that  pervades  both.  Of  this  too,  all  future  applica- 
tions will  be  a  continual  test.  Thus  every  real 
discovery  will  be  verified  as  it  is  made,  in  complete 
accordance  with  the  not  unreasonable  demand  of 
Mr.  Huxley.  Nay,  it  may  be  justly  doubted  whether 
he  can  produce,  for  a  large  number  of  what  he  ac- 
cepts as  scientific  verities,  any  verification  so  com- 
plete. That  it  comes  to  him  from  Scripture  ought 
not  to  prejudice  it  in  his  eyes  ;  nor  can  the  refusal 
of  it  for  this  reason  be  justified  in  the  least  degree 
under  the  warrant  of  science. 

And  out  of  how  many  sloughs  is  he  saved  at  once 
who   can   accept   Scripture    as   the   interpreter  of 


The  Kingdoms  of  Nature.  93 

nature !  What  light  is  poured  in  there  where  the 
mere  naturalist  has  to  own  that  there  is  none ; 
and  how  this  heavenly  ray  irradiates  all  nature  ! 
How  grand  a  thing  for  the  man  of  science  to  be 
able  to  stand  at  the  beginning  of  things  with  God, 
and  to  see,  if  it  be  "  through  a  glass  darkly/'  the 
birth  of  all  that  exists  around  us !  What  a  new  and 
vast  field  of  research  opens  before  him  in  Scripture 
itself,  so  little  explored  in  this  way  as  it  has  been, 
even  to  the  present  time  :  a  field  in  which  induction 
is  as  fully  in  place  as  any  where,  and  where  micro- 
scope and  telescope  will  open  up  new  worlds,  as  in 
nature  !  Standing,  as  I  do,  but  at  the  threshold  of 
all  this,  or  given  to  enter  but  a  little  way,  I  dare 
predict  to  him  who  shall  bring  together,  as  in  a 
stereoscopic  picture,  the  two  worlds  of  Science  and 
of  Scripture  into  the  unity  which  they  really  have, 
that  he  shall  achieve  for  himself  a  triumph  and  a 
joy  beyond  utterance.  For  me  even  to  lisp  but  a 
few  things  is  yet  much;  and  I  do  it  in  the  hope 
that  others  with  better  knowledge  will  utter  them 
plainly. 

A  general  view  of  nature  is  in  some  sense  the 
easiest  to  accomplish  ;  just  because  broad  features 
are  more  easily  read  than  minute  ones.  And  my 
hope  is  in  this  chapter  to  look  at  the  kingdoms  of 
nature,  and  to  define  them,  or  rather  to  show  how 
Scripture  defines  them  ;    a  work  which  may  seem 


94      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

quite  superfluous.  But  it  is  important  to  begin  at 
the  beginning ;  and  if  some  have  no  need,  we  be- 
lieve there  is  need  for  many. 

Classification,  if  it  be  a  true  one,  must  be  of  the 
greatest  importance  in  order  to  knowledge  ;  if  false, 
it  must  be  correspondingly  injurious.  As  putting 
things  in  their  place,  and  exhibiting  their  difference 
from,  and  their  relation  to,  one  another,  a  true  and 
all-embracing  classification  would  be  indeed,  what 
one  has  called  it,  "a  summation  of  knowledge." 

Even  in  the  large  and  general  way  in  which  alone 
we  can  speak  of  it  here,  it  is  important  to  know 
what  is  the  truth.  Where,  for  instance,  shall  we 
assign  man  his  place  ? 

"The  question  of  questions  for  mankind,"  says  Prof. 
Huxley,  "the  problem  which  underlies  all  others,  and  is 
more  deeply  interesting  than  any  other, — is  the  ascertain- 
ment of  the  place  which  man  occupies  in  nature  and  of  his 
relation  to  the  universe  of  things." 

There  are  in  reality  two  questions  here  instead  of 
one ;  but  the  second  answer  he  takes  evidently,  and 
with  some  reason,  to  be  involved  in  the  first.  And 
this  is  shown  in  his  conclusion: — 

"The  structural  differences  between  Man  and  the  man- 
like Apes  certainly  justify  our  regarding  him  as  constitu- 
ting a  family  apart  from  them;  though  inasmuch  as  he 
differs  less  from  them  than  they  do  from  other  families  of 
the  same  order,  there  can  be  no  justification  for  placing 
him  in  a  distinct  order It  is  as  if  nature  herself 


The  Kingdoms  of  Nature.  95 

had  foreseen  the  arrogance  of  man,  and  with  Roman 
severity  had  provided  that  his  intellect,  by  its  very  tri- 
umphs, should  call  into  prominence  the  slaves,  admonish- 
ing the  conqueror  that  he  is  but  dust, 

"The  facts,  I  believe,  cannot  be  disputed ;  and  if  so,  the 
conclusion  appears  to  me  to  be  inevitable. 

"But  if  Man  be  separated  by  no  greater  structural  bar- 
rier from  the  brutes  than  they  are  from  one  another — then 
it  seems  to  follow  that  if  any  process  of  physical  causation 
can  be  discovered  by  which  the  genera  and  families  of  ordi- 
nary animals  have  been  produced,  that  process  of  causa- 
tion is  amply  sufficient  to  account  for  the  origin  of  man." 

And,  accordingly,  evolution  accounts  for  him. 
"Man's  place  in  nature"  is  thus  in  the  order 
Primates,  sub-order,  Anthropoidea,  and  family,  An- 
thropidae,  next  above  (and  not  very  far  off)  the  apes 
proper ;  and  this  position  of  his  means  blood- 
relationship  with  the  beasts  that  perish,  and  the 
extinction  of  every  hope  of  immortality  that  cannot 
be  shared  with  them. 

If  the  body  be  all,  it  is  impossible  to  dissent  from 
these  conclusions.  But  although  it  be  admitted  that 
the  body  is  not  all,  and  that  psychical  phenomena, 
as  sensation,  affection,  intelligence,  are  not  the  prod- 
ucts of  organization  merely,  still  it  is  in  dispute  as 
to  the  real  difference  in  this  respect  between  man 
and  the  beast.  Even  De  Quatrefages,  who  claims 
on  behalf  of  man  (as  he  says,  with  continually  grow- 
ing conviction)  that  he  must  be  referred  to  a  human 


96      Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

kingdom,  bases  this  entirely  on  the  ground  of  his 
moral  and  religious  faculties.  On  the  other  hand, 
many  now  see  in  this  respect  also  no  difference  save 
of  degree  between  them.  It  cannot  but  be  of  im- 
portance, then,  to  have  the  testimony  of  another 
witness,  and  to  see  what  Scripture — and  with  what 
grounds  in  nature — affirms  as  to  this. 

Let  us  recur  once  more  to  our  numbers,  then,  and 
ask  ourselves  what  is  the  number  of  nature,  or,  as 
Scripture  usually  prefers  to  speak,  of  creation. 
Here  there  is  not  a  moment's  doubt :  the  number  4, 
as  we  have  already  seen,  is  the  number  of  the 
creature. 

We  have,  of  course,  no  right  to  say,  on  this  ac- 
count, that  there  are  four  kingdoms  in  nature,  in- 
stead of  three,  as  nearly  all  the  world  says.  We 
have  no  right  to  predict  in  these  matters,  but  only  to 
interpret.  Yet,  if  there  were  four,  we  should  have 
a  right  to  take  it  as  a  new  witness  of  the  harmony 
between  nature  and  the  Scripture  numbers. 

Suppose,  for  a  moment,  there  were  four  kingdoms; 
there  could  not  be  a  doubt,  of  course,  that  to  the 
Animal,  Vegetable,  and  Mineral  we  must  add  the 
Human  one. 

We  should  have,  then,  three  organic  kingdoms 
and  one  /^organic. 

But  here  at  once  we  have  another  note  of  har- 
mony.    For  the  Scripture  4  divides  commonly  into 


The  Kingdoms  of  Nature.  97 

3  -f-  1,  as  we  have  seen,  the  numbers  speaking  of 
creation  as  manifesting  the  Creator.  We  are  enti- 
tled to  look  further,  then,  with  hope. 

The  fourth  must  stand  here  for  the  Mineral 
kingdom  :  has  it  the  characteristics  of  that  number  ? 
Assuredly,  if  weakness  and  passivity  characterize 
this,  it  has  these  fully.  The  inertia  of  matter  is  a 
well-known  attribute  of  it.  And  from  matter,  we 
call  that  which  yields  itself  up  to  the  hand  that 
fashions  it,  "material." 

These  are  strange  coincidences,  if  they  be  no 
more  than  that.  But  are  they  no  more  ?  Let  us 
us  examine  the  organic  kingdoms  and  the  numbers 
attached,  and  see. 

These  three  organic  kingdoms,  then,  may  be  seen 
as  one,  in  that  they  are  pervaded  by  the  common 
principle  of  life,  and  answer  to  the  number  3,  in 
that  they  are  organic.  Life  is  the  basis  of  individu- 
ality in  nature,  as  is  evident.  Every  living  thing  is 
a  unity  in  such  sense  as  a  stone  or  a  rock  is  not. 
The  rock  can  be  divided,  and  is  not  altered,  except 
in  size.  The  living  unit  may  recover  itself  after 
division,  indeed  ;  but  if  it  cannot  do  this,  dies :  it 
cannot  be  indifferent  to  it,  as  the  rock  is.  Thus  the 
four  kingdoms  of  nature  clearly  fall  into  two  divi- 
sions— the  living  and  the  non-living,  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  meaning  of  numbers,  stand  as  1  and  2. 
The  living,  though  three,  are  one. 


98      Spiritual  Lazv  in  the  Natural  World. 

They  are  one  also  in  that  they  are  all  organic. 
Yet  this  organization  which  characterizes  them, 
while  itself  one  in  the  harmony  of  its  parts,  is  more 
than  one  in  the  fact  that  there  are  parts, — organs, — 
individual,  though  harmonious.  Life  implies  ac- 
tivity, and  in  this  way  a  various  activity,  a  division 
of  labor  for  the  good  of  the  whole.  And  this  we 
shall  find  really  coming  under  the  number  3,  accord- 
ing to  the  definition  already  given  of  that  number. 

Three  is  the  number  of  sanctification  ;  and  the 
idea  in  sanctification  is  that  of  setting  apart  in  some 
special  place  or  to  some  specific  office.  When  the 
Lord  says,  "For  their  sakes  I  sanctify  Myself" 
(Jno.  xvii.  19),  He  is  speaking  of  the  place  He  is 
going  to  take  as  Man  in  heaven.  So  Jeremiah  was 
sanctified  to  be  the  Lord's  prophet,  and  Aaron  and 
his  sons  to  be  His  priests.  All  the  vessels  of  the 
tabernacle  and  of  the  temple  were  thus  set  apart  or 
sanctified  to  a  special  use  in  connection  with  the 
service  of  God.  And  here  in  nature,  where  all 
things  serve  Him,  everything  filling  its  place  and 
doing  its  work,  this  specializing  is  but,  so  to  speak, 
a  natural  sanctification.  We  shall  find  this  thought 
in  various  modifications  under  this  number,  as  we 
investigate  the  numerical  series  which  are  presented 
to  us  in  nature. 

The  three  organic  kingdoms  thus  far  fill  their 
place,  then.     But  we  have  to  go  much  further.    We 


The  Kingdoms  of  Nature.  99 

have  to  find  the  place  of  each  one  as  tested  by  the 
numerals  also :  where,  if  the  mineral  kingdom 
stands  as  4,  the  human,  animal,  and  vegetable 
kingdoms  stand  as  respectively  1,  2,  3.  Let  us 
begin  once  more  at  the  lowest,  the — 

VEGETABLE    KINGDOM. 

How  in  this  series  does  the  number  3  specifically 
characterize  the  vegetable  kingdom  ? 

With  regard  to  man  and  beast,  the  vegetable 
kingdom  has  an  indispensable  part  to  fulfill.  Ulti- 
mately, it  has  to  feed  them  both.  For  even  the 
carnivorous  animals  are  sustained  by  the  herbivo- 
rous ;  and  did  the  beasts  prey  simply  upon  each 
other,  there  would  soon  be  of  necessity  an  end  of 
all.  But  this  place  filled  by  the  vegetable  depends 
upon  this,  that  it  alone  has  the  power  of  taking  up 
and  transforming  the  inorganic  material  into  organic 
upon  which  alone  the  higher  organisms  can  subsist. 
It  is  the  price  they  pay  for  their  elevation  in  the 
scale  of  being,  that  they  must  be  more  dependent ; 
and  this  is  a  constant  law  of  nature. 

The  vegetable  is  in  this  way  the  great  transform- 
ing agency  in  creation, — the  producer,  as  the  animal 
is  the  consumer.  Every  naturalist  in  the  world  will 
agree  to  this  .definition  of  it.  And  yet  this,  again, 
clearly  lies  within  the  compass  of  the  number  3. 
The  Spirit  of  God,  whose  number  it  is,  is  thus  the 
Great  Producer  and  the  Great  Transformer.     Spe- 


ioo    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

cialization  implies  transformation.  Sanctification, 
when  an  inward  work,  is  the  same  thing.  The 
water,  the  type  of  the  Spirit,  is  that  which  prepares 
the  root  for  the  soil  and  the  soil  for  the  root :  with- 
out its  mediation,  no  food  could  be  got  from  the 
barren  ground.  Thus  the  number  of  its  rank  in 
this  series  fully  characterizes  the  plant  in  the  or- 
ganic creation  :  its  numerical  stamp  is  completely 
justified. 

Let  us  pass  to  the — 

ANIMAL    KINGDOM, 

still  with  our  guide,  and  see  how  the  more  complex 
nature  of  the  higher  being  will  submit  itself  to  the 
simplicity  of  this  arithmetical  law. 


101 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
Animal   and   Human. 

THE  vegetable  has  life ;  and  life  is  a  mystery 
entirely  beyond  us.  Nothing  has  demon- 
strated this  better  than  all  the  labor  that  has 
been  now  for  a  good  while  bestowed  upon  it  in  the 
opposite  interest.  That  it  is  known  only  to  proceed 
from  life  is  now  admitted  even  by  those  whose 
every  hope  for  their  theory  depends  on  the  specula- 
tion that  in  another  age  of  the  world,  somewhere, 
somewhen,  it  may  have  been  different.  In  our 
present  inquiry,  we  are  happily  delivered  from  the 
necessity  of  discussing  such  things.  Scripture  still 
leaves  it  a  mystery,  and  we  must :  no  less  real  on 
that  account  than  the  countless  mysteries  that 
everywhere  surround  us. 

When  we  pass  from  the  vegetable  to  the  animal 
world,  however,  it  is  not  with  life  alone  that  we 
have  to  do,  but  with  that  which  is  much  more 
strange  to  our  partial  systems  of  natural  science, 
— the  living  soul. 

Here,  indeed,  theologians  often  themselves  are  in 
confusion,  and  have  not  given  consistent  testimony 


102    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

to  the  Scripture-doctrine.  They  have  often  made 
the  possession  of  soul  distinctive  of  man,  or,  con- 
founding soul  and  spirit,  have  ascribed  the  latter  to 
the  beast.  They  have  thus  lost,  on  the  one  hand  or 
the  other,  the  simple  distinguishing  marks  of  the 
organic  kingdoms.  According  to  Scripture,  it  is 
nevertheless  as  clear  as  need  be,  that  in  the  vegeta- 
ble we  have  life  without  soul ;  in  the  animal,  life 
and  soul ;  and  in  man,  life,  soul,  and  spirit. 

Let  us  first  get  clearly  hold  of  the  Scripture  doc- 
trine. 

In  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  it  will  be  noted 
that  although  we  ordinarily  speak  of  the  six  days  of 
creation,  the  term  is  only  used  in  it  in  relation  to 
three  things.  First,  "in  the  beginning  God  created 
the  heaven  and  the  earth."  Secondly,  on  the  fifth 
day,  "  God  created  every  living  soul  that  moveth. 
Thirdly,  on  the  sixth  day,  "God  created  man  in  His 
own  image." 

Now,  the  meaning  usually  given  to  the  word 
"  created  "  has  been  questioned  or  denied  ;  but  here 
throughout  it  seems  in  contrast  with  mere  making, 
and  strictly  to  apply  to  the  bringing  into  being 
of  something  not  developed  out  of  any  thing  pre- 
existing. In  the  beginning,  (if  strictly  that,)  there 
was  nothing  pre-existing.  The  "living  soul  "  was 
an  entirely  new  existence,  not  a  development  out  of 
matter  or  its  forces.     In  man,  there  is  spirit  as  well 


Animal  and  Human.  103 

as  soul :  hence  again  a  new  existence,  and  that  in 
the  image  of  God, 

Notice,  that  the  living  soul  is  in  the  thirtieth 
verse  {margin)  distinctly  said  to  be  'in*  "  every 
thing  that  moveth  on  the  earth; "  and  that  while  the 
functions  of  nutrition  and  reproduction  are  by 
physiologists  styled  "vegetative  functions,"  the  an- 
nimal  ones  are  those  of  sensation  and  voluntary 
motion.  Both  are  indicated  in  the  "  living  soul 
that  moveth,"  with  perfect  accuracy. 

The  "soul"  in  Scripture*  is  the  seat  of  the 
emotions,  love,  hate,  pity,  longing,  lust,  appetite, 
and  of  the  life  also  of  the  body.  It  is  the  sensitive 
nature,  including  in  man  what  we  usually  call  the 
heart.  If  "knowledge"  is  also  ascribed  to  it,  we 
can  readily  understand  this,  speaking  as  we  do  also 
of  knowledge  of  the  heart :  but  the  seat  of  true 
intellect  is  the  spirit. 

And  this  in  man  it  is  that  shows  him  to  be  in  the 
image  of  God.  This  has  by  some  been  referred  to 
his  position  as  His  representative  on  earth,  the  head 
over  all  in  it ;  but  this  is  impossible  as  the  true  view, 
for  in  that  case,  he  would  not  have  been  created  in 
it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  parallel  expression  in 
the  fifth  chapter,  where  Adam  is  said  to  have  begot- 
ten a  son  "after  his  image,"  may  well  explain  the 


*  Nephesh  in  the  Old,  psuche  in  the  New  Testament.    In  the  passage 
above,  and  often  in  our  common  version,  "  creature." 


104    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

thought.  We  are  thus  "the  offspring  of  God  ;"  as 
the  apostle  quotes  to  the  Athenians.  In  man  there 
are  "spirit,  soul,  and  body"  (i  Thess.  v.  23),  and 
God  is  the  "Father  of  spirits"  (Heb.  xii.  9),  Him- 
self "  Spirit."  How  clear  this  makes  the  statement 
in  Genesis  !  Had  it  said  "  Father  of  souls"  it  would 
have  made  Him  Father  of  the  beasts. 

So  also  is  He  the  "  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  " 
(Num.  xvi.  22),  for  the  spirit  is  that  alone  by  which 
we  apprehend  God,  or  (in  that  sense)  have  one.  It 
is  that  by  which  we  "know  the  things  of  a  man" 
(1  Cor.  ii.  11),  and  is  rendered  in  our  version  in 
several  passages  "  mind  "  or  "  understanding,"  which 
is  plainly  its  true  sense.  To  the  beast  it  never  is 
ascribed.*  "All  flesh"  is  commonly  in  Scripture 
limited  to  man  :  as  where  the  Spirit  is  promised  to 
be  poured  out  on  all  flesh  (Acts  ii.  17),  or  all  flesh  is 
to  see  the  salvation  of  God.  (Luke  iii.  6.) 

Thus  by  "spirit"  man  is  in  relationship  to  God, 
and  thus  also  to  eternity.  If  there  are  passages 
which  may  seem  equivocal  as  to  the  soul,  and  the 
beasts  that  have  soul  are  still  "beasts  that  perish," 
(Ps.  xlix.  20,)  there  is  not  in  the  Word  of  God  a 
shadow  upon  the  immortality  of  spirit  from  end 

*One  passage  only  can  with  any  plausibility  be  supposed  to  do  this  : 
Eccl.  iii.  21.  But  it  is  merely  the  language  of  doubt  from  the  stand- 
point of  human  knowledge  :  "  who  knoweth?"  where  ruach  also  may 
mean  "  breath  "  or  "  spirit,"  according  to  the  context.  See  my  "  Facts 
and  Theories  as  to  a  Future  State,"  pp.  44-80,  for  the  full  argument  as 
to  Soul  and  Spirit. 


Animal  and  Human.  105 

to  end.  Nay,  man  who  is  in  this  life  characterized 
as  a  "  living  soul/'  (Gen.  ii.  7)  as  soon  as  he  departs 
is  no  more  this,  but  is  a  "spirit."  He  still  has  a 
soul,  as  "Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell"  is 
proof  ;  but  all  the  more  striking  is  it  that  soul  has 
ceased  to  define  him  :  "  they  thought  that  they  had 
seen  a  spirit ;"  "a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones, 
as  ye  see  Me  have."  Indeed,  our  own  use  of  lan- 
guage recognizes  the  same  distinctions ;  for,  while 
we  speak  commonly,  without  the  least  materialistic 
meaning,  of  souls  perishing  by  flood  or  plague,  we 
never  think  of  spirits  doing  so  ;  and  the  departed 
man  we  still  call  a  "ghost"  or  "spirit" — words 
equivalent  in  meaning. 

But  why,  then,  this  use  of  the  word  "soul  "for 
man  in  this  life?  which  we  find,  moreover,  just 
where  naturally  we  should  expect  something  else. 
For,  when  in  Genesis  we  have  seen  his  very  body 
moulded  out  of  the  dust  with  special  care,  and  then 
the  breath  of  life  inbreathed  by  God  as  if  He  would 
endow  him  with  something  from  Himself  which 
should  bring  him  into  a  relationship  with  Himself 
known  by  no  other  being  upon  earth,  it  does  seem 
disappointing  all  our  expectations,  just  to  say,  "And 
man  became  " — not  a  spirit  or  the  offspring  of  God, 
but — "a  living  soul:"  after  all,  only  what  the 
beast  is  ! 

Look  deeper,  and  the  disappointment  passes,  and 


106    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

gives  place  to  other  feelings.  Scripture  is  only 
more  accurate,  more  scientific,  than  we  are  prepared 
for.  In  exact  classification  every  one  knows  that 
we  have  genus  and  species,  and  that  we  have  them 
in  this  order  and  distinct.  The  generic  must  not  be 
mixed  with  the  specific  definition,  nor  must  the 
specific  precede  the  generic ;  otherwise  we  have 
real  confusion,  such  as  Scripture  is  never  guilty  of. 
In  these  two  accounts  of  man's  creation,  in  the  first 
two  chapters  of  Genesis,  we  have  no  confusion,  and 
no  meaningless  repetition  either.  In  the  first,  man's 
generic  place  is  given,  in  contrast  with  the  animals, 
where  it  is  needed  to  distinguish  him.  Here  it 
would  not  do  to  speak  of  him  as  a  "  living  soul  " — 
that  would  not  distinguish.  He  is  thus  spoken  of 
first  as  in  the  image  of  God,  created  in  it,  thus  im- 
plying spirit,  as  we  have  seen.  He  belongs,  then, 
to  the  genus  "  spirit,"  as  do  the  angels,  as  do  not  the 
beasts  :  he  belongs  to  the  family  of  God.  The 
second  chapter  does  not  repeat  this :  it  gives  his 
specific  distinction  in  this  spiritual  genus.  Here  to 
define  him  as  spirit  would  not  distinguish  him:  no; 
his  distinction  here,  as  from  the  angels,  is  evidently 
just  what  is  given  us, — his  specific  distinction — that 
he  is  a  "  living  soul." 

And  what,  then,  does  this  imply?  Is  it  not 
plainly  that  he  is  a  spirit  in  disguise?  linked  with  a 
lower    nature,    which,    while    suited   to   the  animal 


Animal  and  Human.  107 

merely,  to  him  becomes  a  yoke,  a  discipline,  a  hu- 
miliation, just  because  he  is  more?  What  helpless- 
ness is  like  the  helplessness  of  a  human  babe  ? 
How  long  does  it  take  to  put  man  in  possession  of 
those  faculties  in  him  that  transcend  the  beast ! 
Nay,  more,  in  those  which  but  equal  him  with  the 
beast  he  is  painfully  deficient.  The  beast's  instincts 
fit  it  from  the  start  for  the  sphere  in  which  it  is  to 
move.  In  man,  they  drudge  but  in  service  to  a 
higher  nature,  more  dependent  because  it  is  higher 
— because  in  a  world  like  this,  built  up  from  the 
bottom,  as  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  shows  it,  that 
which  is  higher  is  dependent  upon  all  that  is  built  up 
upon.  Thus,  as  the  soul  leans  upon  the  body,  so  the 
spirit  upon  the  soul.  The  lowest  faculties  develop 
first,  just  because  the  others  must  by  their  means. 
The  mind  furnishes  itself  through  the  senses :  the 
tangible,  material  things  must  supply  the  images  of 
the  unseen  and  spiritual :  and  of  this,  it  is  well 
known,  the  roots  of  all  language  are  a  perfect  wit- 
ness to  us.  Man  is  a  spirit,  but  a  spirit  in  humilia- 
tion. "We  see  through  a  glass  darkly" — "in  a 
riddle/'  as  the  last  word  means, — groping  in  the 
twilight  before  we  see;  learning  by  putting  together 
fragments  of  knowledge,  by  induction  and  deduc- 
tion, by  theorizing  and  verification,  the  painful  labor 
of  it  all  a  constant  lesson  of  lowliness,  if  we  will 
learn  it ;  if  not,  a  constant  witness  against  our  pride. 


108    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

And  is  not  this  the  need  of  it,  and  the  moral 
justification  of  it  all  ?  If  we  will  still  listen  to  Scrip- 
ture, it  was  through  pride  that  Satan  fell,  (i  Tim. 
iii.  6.)  Created  after  the  angels'  fall,  by  and  by  to 
be  tempted  in  the  same  direction  ("Ye  shall  be  as 
God ")  and  to  yield,  these  limitations  and  depen- 
dences are  not  a  needless  humiliation  for  man,  but 
the  true  and  tender  discipline  of  the  "Father  of 
spirits,"  who,  necessarily,  and  for  our  profit,  chast- 
eneth  every  son  whom  He  receiveth."  Let  us  not 
fret  under  it,  nor  faint,  nor  be  indifferent.  Faith 
will  turn  it  all  to  blessing;  and  faith  here  alone  is 
reasonable;  faith  it  is  that  finds  verification  from 
every  whit  of  real  knowledge. 

But  this,  then,  in  brief,  is  man  ;  and  thus  he  is 
distinguished  from  the  beast.  His  kingdom  is  that 
of  spirit,  while  it  is  fully  allowed  that  by  one  side 
he  is  related  to  the  beast.  Granting  this,  it  is  yet 
only  a  partial  and  materialistic  classification  that 
can  assign  him  his  place  in  nature  with  the  beast. 
He  is  a  true  microcosm,  in  whom  all  the  elements 
of  the  world  in  which  he  is  are  assimilated  into  a 
perfect  unity,  which  sin  has  indeed  obscured,  but 
not  destroyed.  Life  is  indeed,  as  has  been  already 
said,  the  basis  of  organic  unity.  Yet  in  the  plant, 
the  individual  organism  can  be  divided  again  and 
again,  and  multiplied  by  division.  So  in  the  lowest 
animals,  as  notably  in  the  Hydrae,  we  find  soul  itself 


Animal  and  Human.  109 

little  jealous  of  a  similar  division.  In  the  Zoophytes 
it  is  often  hard  to  say  what  an  individual  really  is  ; 
and  thus  we  may  suspect  even  in  the  higher  animals 
that  it  is  more  the  complexity  of  the  organism  than 
the  nature  of  the  soul  that  resists  division.  But  in 
man  with  spirit  we  find  personality,  a  unity  which 
appears  in  consciousness,  and  asserts  sovereignty 
over  all  the  lower  nature.  Here  is  at  last  a  being 
who  can  say  "I,"  and  despite  the  constant  change 
in  his  material  frame,  affirms  his  own  continuous 
identity.  Thus  in  his  sphere,  small  though  it  may 
be,  he  is  truly  in  the  image  of  God,  the  unchange- 
able One, — His  offspring. 

He  is  naturally  also  as  a  species  one,  although 
here  some  would  fain  have  had  it  otherwise.  In  his 
triune  nature,  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  representing 
severally  the  three  organic  kingdoms,  he  of  neces- 
sity conforms  as  they  do,  to  the  numerical  law. 

But  the  animal  kingdom  requires  further  consider- 
ation. What  does  the  number  two  indicate  as  to  it? 
As  we  have  already  seen,  that  the  soul  is  character- 
istic of  the  animal,  it  is  in  the  soul  that  we  must 
find,  as  it  would  seem,  the  number  significant.  It 
may  not  of  course  be  confined  to  this,  but  at  least 
here  we  should  expect  to  find  prominent  the  indica- 
tions of  the  number.  How,  then,  does  the  number 
two  characterize  soul? 

We  have  here  a  subject  little  explored,  and  upon 


1 10   Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

which  we  can  find  little  direct  help  from  science. 
But  the  researches,  which  have  of  late  been  many, 
into  the  difference  between  man  and  beast,  indi- 
rectly throw  much  light  upon  it. 

Take  the  following  from  the  Duke  of  Argyle  : — 

"It  is  often  said  we  can  never  really  know  what  unrea- 
soning instinct  is,  because  we  can  never  enter  into  an 
animal  mind,  and  see  what  is  working  there.  Men  are  so 
apt  to  be  arrogant  in  philosophy,  that  it  seems  almost 
wrong  to  deprecate  even  any  semblance  of  the  conscious- 
ness of  ignorance.  But  it  were  much  to  be  desired  that 
the  modesty  of  philosophers  would  come  in  the  right 
place.  I  hold  that  we  can  know,  and  can  almost 
thoroughly  understand,  the  instincts  of  the  lower  ani- 
mals ;  and  this,  for  the  best  of  all  reasons,  that  we  our- 
selves are  animals,  whatever  more; — having,  to  a  large 
extent,  precisely  the  same  instincts,  with  the  additional 
power  of  looking  down  upon  ourselves  in  this  capacity 
from  a  higher  elevation  to  which  we  can  ascend  at  will. 
....  In  contemplating  the  phenomena  of  reasoning  and 
of  conscious  deliberation,  it  really  seems  as  if  it  were 
impossible  to  sever  it  from  the  idea  of  a  double  person- 
ality. Tennyson's  poem  of  the  *  Two  Voices '  is  no  poetic 
exaggeration  of  the  duality  of  which  we  are  conscious 
when  wre  attend  to  the  mental  operations  of  our  own 
most  complex  nature.  It  is  as  if  there  were  within  us 
one  Being  always  receptive  of  suggestions,  and  always 
responding  in  the  form  of  impulse — and  another  Being 
capable  of  passing  these  suggestions  in  review  before  it, 
and  of  allowing  or  disallowing  the  impulses  to  which  they 
give  rise.    There  is  a  profound  difference  between  crea- 


Animal  and  Human.  1 1  I 

tures  in  which  one  only  of  these  voices  speaks,  and  Man, 
whose  ears  are,  as  it  were,  open  to  them  both.  The 
things  which  we  do  in  obedience  to  the  lower  and  sim- 
pler voice  are  indeed  many,  various,  and  full  of  a  true  and 
wonderful  significance.  But  the  things  which  we  do,  and 
the  affections  which  we  cherish,  in  obedience  to  the  higher 
voice,  have  a  rank,  a  meaning,  and  a  scope  which  is  all 
their  own.  There  is  no  indication  in  the  lower  animals  of 
this  double  personality.  There  is  no  indication  that  they 
hear  any  voice  but  one ;  and  there  is  every  indication  that 
in  obeying  it  the  whole  law  of  their  being  is  perfectly  ful- 
filled. This  it  is  which  gives  such  restfulness  to  Nature, 
whose  abodes  are  indeed  what  Wordsworth  calls  them — 
1  Abodes  where  Self-disturbance  hath  no  part.'  " 

This  impulsive,  instinctive  life  is  evidently  what 
according  to  what  we  have  seen,  the  mere  soul-life 
of  the  beast  is, — in  a  relation  of  dependence  to  a 
Mind  whose  will  it  expresses,  but  of  which  it  is  un- 
conscious, and  which  is  not  its  own.  Now,  this  is 
what  the  number  two  expresses,  as  has  been  already 
said  ;  and  what  makes  them  fit  to  be  the  servants  of 
man,  under  whom  they  were  originally  placed,  and 
who  may  be  to  them  thus,  in  such  measure  as  he 
practically  fills  the  place  allotted  to  him  of  God,  the 
mind  they  lack.  Abdicate  the  place  too  he  may, 
and  then  those  that  should  have  been  his  servants 
only,  become  his  enemies,  and  this  is  what,  since 
the  fall,  we  experience  in  varying  measure,  though 
still  enough  evidence  remains  of  what  originally 
God  designed. 


H2    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

This  is  from  one  side  what  the  beast  is  ;  from  an- 
other, he  is  the  consumer  of  what  the  plant  manu- 
factures, the  balance-wheel  against  over-production: 
and  this  too  is  very  fully  accordant  with  his  numeri- 
cal place.  As  the  chemist  puts  it,  he  is  the  oxidizer, 
as  the  plant  is  the  reducer,  and  between  them  the 
interplay  of  the  vital  forces  is  maintained. 

Even  in  his  body — and  so  in  man's,  which  is  still 
animal, — there  is  found,  as  I  think,  the  stamp  of  his 
number,  in  that  bilaterality  which  everywhere  seems 
(in  contrast  with  the  plant)  the  stamp  of  the  animal. 
As  Prof.  Clark  has  said  : — 

"  All  animals  are  double,  even  man  ....  bilaterality  is 
the  basis  upon  which  the  animal  structure  is  erected;  and 
whatever  modification  there  may  be  in  this  feature,  this 
type  of  form,  such  a  modification  is  subordinate  to  the 


Thus  it  is  not  a  feature  of  secondary  importance 
that  is  marked  by  this  number,  but  one  of  funda- 
mental importance. 

Has  it  to  do  with  that  voluntary  movement  which 
is  part  of  the  definition  of  the  animal  in  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis,  "the  living  soul  that  moveth"  ? 
In  the  higher  orders,  as  the  Articulates  and  Verte- 
brates, one  might  easily  imagine  so,  even  the  brain 
(which  is  double)  being  largely  occupied  with  the 
control  of  movement,  as  Ferrier  and  others  since 
have  fully  shown.    This  is  but  a  suggestion,  though 


Animal  and  Human.  113 

a  reason  for  this  peculiarity  of  structure  there  must 
be  ;  and  this,  if  it  could  be  shown,  would  complete 
the  harmony  in  this  respect  between  nature  and 
Scripture.  At  any  rate,  the  living  soul  fills  its 
place. 


H4 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Classification. 

TO  touch  the  subject  of  classification  even,  one 
must  be  very  bold,  very  ignorant,  or — and  I 
would  rather  have  this  considered  to  be  my 
own  case — very  confident  in  his  guide.  It  will  be 
seen,  in  fact,  that  I  have  already  touched  it,  and  that 
my  readers  have  some  right  to  assert  that  the  princi- 
ples that  have  been  announced  ought,  if  true,  to  carry 
one  further.  If  nature  have,  to  the  extent  affirmed 
already  in  these  pages,  a  numerical  structure,  then 
is  it  at  all  likely  that  this  should  be  but  so  partial  a 
truth?  Must  not  the  smaller  divisions,  as  well  as 
the  larger,  if  once  they  are  ascertained,  be  char- 
acterized by  these  significant  numbers  ?  Nay,  would 
it  not  seem  that  their  first  service  to  us  here,  if,  as 
is  plain,  they  are  meant  to  do  us  service,  will  be  to 
verify  true  classification  ? 

Certainly  this  seems  a  first  necessity  in  order  to 
find  what  deeper  meaning  than  we  have  yet  realized 
lies  hid  in  nature.  We  must  have  some  arrange- 
ment of  the  multifarious  objects  she  presents  to  us 
which  will  save  us  the  impossible  toil  of  accumulat- 
ing in  our  minds  the  tens  of  thousands  of  points  of 


Classification.  115 

detail, —  of  resemblance  and  of  contrast, —  which 
distract  and  bewilder  us,  if  without  a  clue  we  at- 
tempt to  penetrate  what  is  yet,  even  to  the  most 
devoted  students  of  it,  so  much  a  wilderness  of 
facts  and  hypotheses. 

Classification,  if  it  be  a  true  one,  is  the  putting 
things  in  their  places,  defining  their  relationship  to 
one  another  and  to  the  general  plan  ;  and  that  plan 
— if  there  be  one — must  be  God's  plan,  the  expres- 
sion of  the  divine  mind  in  nature,  the  lesson  He  has 
set  for  us  to  learn,  however  poorly  or  imperfectly 
we  may  in  fact  learn  it.  Classification  is  in  this 
sense  of  transcendent  importance ;  and  I  trust,  the 
thought  of  this  may  plead  for  me,  if  I  offer  but 
some  scattered  and  feeble  suggestions  as  to  it, 
which,  if  they  be  little  enlightening,  may  yet  help 
another  perhaps  to  find  the  light. 

Surely,  the  thing  that  becomes  us,  as  those  in 
our  Father's  image,  is  to  expect  to  find  every- 
where in  what  He  has  made  the  impress  of  its 
Maker,  His  own  manifestation  to  the  minds  of 
those  who  seek  Him  in  it.  And  (it  may  be  again 
said)  if  He  have  forbidden  to  us  idle  words,  there 
will  be  in  all  this  no  idle  word.  Serious,  yet  blessed 
meaning  will  face  us  everywhere  ;  and  to  look  for 
this  is  to  find  it,  if  only  we  look  reverently,  as  those 
that  value  what  they  search  for.  Here  the  law  holds 
good, — "every  one  that  seeketh  findeth."     Encour- 


1 1 6    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

aged  thus  by  the  Word  of  God  itself,  we  may  go  on. 

Classifications  are  numerous  enough,  but  in  look- 
ing round  among  them  one  can  find  few  indeed  that 
claim  for  themselves  any  principle  of  construction 
which  can  give  us  the  least  hope  of  such  a  clue  to 
the  divine  plan  as  we  are  seeking.  The  meaning 
that  Darwinism  seeks  has  no  purpose  in  it,  therefore 
no  intelligence  ;  and  the  systems  devised  in  this 
interest  have  as  their  only  end,  to  discover  the 
genealogical  tree  of  life,  which,  whether  it  has  its 
root  in  chance  or  necessity,  was  never  watered  by 
the  river  of  God,  and  bears  no  fruit  but  Dead  Sea 
apples.  Nor  in  general  has  any  divine  plan  been 
seriously  thought  of.  There  is,  however,  an  excep- 
tion to  this;  and,  if  "he  that  seeketh  findeth,"  we 
may  hope  to  have  here  at  least  a  beginning  of 
truth.  Strange  to  say,  the  first  outline  of  it  was 
struck  out  nearly  at  the  same  time  by  two  men 
entirely  apart  from  one  another,  the  Wallace  and 
Darwin,  let  us  hope,  of  a  better  day  beginning,  and 
for  which  we  would  be  glad  to  believe  in  the  "sur- 
vival of  the  fittest."  That  its  discoverers  have 
passed  away,  and  the  system  itself  has,  after  awak- 
ening some  attention  for  awhile,  died  also,  need  not 
forbid  hope,  for  many  a  truth  discovered  has  had 
ordained  for  it  such  a  death,  and  yet  in  due  time 
resurrection;  and  it  may  be  so  with  this. 

The  system  has  for  us  also  this  additional  attrac- 


Classification.  117 

tion,  that  it  is  a  nu??ierical  one.  Thus  our  hope 
brightens,  especially  as  it  purports  to  be  not  a 
hypothesis,  but  a  discovery, — a  report  of  what  those 
versed  in  certain  branches  of  natural  history  had 
observed  in  their  respective  departments ;  not  a 
theory  of  what  should  be  there,  but  of  what  (accord- 
ing to  their  belief)  was  there. 

The  first  of  these  discoverers  had  given  himself 
to  the  special  study  of  insects,  and  the  volume 
which  contained  his  first  rough  sketches  was  called" 
Horce  Entomologicoe.  But  Mr.  McLeay's  system  was 
taken  up,  and  in  some  sense  remodeled,  by  a  well- 
known  man,  and  author  of  a  book  in  which  it  was 
elaborated  and  applied  especially  to  Ornithology — 
the  "Fauna  Boreali-Americana."  From  a  later  and 
smaller  book,  the  "  Geography  and  Classification  of 
Animals,"  published  in  1835,  I  take  the  outlines  of 
the  completed  system. 

The  first  principle  of  Mr.  McLeay's  system  is, 
that  every  natural  series  or  group  of  animals  is 
circular  j — 

"So  that,  upon  commencing  at  any  given  point,  and 
thence  tracing  all  the  modifications  of  structure,  we  shall 
be  imperceptibly  led,  after  passing  through  numerous 
forms,  again  to  the  point  from  which  we  started." 

The  second   principle   is,   that   the    divisions   of 
every  group,  where  any  exist,  are  five  in  number. 
To  which  Mr.  Swainson  adds,  that  the  primary 


1 1 8    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

circular  divisions  of  every  natural  group  are  three 
actually,  and  five  apparently.  He  calls  these  three, 
the  typical,  subtypical,  and  aberrant  groups ;  and 
adds — 

"The  difference  of  considering  a  natural  group  as 
divisible  into  three  instead  of  tive,  does  not  in  the  least 
affect  the  natural  series  by  which  they  are  united.  The 
discovery  of  the  union  of  Mr.  McLeay's  three  aberrant 
groups  into  a  circle  of  their  own,  is  the  addition  only  of  a 
property  superadded  to  that  which  they  were  known  to 
possess ;  this  property  consisting  of  uniting  into  a  circle 
among  themselves,  as  well  as  passing  into  the  typical  and 
subtypical  groups." 

The  third  principle  is  this, — 

"That  the  contents  of  every  circular  group  are  sym- 
bolically or  analogically  represented  by  the  contents  of 
every  other  circle  in  the  animal  kingdom." 

And  the  fourth  principle,  which  seems  really  in- 
volved in  the  last,  although  it  was  first  stated  ex- 
plicitly by  Mr.  Swainson,  is — 

"That  the  primary  divisions  of  every  circular  group 
are  characterized  by  definite  peculiarities  of  form,  struc- 
ture, and  economy;  which,  under  diversified  modifica- 
tions, may  be  traced  throughout  the  animal  kingdom;  and 
are  therefore  to  be  regarded  as  the  primary  types  of 
nature." 

This  is  the  completed  system,  certainly  remark- 
able for  its  simplicity  and  symmetry  at  any  rate, 
while  its  requirements  are  sufficiently  great  to  make 


Classification.  1 1 9 

it  impossible,  if  they  can  be  met  in  practice,  for  the 
system  which  can  meet  them  to  be  other  than  the 
truth.     We  shall  return  to  this  directly. 

The  second  discoverer  of  this  numerical  system 
was  Elias  Fries,  a  distinguished  botanist,  who  in  his 
Systema  Mycologicum  applied  it  to — 

"The  full  investigation  of  the  whole  class  of  Fungi," 
says  Mr.  Swainson,  "through  all  its  minor  groups  or 
subdivisions."  "It  is  very  remarkable  that  this  con- 
summate botanist,  totally  ignorant  of  the  previous  pub- 
lication of  the  Horce  Entomologicce,  should  have  detected 
the  same  principles  of  circular  affinities  therein  devel- 
oped, and  should  have  illustrated  them  by  analysis  much 
more  fully.  Yet,  although  these  naturalists  agree  in  con- 
sidering the  cirenlarity  of  groups  to  be  the  first  princi- 
ple of  the  natural  system,  they  differ  in  the  determinate 
number  of  their  groups;  those  of  Mr.  McLeay  being,  in 
fact,  ten  (or,  according  to  his  subsequent  belief,  five)  ;  and 
those  of  M.  Fries  four.  It  seems,  however,  that  the 
centrum  or  typical  group  of  the  German  botanist,  is  always 
divisible  into  two  series  (sed  centrum  abit  semper  in  duas 
series)  ;  and  that  each  of  his  series  or  groups  is  a  circle 
appears  evident  from  the  following  words: — Omnis  sectio 
naturalis  circulum  per  se  clausum  exhibet, — that  is,  every 
section,  series,  or  group  forms  of  itself  a  circle.  Hence 
it  follows,  that,  as  one  of  M.  Fries's  groups,  according 
to  his  own  account,  is  always  divisible  into  two,  thus 
their  total  number  is  not  four,  but  five.  The  difference, 
therefore,  between  this  theory  and  the  last  is  rather 
nominal  than  real:  for  as  M.  Fries  at  the  same  time 
detected  the  theory" — principle? — "of  representation,  by 


120   Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

which  the  contents  of  one  circle  typified  the  contents  of 
a  neighboring  circle,  this,  of  course,  led  him  clearly  to 
understand,  and  to  define  the  difference  between  analogy 
and  affinity." 

Thus  two  natural  explorers,  in  different  depart- 
ments of  research,  came  to  the  discovery,  as  they 
believed,  of  a  natural  system,  in  itself  sufficiently 
striking  in  its  features,  and  much  more  so  as  inde- 
pendently developed.  The  distinguished  naturalists 
to  whom  I  have  compared  them  had  predecessors 
more  or  less  in  their  own  line.  It  does  not  appear 
that  Messrs.  McLeay  and  Fries  had  any  help  of  this 
kind ;  and  their  views  seem  certainly  to  claim,  if 
only  on  this  account,  a  careful  examination. 

The  system  also,  as  I  have  said,  is  one  which, 
taken  in  all  its  features,  makes  too  many  demands 
upon  its  followers,  to  carry  without  conquering  the 
minds  of  practical  observers ;  and  that  it  has  been 
capable  of  being  applied  by  those  who  were  such  to 
different  and  extended  fields  of  natural  research, 
argues  for  it  much.  It  does  not  hide  itself  from  ex- 
amination in  the  mists  of  geologic  ages,  or  discount 
unlimited  "  drafts  upon  the  bank  of  time,"  but  ap- 
peals for  examination  in  the  light  of  nature  as  it  is 
to-day,  and  expects  its  riches  from  existing  bullion. 
We  may  take  it  up  hopefully,  especially  as  a  numeri- 
cal system,  and  which  as  such  we  may  test  by  what 
light  we  have  got  from  numbers, — a  test  of  a  very 


Classification.  121 

strict  kind,  as  must  be  evident.  How  will  it  be 
borne  ?  How  will  Scripture  vindicate  itself  here 
again  as  the  interpreter  of  nature?  Shall  we  find  it 
still  a  spiritual  realm,  and  its  law  therefore  spiritual 
law  ?     Let  us  see. 

We  have,  then,  a  quinary  system  which  in  a  cer- 
tain aspect  of  it  is  also  a  ternary  one.  These  num- 
bers, three  and  five,  are  very  prevalent  in  the 
organic  kingdoms.  Among  plants  the  flowers  of 
exogens  habitually  have  their  parts  in  fives,  those  of 
endogens  in  threes  or  multiples  of  three.  In  the 
animal  kingdom,  the  typical  foot  of  the  vertebrate 
is  divided  into  five,  as  the  joints  of  the  digits  are 
typically  three.  Three  we  have  seen  to  be  the 
number  of  the  organic  kingdoms,  and  that  which 
seems  to  stamp  them  as  organic.  Moreover,  this 
specializing  of  parts  which  is  meant  by  organization 
implies  also  the  unity  of  that  for  which  each  part 
exists :  the  three  readily  connects  with  one,  as  we 
know,  and  one  writer  has  spoken  of  it  as  the  num- 
ber of  "  constitutional  completeness/'  It  is  thus  a 
number  well  fitted  to  be  used  in  the  arrangement  of 
those  organisms  which  are  also,  as  it  were,  the  or- 
gans of  the  whole  creation. 

Of  the  number  five  in  this  connection  it  is  more 
difficult  to  speak.  The  meanings  already  ascribed 
to  it  suit  only  man,  not  the  lower  creatures,  except 
it  be  that  which  from  the  human  hand  speaks  of 


122    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

measured  capacity — a  not  unsuitable  meaning,  how- 
ever, for  do  not  these  five  types,  in  fact,  measure 
the  capacity  of  that  to  which  they  apply  ?  and  may 
it  not  be  that  as  the  three  speaks  of  constitution, 
the  five  speaks  of  function  ?  Thus  would  mammal, 
bird,  fish,  amphibian,  reptile  give  us  the  full  range 
of  function — thus  the  practical  meaning  of  the 
vertebrated  animal.  And  good  it  is  even  to  think 
whether  it  perhaps  may  have  a  meaning !  in  this 
direction,  if  our  thought  be  infantile,  it  is  none  the 
less  a  good  thing  to  begin  to  think. 

But  now  we  must  remember  that  each  of  these 
divisions  is  a  circle,  if  natural;  when  we  have 
reached  our  fifth  point  we  are  on  our  way  back 
again  to  whence  we  started.  Is  it  not  strange,  then, 
that  in  this  number  five,  as  already  looked  at  in  an 
entirely  different  interest,  we  have  found  a  four  and 
one — the  four  of  the  creature  and  the  one  of  God 
— actually  met  together  !  Thus,  having  started  with 
one,  we  get  back  to  one  again  :  there  is  a  closing  of 
the  circle  therefore  !  and  with  blessed  intimation  of 
a  meaning  full  of  the  inspiration  of  hope ! 

For  why  have  our  naturalists  had  to  give  up  that 
thought  of  a  linear  series  in  nature,  which  even 
now,  in  a  mere  involuntary  retention  of  it  in  the 
mind,  spoils  the  great  mass  of  systems?  Why  but 
because  that  linear  series  is  either  something  in 
which  we  drop  ever  down  without  recovery  away 


Classification.  123 

from  God ;  or,  it  may  be,  ascend,  but  not  toward 
God,  aud  so  in  result  never  to  reach  Him?  This  is 
atheistic  Darwinism  in  its  real  character,  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  mere  natural  godlessness,  which  allows 
things  to  have  come  from  Him,  but  will  not  have 
them  return  to  Him.  This  quinary  circle,  read  in 
the  light  of  its  number,  reader — a  number  which, 
remember,  neither  of  its  discoverers  knew  as  having 
meaning, — tells  us  that  nature  is  a  circle  that  begins 
with  God  and  returns  to  Him  again :  it  is  a  planet 
that  has  its  orbit  from  Him,  and  more ;  its  function 
and  work  are  to  bring  us  His  message,  and  lead  us 
back  to  Him  again. 

Thus  the  system  stands  the  numerical  test  well, 
so  far;  does  it  not?  Not  only  so,  but  the  numbers 
seem  ready  to  bring  out  of  it  a  wealth  of  meaning, 
beyond  what  we  could  have  imagined.  We  have 
only  begun,  however;  and  have  now  to  examine, 
with  Mr.  Swainson's  aid,  these  primary  types  of 
nature,  and  see  what  more  the  interpretation  of  the 
numerical  system  may  add  to  this. 

He  says, — 

"As  every  natural  group  is  first  divided  into  three  cir- 
cles, so  it  follows  that  there  are  three  primary  denomina- 
tions of  groups ;  and  these,  as  we  have  already  explained, 
are  called  the  typical,  the  subtypical,  and  the  aberrant: 
by  these  names  we  express  their  denomination,  and  we 
shall  now  treat  of  each  in  detail. 

"The  first  distinction  of  typical  groups  is  implied  by 


1 24    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

the  name  they  bear.  The  animals  they  contain  are  the 
most  perfectly  organized, — that  is  to  say,  are  endowed 
with  the  greatest  number  of  perfections,  and  capable  of 
performing  to  the  greatest  extent,  the  functions  which 
peculiarly  characterize  their  respective  circles.  This  is 
universal  in  all  typical  groups ;  but  there  is  a  marked  dif- 
ference between  the  types  of  a  typical  circle  and  the  types 
of  an  aberrant  one.  In  the  first,  we  find  a  combination  of 
properties  concentrated,  as  it  were,  in  a  certain  individual, 
without  any  one  of  these  preponderating  in  a  remarkable 
degree  over  the  others ;  whereas  in  the  second,  it  is  quite 
the  reverse :  in  these  last,  one  faculty  is  developed  in  the 
highest  degree,  as  if  to  compensate  for  the  total  absence 
or  very  slight  development  of  others. 

"Let  us  exemplify  this  proposition  by  familiar  instances. 
The  crow  has  been  considered  the  pre-eminent  type  of  all 
birds,  it  is  also  the  type  of  a  typical  circle.  It  conse- 
quently unites  in  itself  a  greater  number  of  properties 
than  are  to  be  found  individually  in  any  other  genus  of 
birds ;  as  if,  in  fact,  it  had  taken  from  all  the  other  orders 
a  portion  of  their  peculiar  qualities,  for  the  purpose  of  ex- 
hibiting in  wrhat  manner  they  could  be  combined.  From 
the  rapacious  birds,  this  'type  of  types,'  as  the  crow  has 
been  justly  called,  takes  the  power  of  soaring  in  the  air, 
and  of  seizing  upon  living  birds,  like  the  hawks,  while  its 
habit  of  devouring  putrid  substances,  and  picking  out  the 
eyes  of  young  animals,  is  borrowed  from  the  vultures. 
From  the  scansorial  or  climbing  order,  it  takes  the  faculty 
of  pecking  the  ground  and  discovering  its  food  when  hid- 
den from  the  eye,  while  the  parrot  family  gives  it  its  taste 
for  vegetable  food,  and  furnishes  it  with  great  cunning, 
sagacity,  and  powers  of  imitation,  even  to  imitating  the 


Classification.  125 

human  voice.  Next  come  the  order  of  waders,  who  im- 
part their  quota  to  the  perfection  of  the  crow  by  giving  to 
it  great  powers  of  flight,  and  perfect  facility  in  walking, 
such  being  among  the  chief  attributes  of  the  grallatorial 
order.  Lastly,  the  aquatic  birds  contribute  their  portion 
by  giving  this  terrestrial  bird  the  power,  not  only  of  feed- 
ing upon  fish,  which  are  their  peculiar  food,  but  actually 
of  occasionally  catching  them.  In  this  wonderful  manner 
do  we  find  the  crow  partially  invested  with  the  united 
properties  of  all  other  birds,  while  in  its  own  order,— that 
of  the  Insessores,  or  perchers, — it  stands  the  pre-eminent 
type.  Here,  then,  is  an  example  of  the  characteristic 
properties  of  the  type  of  a  typical  circle. 

"Let  us  look  at  the  type  of  an  aberrant  circle.  The 
woodpecker  is  of  this  description,  for  it  is  the  permanent 
type  of  the  climbing  bird  (Scansores) ,  which  is  an  aberrant 
tribe.  Here,  instead  of  finding  a  combination  of  diversi- 
fied characters  similar  to  those  belonging  to  the  crow,  the 
whole  structure  becomes  adapted  for  one  particular  pur- 
pose— that  of  climbing  trees,  and  extracting  from  them 
the  allotted  food." 

I  do  not,  for  I  need  not,  proceed  with  the  long 
and  interesting  description  that  follows,  of  the  way 
in  which  this  is  carried  out.  It  is  evident  that  in 
the  last  case  unity  is  exemplified  in  the  very  one- 
sidedness,  or  narrowness,  of  the  development.  But 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  less,  but  more,  shown  to 
the  reflecting  mind  in  that  balance  of  attributes 
which  we  find  in  the  former  one.  Moral  unity  is 
shown  in  such  a  balance  of  moral  attributes  in  which 


1 26    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

is  no  defect  and  no  excess.  The  idea  is  better  ap- 
preciated by  our  narrow  minds  when  the  idea  is 
narrow.  The  woodpecker  is  the  typical  climber, 
but  the  crow,  the  typical  bird. 

Unity  of  idea,  whether  the  idea  be  full  or  narrow, 
is,  then,  the  characteristic  of  the  typical  form.  Mr. 
Swainson  has  not  the  least  suspicion  of  any  mean- 
ing in  numbers ;  yet  he  has  here  given  the  thought 
as  correctly  as  if  he  were  writing  with  full  knowl- 
edge.    And  he  adds, — 

"Perfection  in  the  number  of  species  or  of  forms  is  also  a 
remarkable  and  very  general  character  of  pre-eminently 
typical  groups;" — 

illustrating,  as  usual,  with  examples.  This  is,  in- 
deed, a  consequence  of  that  fullness  of  idea  which 
is  found  in  whatever  is  pre-eminently  typical.  In 
the  crow,  we  have  it  exemplified  in  the  species ;  but 
it  may  be  equally  well  in  a  genus,  a  family,  or  an 
order.  And  it  is  striking  to  find  this  as  fully  char- 
acteristic of  the  first  books  of  Scripture.  Thus 
Genesis,  which  heads  the  books  of  the  Law,  Isaiah, 
the  first  book  of  the  Prophets,  the  Psalms,  which  in 
the  Hebrew  begin  the  poetical  books,  have  fully  this 
character  ;  and  in  the  New  Testament,  Matthew, 
first  of  the  Gospels,  Romans  of  Paul's  epistles, 
1  Peter  (which,  however,  does  not  with  us  stand,  as 
it  should,  at  the  head  of  the  catholic  ones),  are  plain 
examples  in  their  respective  sections.     This  may 


Classification.  1 2  7 

serve,  with  all  else  here,  to  show  how  thoroughly 
the  hand  of  One  Writer  is  to  be  found  alike  in  the 
books  of  Nature  and  of  Revelation. 

Now  let  us  pass  on  to  the  subtypical  groups,  and 
listen  again  to  Mr.  Swainson  : — 

"II.  Subtypical  groups,  as  the  name  implies,  are  a  de- 
gree lower  in  organization  than  those  last  described,  and 
thus  exhibit  an  intermediate  character  between  typical 
and  aberrant  divisions.  They  do  not  comprise  the  largest 
individuals  in  bulk,  but  always  those  which  are  the  most 
powerfully  armed,  either  for  inflicting  injury  on  their  own 
class,  for  exciting  terror,  producing  injury,  or  creating  an- 
noyance to  man.  Their  dispositions  are  often  sanguinary ; 
since  the  forms  most  conspicuous  among  them  live  by 
rapine,  and  subsist  on  the  blood  of  other  animals.  They 
are,  in  short,  symbolically  the  types  o/evil;  and  in  such 
an  extraordinary  way  is  this  principle  modified  in  the 
smaller  groups,  that  even  among  insects,  where  no  other 
power  is  possessed  but  that  of  causing  annoyance  or  tem- 
porary pain,  we  find  in  the  subtypical  order  of  the  Annu- 
losa  {Aptera,  Linn.),  the  different  races  of  scorpions,  acari, 
spiders,  and  all  those  repulsive  insects  wThose  very  aspect 
is  forbidding,  and  whose  bite  or  sting  is  often  capable  of 
inflicting  serious  bodily  injury.  If,  again,  we  look  to  the 
subtypical  groups  of  quadrupeds  and  birds,  this  principle 
of  evil  is  developed  in  the  highest  degree ;  both  are  armed 
with  powerful  talons,  both  live  on  slaughtered  victims, 
and  both  are  gloomy,  unsocial,  and  untamable.  The  for- 
midable-toothed bill  which  so  strikingly  distinguishes  ra- 
pacious birds,  will  be  found  in  every  group  which  represents 
them  in  the  entire  order  of  perchers,  and  these  groups 


128    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

amount  to  more  than  one  hundred.  .  .  .  Even  in  the 
smaller  subtypical  groups  of  larger  circles,  which  are 
themselves  typical,  this  extraordinary  characteristic  is 
manifested,  though  in  a  much  smaller  degree.  Take,  for 
instance,  the  American  group  of  monkeys  (Cebidce,  Sw.) 
which  belong  to  the  typical  order  of  Quaclrumanes ;  of  that 
circle  it  is  the  subtypical  group,  and  we  accordingly  find 
that,  while  the  family  of  true  apes  (Simiadce)  live,  in  a 
state  of  nature,  upon  vegetable-diet  alone,  the  Cebidce  are 
partially  carnivorous,  and  that  many  prowl  about  to  de- 
stroy life  by  feeding  upon  insects,  and  even  small  birds." 

He  gives  much  more  to  the  same  effect,  but  this 
is  enough  for  our  purpose;  enough  indeed  to 
create  astonishment  if  there  be  room  for  it,  after  all 
that  we  have  had  before  us  already.  For  how  is  it 
again  that  Mr.  Swainson  gives  us  one  of  the  char- 
acters of  the  number  two,  strongly  marked  in  Scrip- 
ture and  in  Nature,  while  he  says  and  knows  nothing 
of  the  meaning  of  the  number  which  stands  there 
side  by  side  with  the  name  of  the  groups  of  which 
he  speaks  ?  It  is  now  some  years  since,  when  study- 
ing the  grouping  of  the  Psalms,  that  I  found  to  my 
surprise  that  commonly  in  a  second  series,  whether 
of  smaller  divisions  or  of  larger,  and  often  in  the 
second  psalm  of  a  very  different  group,  the  subject 
was  in  some  way  the  enemy.  It  was  not  till  a  good 
while  after,  that  I  found  the  root  of  the  meaning  in 
nature,  two  speaking  naturally  of  difference,  hence 
of  contrast,  opposition,  the  enemy.    And  it  was  not  till 


Classification.  129 

later  still,  that  I  found  in  Mr.  Swainson's  book  this 
definition  of  his  second  subtypical  groups.  Is  it, 
with  all  else  that  we  have  seen  in  the  same  way, 
accident  merely  that  it  should  be  so?  Will  those 
say  it  who  know  what  the  nature  of  chance  is? 

But  if  not  chance,  what  is  it?  Is  it  not,  then, 
surely  truth,  and  of  God  ? 

Second,  not  first,  for  evil  is  necessarily  inferior  to 
the  good, — "a  degree  lower  in  organization  than" 
the  typical,  says  Mr.  Swainson.  A  type  of  evil 
ordained  for  us  out  of  the  animal  creation,  he  that 
will  may  find  in  Gen.  iii.  Is  not  this  the  secret  of 
the  strife  in  nature  that  goes  on  around  us,  that 
God  would  thus  provide  us  with  such  object-lessons 
as  are  these  ?  Does  not  spiritual  law  govern  the 
natural  world  still  in  all  this  ? 

No  doubt  there  is  much  else  in  these  subtypical 
groups,  and,  if  we  are  to  conclude  from  what  we 
find  in  Scripture,  this  number  will  not  always  have 
an  evil  significance,  but  often  the  reverse.  How- 
ever, we  are  just  now  following  Mr.  Swainson,  and 
it  will  be  better  to  let  these  things  develop  them- 
selves in  practice  than  to  give  ourselves  to  what 
may  be  mistaken  theorizing.  Let  us  go  on  now  to 
his  third,  or  aberrant  groups,  which,  however,  as 
containing  three  distinct  types,  he  can  only  in  gen- 
eral characterize  as  aberrant,  or  departing  from  the 
the  more  typical  forms.     We  might  call  them  more 


130    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

appropriately,  I  think,  specialized j  and  then  at  once 
shall  find  their  number  as  a  third  group  quite  in 
harmony  with  their  character.  The  nature  of  this 
specialization  we  shall  learn  as  we  take  them  up 
separately  now. 

But  these  specialized  groups  stand  in  relation  to 
the  first  two,  as  3,  4,  and  5,  while  they  all  come 
under  number  three  of  course  also,  as  types  more 
narrowly  specialized  than  the  first  two.  We  have  to 
inquire  yet  what  they  individually  mean.  This  is 
literally  true,  while  I  write,  that  I  am  myself  in- 
quiring with  my  reader,  and  propose  to  take  him 
into  my  confidence,  and  think  out  my  thoughts 
aloud,  as  I  have  been  doing  in  much  that  is  already 
written.  There  will  be  in  it,  thus,  much  of  the 
charm  of  a  voyage  of  discovery  for  us  both :  who 
knows  what  surprises  may  be  in  store  for  us,  and 
with  what  argosies  of  treasure  we  may  return  to 
port  ?  Meanwhile,  as  we  have  taken  Mr.  Swainson 
for  our  pilot,  at  least  as  long  as  he  shall  give  us  sat- 
isfaction, we  will  go  on  with  him. 

He  says, — 

"It  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  consider  aberrant 
groups  as  naturally  divided  into  three  distinct  types.  We 
shall,  for  the  present,  distinguish  these  by  the  names  we 
have  assigned  to  them  in  ornithology, — the  only  division 
of  zoology  wherein  they  have  been  accurately  traced.  It 
may  be  objected  to  this  plan,  that  to  designate  a  type  of 


Classification.  131 

quadrupeds  or  of  insects  by  the  same  term  as  that  which 
is  appropriated  to  birds  will  lead  to  a  confusion  of  ideas. 
But  on  the  other  hand,  as  these  types,  throughout  the 
animal  kingdom,  are  found  to  present  certain  characters 
in  common,  the  advantages  of  designating  them  by  com- 
mon names  are  abundantly  obvious.  Hereafter,  when  the 
subject  has  undergone  deeper  investigation,  we  shall  sug- 
gest more  comprehensive  and  appropriate  names.  For 
the  present,  therefore,  we  shall  term  them  the  Aquatic, 
the  Suctorial,  and  the  Basorial :  these  collectively  form 
the  aberrant  circle  of  every  group  in  the  animal  kingdom. 

"The  natatorial  or  aquatic  types,  represented  by  the 
natatorial  order  of  birds,  as  the  name  implies,  are  more 
especially  inhabitants  of  the  waters.  They  possess  many 
and  striking  peculiarities,  modified  indeed,  in  the  most 
astonishing  manner,  but  more  conspicuous  perhaps 
throughout  all  natural  groups  than  any  of  those  belong- 
ing to  other  types.  We  shall  consider  these  characters 
under  the  heads  of  structure  and  economy,  and  exemplify 
our  remarks  by  some  familiar  instances. 

"I.  As  to  structure,  aquatic  types  are  chiefly  remarkable 
for  their  enormous  bulk,  the  disproportionate  size  of  their 
head,  and  the  absence  or  very  slight  development  of  the 
feet.  If  we  look  to  the  primary  divisions  of  the  verte- 
bratecl  animals,  we  see  one  of  those  peculiarities  very 
strongly  marked  in  the  fishes,  the  only  class  wherein  the 
feet,  in  all  individuals,  are  entirely  wanting,  while  every 
one  is  aware  that  no  fish  can  exist  unless  in  its  own  ele- 
ment  As  we  approach  the  more  perfect  animals, 

we  begin  to  see  the  development  of  another  singular  feat- 
ure ;  namely,  a  very  large,  thick,  and  obtuse  head,  fur- 
nished with  jaws  capable  of  great  expansion,  and  termin- 


132    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

ated  by  a  blunt  or  truncated  muzzle  or  snout.  This 
structure  implies  the  peculiar  power  of  seizing  their  food 
by  the  mouth  alone,  without  the  assistance  of  feet  or 
claws ;  and  as  this  power  would  only  be  necessary  to  such 
animals  as  lived  upon  others,  we  according  find  that 
nearly  all  natatorial  types  are  carnivorous Sub- 
typical  forms,  as  we  have  already  seen,  are  pre-eminently 
carnivorous,  but  they  differ  from  the  natatorial  (which 
always  follow  them)  in  this,  that  the  food  is  captured  by 
the  aid  of  the  claws,  whereas  in  the  types  we  are  now 
speaking  of  the  mouth  alone  is  the  instrument  of  capture. 

"II.  As  to  the  economy  of  the  aquatic  types,  we  have 
already  premised  that  they  are  almost  entirely  carnivo- 
rous— a  habit  which  is  naturally  to  be  expected  in  any 
group  which  joined,  or  immediately  blended  into,  the  sub- 
typical.  We  have  seen  that  the  feet  are  slightly  and  often 
not  at  all  developed :  an  incapacity  for  quick  motion  is  the 
natural  result  of  such  an  organization.  ..." 

I  have  omitted  Mr.  Swainson's  illustrations,  be- 
cause they  are  not  at  present  of  any  service  to  us, 
though  we  may  more  or  less  have  need  of  them  at  a 
future  time.  All  we  want  at  present  is  the  typical 
idea  which  we  are  then  to  proceed  to  test  by  the 
meaning  of  the  numbers.  The  number  is  3,  which 
easily  may  here  indicate  specialization  or  transform- 
ation, as  it  is  in  outward  form  indeed  carried  out 
in  these  forms  to  the  extreme.  Three  is  also  the 
number  of  solidity,  which  in  popular  phrase  is  ap- 
plied to  bulk ;  but  this  is  much  more  doubtful  in 


Classification.  133 

application.  To  a  strictly  natatorial  type  the  num- 
ber would  not  point,  nor  perhaps  any  number,  and 
when  Mr.  Swainson  reckons  as  of  this  type  the  owl 
and  the  ostrich,  it  is  plain  that  he  cannot  mean  to 
insist  upon  the  absolute  accuracy  of  the  designation. 
He  can  only  mean  that  in  the  aquatic  tribes  we  have 
in  general  the  best  exemplification  of  the  type.  Of 
carnivorous  habits  also  the  numbers  say  nothing. 

What  we  might  infer  from  the  numerical  stamp 
would  seem  to  be  that  we  are  at  the  furthest 
extreme  from  the  typical,  as  it  fact  we  are  nearly  at 
the  opposite  point  of  the  circle, — the  most  trans- 
formed or  in  disguise  :  for  the  three  is  doubly 
stamped  upon  it  by  its  position  in  the  quinary  series 
and  its  position  also  as  a  member  of  the  aberrant 
circle. 

It  is  clear  that  either  Mr.  Swainson's  definition 
somewhat  fails  here,  or  the  power  to  apply  the 
numbers,  or  else  the  numbers  do  not  apply.  There 
is  a  faint  resemblance,  but  not  at  all  what  we  have 
found  before,  or  what  we  had  felt  encouraged  to 
expect.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  no  positive  dis- 
agreement either,  and  the  clue  to  a  fuller  agreement 
may  be  found  as  we  go  on  to  the  fourth  type  with 
our  guide. 

"We  are  now  to  consider  the  suctorial  type  of  form: 
this  corresponds  with  the  tenuirostral  type  among  perch- 
ing birds,  the  grallatorial  among  the  orders  of  that  class, 


1 34    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

the  gliriform  among  quadrupeds,  and  the  onUciform  and 
vermiform  in  the  class  of  insects.  We  shall,  however, 
designate  all  these  order  under  the  common  name  of  suc- 
torial, because  it  is  more  generally  applicable  to  the  habits 
of  the  animals  here  alluded  to  than  any  other.  One  of  the 
chief  peculiarities  of  this  type  is,  that  the  food  is  imbibed 
by  suction ;  a  mode  of  nourishment  which  is  of  course  ac- 
companied by  many  remarkable  deviations  from  the  struc- 
ture of  other  types.  These  are  always  the  smallest  in 
point  of  size,  the  most  feeble  and  defenseless  in  structure, 
and  the  most  defective  in  the  organs  of  mastication.  In 
all  these  characters  the  suctorial  stands  in  direct  opposi- 
tion to  the  natatorial  type.  In  such  as  belong  to  the 
vertebrated  circle,  the  feet  are  always  fully  developed  ; 
for  these  animals  are  peculiarly  active,  and  enjoy  in  a  re- 
markable degree  the  power  of  leaping  and  running:  The 
suctorial  form  is  also  widely  different  from  the  natatorial 
in  other  respects ;  there  is  a  great  length  or  attenuation 
of  the  body,  the  head  is  always  very  small,  generally  pro- 
longed into  a  pointed  snout,  and  the  mouth  as  adapted  for 
sucking  is  uncommonly  small:  in  some  few  instances  it  is 
not,  in  fact,  apparent.  All  animals  belonging  to  this  type 
are  shy,  and  evince  little  or  no  propensity  to  become 
domesticated.  They  are  without  offensive  protection; 
but  nature,  as  if  to  screen  them  from  their  enemies,  has 
endowed  them  with  great  caution,  uncommon  vitality,  and 
in  many  cases  has  protected  them  either  with  a  hard  skin, 
or  a  coating  of  bony  armor  which  entirely  envelops  their 
body,  and  repels  all  injury.' ' 

Here   it  is  evident  that  there  is  again  a  corre- 
spondence  between   the    type    and    its    numerical 


Classification.  1 3  5 

stamp.  "  Weakness  "  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  most 
fundamental  meanings  of  the  number  4,  as  it  is 
the  fundamental  thought  in  the  type  here.  And  if 
to  this  we  add  that  it  is  the  number  of  the  mineral 
kingdom,  this  might  well  remind  us  of  the  many  of 
these  to  whom  it  has  been  given,  as  to  coral  for  in- 
stance, to  provide  for  itself  and  in  its  own  structure, 
the  strength  of  the  rock  as  their  defense.  The  suc- 
torial element  in  the  type  we  can  scarcely  expect  to 
find  indicated  in  the  number ;  but  on  the  whole 
there  is  a  clear  and  unforced  correspondence  be- 
tween this  and  the  type. 

Only  one  more  remains  to  be  considered: — 

"The  rasorial  type,  so  termed  in  ornithology,  is  the 
third  and  last  which  enters  into  the  aberrant  circle — which 
circle  is  always  closed  by  the  union  of  this  type  with  the 
natatorial;  hence  it  follows  that  they  approximate  in 
their  general  characters.  First,  as  to  the  form  and  struc- 
ture of  rasorial  types.  They  are,  in  general,  remarkable 
for  their  size ;  being  inferior  only  to  the  natatorial.  From 
these  they  are  further  to  be  distinguished  by  the  strength 
and  perfection  of  their  feet;  the  toes  of  which  (in  verte- 
brated  animals)  are  never  united  so  as  to  be  used  for 
swimming.  This  perfection,  however,  is  of  a  very  pecu- 
liar kind ;  since  it  is  confined  to  the  powers  of  walking  on 
dry  land,  or  of  climbing  among  trees.  These  scansorial 
powers,  in  fact,  although  occasionally  found  in  other 
types,  are  so  very  frequent  and  remarkable  in  this,  that  it 
may  be  considered  one  of  the  pecularities  of  the  rasorial 
structure.   This  is  the  type  so  remarkable  for  the  greatest 


136    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

development  of  tail ;  and  for  those  appendages,  for  orna- 
ment or  defense,  which  decorate  the  head.  ....  But  it 
seldom  happens  that  both  these  peculiarities  are  united  in 

the  same  group The  food,  in  conformity  to  their 

dispositions,   is  almost  always  vegetable This  is 

again,  one  of  the  strong  points  of  opposition  between  this 
and  the  [natatorial]  type. 

"But  what  more  especially  distinguishes  the  type  we 
are  now  describing  is  the  superior  degree  of  intelligence 
and  docility  that  runs  through  all  the  groups  of  verte- 
brated  animals  belonging  to  it.  It  seems  to  have  been 
ordained  by  Almighty  Wisdom,  that  there  should  be  one 
type  above  all  others  whose  powers  were  to  be  more 
especially  devoted  to  man,  and  which  should  evince  an 
aptitude  and  a  disposition  to  submit  to  his  dominion,  far 
above  all  other  created  things.  This  is  the  grand  char- 
acteristic of  all  rasorial  types  among  the  more  perfectly 
formed  vertebrated  animals,  whose  size  or  structure  are 
in  any  way  adapted  to  answer  the  end  proposed.  This 
principle  of  nature  was  partially  perceived  by  Linnaeus ; 
an  analogy,  indeed,  so  apparent  to  the  commonest  ob- 
server, that  we  can  only  feel  surprise  at  its  ever  having 
been  questioned  by  any  one,  much  more  by  those  who  are 

naturalists All  our  quadrupeds  of  burden  or  of 

food  are  taken  from  the  Ungidata.  The  horse,  the  ox,  the 
sheep,  and  the  goat  are  in  our  meadows  and  pastures; 
while  the  dog  is  a  rasorial  type  of  the  Ferce." 

I  have  quoted  so  much  that  we  might  have  the 
characters  of  this  type  fairly  before  us.  At  first 
sight,  it  would  look  as  if  they  could  be  of  no  service, 
as  we  have  already  confessed  as  to  this  number,  5, 


Classification.  137 

how  little  the  thoughts  that  come  under  it  seem  to 
apply  to  the  lower  creation.  But  it  is  one  of  the 
many  encouragements  that  we  have  been  finding  all 
the  way  through  the  present  examination,  that  the 
numbers  not  only  interpret,  but  also  receive  inter- 
pretation from  nature ;  and  so  it  is  in  this  case. 
The  number  five  as  applied  to  man,  speaks  of  man 
with  God,  the  4  of  the  creature  being  added  to  the 
1  of  the  Creator  ;  and  we  have  brought  this  forward 
already  to  show  that  with  5  the  circle  closes  there- 
fore. But  in  the  lower  sphere  in  which  we  now  are 
— penetrated  everywhere  as  it  is  however  with 
divine  meaning — the  1  represents  man,  instead  of 
God,  but  man  as  His  vicegerent  and  in  His  image. 
Thus  this  last  character  of  the  rasorial  type,  as  de- 
scribed by  Mr.  Swainson,  the  "  aptitude  and  dispo- 
sition "  of  those  exemplifying  it  "to  submit  to  his 
dominion,"  is  surely  as  remarkable  as  unexpected 
an  illustration  of  the  number  before  us.  Man  with 
God  means  man  subject  to  Him,  under  His 
dominion  :  here  we  have  the  shadow  of  that  in  the 
lower  creatures. 

And  thus,  may  we  not  say,  at  the  end  of  the 
survey  of  the  creature,  we  are  reminded  by  these 
examples  that  they  are  put  into  man's  hand  to  be 
his  servants, — a  good  and  needed  admonition  of  the 
hand  that  bestows  all,  and  to  take  reverently  His 
gifts — gifts,  but  thus  trusts,  even  as  this  number  5  is 


138    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

the  number  which  speaks  also  of  our  own  responsi- 
bility, and  of  the  account  we  have  to  render  to  Him 
who  has  bestowed  the  gift. 


139 


CHAPTER  X. 

Among  the  Creatures. 

PERHAPS,  for  my  own  credit,  I  ought  to  stop 
here.  Perhaps  even  for  the  cause  I  hope  to 
serve — which  is  very  much  to  lead  others  to  appre- 
ciate more  God's  gift  to  us  of  the  creatures,  and 
the  full  purpose  of  this  gift  of  God, — I  might  better 
stop,  content  with  what  awakening  of  desire  I  may 
hope  to  have  achieved,  than  go  further  to  show  how 
small  the  distance  I  have  traveled  in  these  inviting 
fields.  I  confess  that  with  me  that  impulsive  self 
of  which  the  Duke  of  Argyll  has  spoken  to  us,  may 
be  refusing  the  voice  of  that  calm  higher  wisdom 
which  ought  to  be  rather  heard,  when  I  attempt  to 
face  the  difficulties  of  the  practical  application  of 
such  principles  as  we  have  been  considering,  and 
lead  my  reader  face  to  face  with  Nature. 

Let  it  be  conceded  that  we  have  obtained  some 
real  glimpse  of  the  divine  side  in  her, — heard  a 
Voice  from  its  very  familiarity  strange  from  such  a 
quarter, — a  Voice  yet  which  sounds  as  a  voice  of 


140    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

home  wherever  we  hear  it, — have  got  principles,  too, 
which  have  not  only  stood  wonderfully  the  tests  to 
which  we  have  been  putting  them, — granting  all 
which  must  be  in  fairness  granted,  yet  we  seem 
little  furnished,  after  all,  for  what  evidently  now  lies 
before  us.  These  types  of  nature,  though  real,  are 
yet  but  very  slightly  sketched  ;  their  inner  meaning, 
for  which,  Spiritual  Law  would  say,  they  must  above 
all  exist,  is  yet  more  a  hint  than  a  revelation  ;  other 
principles,  yet  unknown,  may  (and  very  likely  will) 
come  in,  to  modify  the  application  of  those  we  have 
in  measure  learned.*  All  this  is  true,  and  yet  we 
must  go  forward.  "  Every  one  that  seeketh  findeth  " 
is  a  motto  we  may  still  take  for  our  encouragement. 
And  have  we  not,  in  fact,  found  much  while  on  the 
road?  It  may  be  that  our  Father's  book  of  Nature, 
like  His  other  book  of  Grace,  requires  less  the 
learning  of  the  sage  to  read  it  than  the  teachable 
spirit  of  the  little  child. 

One  of  the  first  places  in  which  we  find  our  father 
Adam  before  the  fall  is  among  the  creatures.  "And 
out  of  the  ground  the  Lord  God  formed  every  beast 
of  the  field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  brought 


*  Thus  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  no  one  must  suppose  that  we  are 
giving  hasty  adhesion  to  the  whole  system  of  Messrs.  M'Leay  &  Swain- 
son.  We  believe  there  is  truth  in  it ;  but  that  is  very  far  from  saying 
that  it  is  the  whole  truth  :  we  neither  accept  it  wholly  nor,  on  the  other 
hand,  condemn  it  for  defects  or  mistakes,  which  adhere  to  all  that  is 
merely  human.    In  the  work  and  Word  of  God  alone  there  are  none. 


Among  the  Creatures.  141 

them  unto  Adam,  to  see  " — that  Adam  might  see — 
"what  he  would  call  them;  and  whatsoever  Adam 
called  every  living  creature,  that  was  the  name 
thereof.  And  Adam  gave  names  to  all  cattle,  and 
to  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every  beast  of  the 
field." 

So  that  one  of  man's  first  lessons  was  a  lesson  of 
zoology;  for  the  giving  names  to  all  the  creatures 
surely  implies  intelligence  about  them ;  and  the 
names  stood  for  qualities  in  them  that  might  be  and 
were  discerned.  Adam  was  possessor  of  no  language 
but  his  own,  and  could  not  hide  in  magniloquent 
Greek,  as  do  our  zoologists  now,  the  emptiness  of 
an  unmeaning  name.  Could  we  recall,  as  we  cannot 
now,  those  first  names,  we  should  surely  find  con- 
vincing proof  that  Adam  was  a  full-grown  man,  and 
that  nature  appealed  to  him  in  a  different  way  from 
that  in  which  now  it  appeals  to  us,  from  our  text- 
books of  zoology.  Indeed,  the  Hebrew  names, 
which  must  be  no  very  far-off  kin  to  Adam's,  may 
well  contain  plenty  of  treasure  in  this  way  awaiting 
the  explorer.  Since  then,  we  have  dissected  the 
forms,  and  too  much  lost  the  life  and  power. 

However,  we  will  not  theorize  :  we  will  go  abroad 
and  breathe  the  fresh  air  of  God's  world,  in  which, 
let  us  remember,  not  a  sparrow  falls  to  the  ground 
without  Him,  and  He  clothes  the  lilies  of  the  field 
with  a  glory  beyond  Solomon's.     Our  interest  in  it 


142    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

may  well  be  inspired  by  His  interest,  and  that  which 
we  find  of  Him  in  it  be  in  truth  but  fellowship  with 
Him. 

Supposing  still  that  what  is  written  largest  should 
be  the  plainest,  and  desiring  to  get,  as  the  introduc- 
tion to  all  else,  the  general  plan  of  creation,  let  us 
take  up  the  animal  kingdom  briefly  now,  to  study 
its  divisions — of  course,  the  largest  ones. 

The  types  of  which  we  have  been  speaking  apply 
only  to  the  divisions  of  the  animal  kingdom  ;  but 
the  numerical  system,  as  we  have  seen,  goes  beyond 
this,  and  characterizes  all  nature.  We  may  take  it 
at  least  as  a  fixed  principle,  that  wherever  the  num- 
bers are,  they  are  meant  to  speak  to  us ;  they  have 
a  reason  in  the  divine,  and  a  reason  open  to  be 
discovered  by  us  to  an  extent  practically  unlimited, 
except  by  unbelief.  Whatever  is  of  reason  is  meant 
as  an  appeal  to  reason,  God's  written  Word  being 
always  the  interpreter  of  the  obscure  and  parabolic 
utterances  of  the  book  of  nature.  This  we  shall 
find,  the  more  firmly  we  grasp  it,  and  the  more 
faithfully  we  adhere  to  it,  to  be  proportionately 
fruitful  as  a  principle.  I  appeal  to  the  reader  if  we 
have  not  found  it  so. 

The  kingdoms  of  nature  are  not  five,  nor  three, 
but  four.  The  organic  kingdoms  are,  however, 
three  ;  but  they  do  not  constitute  a  circle.  On  the 
other  hand,  their  3  and  1  speak,  as  we  have  seen,  of 


Among  the  Creatures.  143 

the  manifestation  of  the  Creator  in  the  creature, 
and  justify  our  search  into  it  that  we  may  find  Him 
in  it.  An  unmeaning  act  would  not  be  worthy  of 
Him  :  we  will  not  ascribe  such  to  Him. 

Are  there  five  types  of  form  in  the  animal  king- 
dom? To  this,  of  course,  there  will  be  various 
answers.  We  do  not  propose  to  discuss  them.  The 
tendency  now  is  away  from  the  thought  of  original 
types  at  all.  A  mindless  evolution,  of  course,  would 
work  in  its  own  blind  way : — 

"Experience  has  shown, "  says  Dawson,  "that  those 
naturalists  who  discard  the  idea  of  intelligent  plan  as 
embodied  in  nature,  and  who  regard  it  as  a  mere  chance 
product  of  conflicting  forces  and  tendencies,  necessarily 
arrive  at  irrational  modes  of  classification." 

Cuvier  divided  animals  into  four  main  groups, 
basing  this  upon  plan  of  structure.  These  divisions 
are  those  of  Vertebrates,  Articulates,  Mollusks,  and 
Radiates.  Prof.  Henry  James  Clark  has,  in  his 
"Mind  in  Nature,"  elaborately  argued  for  a  fifth 
division,  commonly  conceded  now,  that  of  Protozoa; 
and  it  is  this  arrangement  I  propose  to  take  up  and 
examine  in  the  light  of  what  knowledge  we  have 
already  gained.  We  will  arrange  them  thus : — 
1.  Vertebrata. 
5.  Mollusca.  2.  Articulata. 

4.  Radiata.  3.  Protozoa. 

If  this  be  a  circle,  as  we  have  been  told  it  must 


144    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

be,  to  form  a  natural  arrangement,  we  may  begin  to 
trace  the  circle  at  any  point  within  it.  We  will 
begin,  therefore,  with  the  simplest  because  the 
lowest  form,  the  Protozoan. 

"  The  type  of  this  division,' '  says  Prof.  Clark,  "  is  found 
in  its  relation  to  a  spiral ;  it  is  the  oblique  or  spiral  type." 

Of  this  he  gives  many  examples,  entering  into 
details,  as  to  which  it  would  be,  for  our  purpose, 
wholly  useless  to  follow  him.  The  simple  fact  is 
what  interests  us ;  because  the  spiral  type  is  (as 
revealed  by  the  arrangement  of  the  leaves  and 
flowers)  that  of  the  vegetable  kingdom,  and  the 
number  (3)  attached  is  that  of  the  vegetable  king- 
dom. In  this,  also,  the  lowest  division  among 
animals,  are  found  the  forms  actually  nearest  to  the 
plants,  which,  strangely  as  one  might  think,  ap- 
proach the  animal  kingdom  most  nearly  in  their 
lowest  forms. 

The  forms  here  are  mostly  microscopic,  and  reveal 
their  structure  only  to  the  skilled  observer.  It  is 
no  wonder,  therefore,  that  this  should  be  in  debate ; 
nor  is  it  possible  for  us  here  to  take  part  in  these 
discussions,  even  if  we  had  (as  we  have  not)  com- 
petency for  them.  We  must  refer  those  who  desire 
it  to  Prof.  Clark's  book. 

In  their  minute  size,  the  Protozoa  are  certainly  in 
contrast  to  Mr.  Swainson's  remarks  on  aquatic  types, 
although  they  are  aquatic.     He  puts  them,  indeed, 


Among  the  Creatures.  145 

in  his  fourth  group  accordingly,  along  with  the 
zoophytes  (corals,  etc.);  but  this  we  shall  have  to 
look  at  when  we  come  to  these.  As  putting  them 
in  this  third  division,  we  have  the  facts  simply  of 
their  being  at  the  furthest  remove  from  typical 
forms,  of  which  there  is  no  doubt,  and  their  spiral 
structure,  and  other  assimilation  to  vegetable  forms. 
But  of  these  lowly  beings  we  know  too  little  to  be 
able  to  speak  with  much  understanding. 

Still,  even  here,  we  may  find  facts  of  a  most  curi- 
ous interest,  though  through  this  relation  to  the 
vegetable  rather  than  any  proper  insight  into  the 
nature  of  these  animalcules.  Can  we  find  any 
"  spiritual  law  "  in  a  spiral  type  ?  The  leaf  arrange- 
ment of  the  plant  may  suggest  some  answer, 
strangely  connected  as  it  seems  with  the  courses 
of  the  stars !  But  is  it  not  all  one  universe,  the  work 
of  One  Hand  ?  Have  we  not  been  taught  that  one 
mysterious  law  links  the  fall  of  the  apple  with  the 
courses  of  the  stars?  It  is  simple  and  familiar 
knowledge. 

Prof.  Cooke  shall  give  us,  from  his  well-known 
book,*  the  law  in  question. 

"If  we  compare  the  periods  of  revolution  [of  the  plan- 
ets] round  the  sun,  expressed  in  days,  we  shall  find  an- 
other simple  numerical  relation,  as  shown  by  the  following 
table : — 

*  "  Religion  and  Chemistry."    (Revised  edition,  pp.  271-275.) 


146   Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

LAW   OF    PERIODIC   TIMES. 

PLANET.  OBSERVED.  THEORETICAL.  FRACTIONS. 

Neptune 60,129 62,000 — 

Uranus 30,687 31,000... 4 

Saturn 10,759 10,333 \ 

Jupiter 4,333 4,133.; j 


Asteroids 1,200  to  2,000 1,550 f 

Mars 687 596 x53 

Earth 365 366x3 )  8 

Venus 225 2272iJ  ^ 

Mercury 88 87 H 

"It  will  be  noticed  that  the  period  of  Uranus  is  half 
that  of  Neptune,  the  period  of  Saturn  a  third  that  of 
Uranus,  the  period  of  Jupiter  about  two  fifths  that  of 
Saturn,  the  period  of  the  Asteroids  about  three  eighths 
that  of  Jupiter,  the  period  of  Mars  about  five  thirteenths 
that  of  the  Asteroids,  the  period  of  Venus  about  eight 
twenty-firsts  that  of  Mars,  and  the  period  of  Mercury  about 
thirteen  thirty-fourths  that  of  Venus.  The  successive 
fractions  are  very  simply  related  to  each  other,  as  will  at 
once  appear  on  writing  them  in  a  series : — 

112         3  5  8         13         (L. 

2  J        3?        5?        8?       13?       21?       34?       °°u 

"Notice  that  after  the  first  two,  each  succeeding  frac- 
tion is  obtained  by  adding  together  the  numerators  of  the 
two  preceding  fractions  for  a  new  numerator.  From  this 
series,  however,  the  earth  is  excluded.  Its  time  of  revo- 
lution is  almost  exactly  eight  thirteenths  of  that  of  Mars, 
and  that  of  Venus  nearly  thirteen  twenty-firsts  that  of  the 
earth;  but  although  these  fractions  do  not  fall  into  the 
above  series,  they  are  members  of  a  complementary  series 
beginning — 

2?       §?       5}       ff       13?       21?       ®C* 


Among  the  Creatures.  147 

"This  simple  relation  was  discovered  by  Prof .  Peirce, 
and  he  has  proposed  an  explanation  for  the  anomaly  pre- 
sented by  the  earth.  But  it  is  not  important  to  dwell  on 
this  point.  My  only  object  has  been  to  show  that  simple 
numerical  relations  appear  in  the  planetary  system,  and 
this,  as  I  trust,  has  been  fully  illustrated/ ' 

One  moment,  to  indulge  the  theological  fancy  of 
a  mind  intoxicated,  if  you  will,  with  reason.  I  have 
no  spiritual  understanding  of  the  formula  here,  and 
can  say  nothing  as  to  it ;  but  this  exceptional  rela- 
tion of  the  earth  does  seem  as  if  it  might  be  a  note 
of — is  certainly  in  strange  accordance  with — its 
exceptional  relation  spiritually  to  the  other  creatures 
of  God,  is  it  not? 

Then  notice, — "  for  ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing 
ye  yourselves  are  wise," — that,  after  all,  the  earth  is 
reduced  to  obedience  to  law  :  it  is  not  left  to  be  an 
anomaly  among  the  planets,  but  brought  back,  may 
we  not  say  ?  And  how  ?  By  a  new  beginning  and  a 
new  law,  which  none  the  less  falls  at  last  into  harmony 
with  the  old  order  1 1  Is  it  not  what  grace  has  at 
any  rate  actually  done  for  us  ? 

Further,  look  back  a  little.  Behind  Mars  we  find 
in  the  table  that  strange  group  of  asteroids,  which 
always  has  seemed  to  me,  and  I  suppose  to  others, 
suggestive  of  catastrophe  among  the  stars;  they 
seem  so  like  shattered  fragments  of  a  world  that 
was.     Here,  in  a  general  way,  however,  the  order  is 


148    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

maintained  ;  but  among  them,  as  we  may  say,  not  by 
them.  You  have  to  find  an  average  among  many 
divergences,  as  if  law  bound  them  only  as  reigning 
spite  of  opposition.  Was  there  not  indeed  a  break 
like  this,  before  the  earth  left  its  orbit,  when  the 
angels  rebelled  ? 

And  yet  then  there  was  no  new  beginning !  That 
began  with— earth  ?  No  !  but  with  a  planet  stand- 
ing in  its  right  place  in  the  former  order  of  things, 
as  Mars  stands  between  the  asteroids  and  the  earth, 
while  it  begins  the  new  one  !  Blessed  be  God  !  there 
is  indeed  One  come  into  the  ranks  of  the  obedient, 
new  head  of  blessing  for  a  restored  earth,  with 
whom  all  begins  again  !  Reader,  have  you  owned 
His  name,  and  taken  your  place  in  the  new  order 
of  things  harmonious  with  the  old  ?  Will  you  believe 
a  gospel  which  the  stars,  in  the  light  of  the  science 
of  the  day,  preach  so  convincingly  ? 

Well,  we  have  wandered  :  we  will  return.  Do 
you  know  that  it  was  only  Mr.  Cooke's  tables,  and 
his  exposition  of  them,  that  just  now  led  me  into 
what  are  new  thoughts  to  me  entirely,  and  the  im- 
pulse to  give  them  to  you,  reader,  I  have  not  cared 
to  resist.  If  all  else  is  full  of  it,  must  there  not  be 
a  gospel  also  of  the  stars  ? 

But  to  proceed  with  Prof.  Cooke : — 

"  Passing  now  to  the  vegetable  kingdom,  we  find  again 
the  same  numerical  laws.  The  leaves  of  a  plant  are  always 


Among  the  Creatures.  149 

arranged  in  spirals  lound  the  stem.  If  we  start  from  any 
one  leaf,  and  count  the  number  of  leaves  around  the  stalk, 
and  the  number  of  turns  of  the  spiral  until  we  come  to  a 
second  leaf  immediately  over  the  first,  we  find  that,  for  any 
given  plant,  as  an  apple-tree,  for  example,  the  number  of 
leaves  and  the  number  of  turns  of  the  spiral  are  always 
absolutely  the  same.  The  simplest  arrangement  is  where 
the  coincidence  occurs  at  the  second  leaf,  after  a  single 
turn  of  the  spiral ;  and  this  may  be  expressed  by  the  frac- 
tion 4,  whose  numerator  denotes  the  number  of  turns  of 
the  spiral,  and  whose  denominator  the  number  of  leaves. 
The  next  simplest  arrangement  is  where  the  coincidence 
occurs  at  the  third  leaf,  after  a  single  turn  of  the  spiral, 
and  may  be  expressed  by  the  fraction  J.  These  two  frac- 
tions express  respectively  the  greatest  and  the  smallest 
divergence  between  two  successive  leaves  which  has  been 
observed.  The  angle  between  two  successive  leaves, 
therefore,  is  greater  than  180°  or  half  the  circumference 
of  the  stem,  or  less  than  120°  or  one  third  of  the  circum- 
ference. The  arrangement  next  in  simplicity  is  where  the 
coincidence  occurs  at  the  fifth  leaf,  after  two  turns  of  the 
spiral,  as  is  represented  in  the  preceding  figures.  Other 
examples  are  given  in  the  table  which  follows,  and  it  will 
be  seen  that  we  have  precisely  the  same  series  of  fractions 
in  the  arrangement  of  leaves  round  the  stem  of  a  plant 
which  appears  in  the  periods  of  the  planets.  The  fractions 
of  this  series  are  all  gradual  approximations  to  a  mean 
fraction  between  4  and  £,  which  would  give  the  most 
nearly  uniform  distribution  possible  to  the  leaves,  and 
expose  the  greatest  surface  to  the  sun." 

Thus  the  Hand  that  has  arranged  the  leaves  of 


150    Spiritual  Lazv  in  the  Natural  World. 

the  plants  has  arranged  also  the  courses  of  the 
planets.  But  the  analogy  is  not  seen  at  its  fullest 
yet.  For  the  orbits  of  the  planets  are  said  to  be 
elliptic,  while  the  line  that  would  connect  the  leaves 
of  a  plant  is  spiral  But  if  we  take  into  account  that 
the  sun,  with  all  its  planets  attending,  is  moving 
through  space  in  an  orbit,  doubtless,  of  its  own,  (for 
every  thing  in  the  heavens  is  obedient  to  law,)  then 
these  elliptical  orbits  become,  in  fact,  spiral  paths, 
and  the  analogy  between  the  vegetable  and  the 
planetary  world  is  perfected. 

What  is  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  spiral,  so 
interpreted  ?  In  the  planet,  it  is  onward  progress  ; 
in  the  plant,  upward  ; — orbital,  we  may  say,  in  each 
case,  or  obedient  to  the  centre  ;  in  the  plant,  a  law 
of  growth,  of  development,  and  production.  How 
well  fitted  to  this  third  place  in  which  we  find  it  in 
the  Protozoan  !  Here,  indeed,  in  minute  forms,  as 
if  to  teach  us  lowliness  as  the  accompaniment  of 
this  upward  tendency.  It  is  in  our  littleness  we 
climb  Godward,  and,  blessed  be  God  !  it  is  in  obe- 
dience, and  as  connected  with  our  Centre  also,  that 
we  do  this.  Sanctification  for  us  is  the  ascending 
spiral :  holiness  is  heavenliness.  Can  these  lowest 
of  creatures  tell  us  this? 

However,  we  must  defer  the  final  answer  till  we 
have  completed  the  zoologic  circle.  Until  we  find 
the  connection,  Mr.  Swainson  would  tell  us  we  can- 


Among  the  Creatures. 


I5i 


not  put  in  its  place  any  member  of  it.     Let  us  go 
on  to  the — 

RADIATA. 

Here  we  find  Mr.  Swainson's  third  division,  along 
with  a  part  also  of  his  fourth,  under  the  name  of 
Acrita,  which  includes  the  corals  and  other  animals 
formerly  called  Zoophytes,  as  well  as  those  of  the 
last  division.  Prof.  Clark,  whose  arrangement  is 
followed  here,  preserves  the  old  Cuvierian  division, 
with  the  separation  only  of  the  Protozoa  from  them. 
The   type   of   form   is   indicated   by  the   name. 

"  There  is  a  regular 
disposition  of  parts 
around  a  common 
centre,  as  in  the 
star-fish  or  the  sea- 
anemone,  which  in 
the  most  character- 
istic forms  are  but 
repetitions  of  each 
other;  and  one  or 
more  of  them  may 
be  removed  with- 
out injury  to  the 
functions  of  the 
rest.  In  most  of 
the  Radiata,  the 
parts  so  lost  are 
replaced  by  a  new  growth ;  and  not  unf requently  it  would 
appear  that  these  parts  may  themselves  reproduce  the 
whole  structure. " 


A  TYPICAL  RADIATE  '.    THREE  POLYPES  OF 
RED  CORAL. 


152    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

In  this  last  respect  they  show,  it  has  been  said, 
an  affinity  with  the  vegetable  kingdom,  as  also  in 
their  circular  symmetry,  so  that  they  have  been 
sometimes  called  "the  flowers  of  the  animal  king- 
dom,"— nay,  in  old  time,  were  mistaken  often  for 
flowers. 

As  our  fourth  division,  however,  they  stand  op- 
posite the  Mineral  Kingdom,  and  radial  symmetry 
is  as  well  that  of  the  crystal  (as  in  the  snow-flake,) 
as  it  is  that  of  the  plant.  It  is  in  this  division  also 
that  we  find  the  corals  accumulating  their  masses 
of  actual  stone.  This  coral  is  an  internal,  not  an 
external  secretion,  and  forms  the  support  as  well  as 
the  retreat  of  the  polype.  The  urchins  and  sea-stars 
crust  themselves  over  with  calcareous  tests.  The 
animal  functions  are  almost  at  their  lowest :  sensa- 
tion and  motion  are  alike  torpid.* 

Thus  their  numerical  place  seems  fully  justified. 
The  number  4  speaks  of  weakness  and  passiveness, 
for  which  the  strength  of  the  rock  is  their  defense ; 
not  only  outwardly,  as  we  have  seen,  but  inwardly, 
— strength  imbibed  and  experienced^  their  own  and 

*  Here,  indeed,  there  seems  a  contrast  with  the  activity  ascribed  by 
Mr.  Swainson  to  the  "  suctorial "  type  ;  but  it  will  be  observed  that  he 
limits  his  remarks  as  to  this  to  the  Vertebrata.  The  number  says 
nothing  as  to  it 

It  will  be  noted,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  capability  of  division 
which  characterizes  the  Radiate  is  strictly  according  to  their  numerical 
place.    Four  is  the  first  number  that  is  capable  of  division. 

t  In  the  urchins  and  sea-stars,  external ;  but  they  are  not  now  con- 
sidered typical  of  the  Radiata. 


Among  the  Creatures.  153 

yet  not  their  own.  Thus  it  is  that  the  true  experi- 
ence of  the  strength  of  the  Rock — of  divine  strength 
— does  not  make  something  of  us,  but  every  thing 
of  God.  We  remain  what  we  ever  were.  "  Confi- 
dence in  the  flesh  "  is  broken,  and  all  self-confidence 
is  recognized  as  confidence  in  the  flesh. 

Here  we  may  encounter  easily  the  reproach  of 
torpidity  and  passiveness,  such  as  we  find  in  the 
Radiate.  Sensation  and  motion  may  seem  at  a  low 
ebb.  In  fact,  the  apprehension  of  God  for  us  gives 
quietness  and  patience;  and  if  " patience  have  her 
perfect  work,"  we  are  "  perfect  and  entire,  wanting 
nothing."  There  ensues  the  stillness  which  is  so 
little  understood,  and  for  which  even  the  Marthas 
of  their  own  kindred  turn  upon  the  Maries  sitting 
at  His  feet,  and  rebuke  them  solemnly  before  the 
Lord.  But  it  is  not  spiritlessness,  nor  carelessness, 
only  the  controlling  power  of  His  presence  over  the 
soul ;  and  He  will  justify  it. 

Good  will  it  be  if  we  get  fast  hold  of  the  lesson 
given  us  by  these  lowly  creatures.  If  the  sluggard 
may  get  his  lesson  from  the  ant,  the  restless  heart 
may  learn  of  the  coral-blossom  from  the  rock.  God 
has  filled  nature  with  these  pictures,  preaching  to 
the  eye,  though,  alas  !  having  eyes,  we  see  not. 

But  we  must  go  on.  The  fifth  class,  for  Mr. 
Swainson   and   for  ourselves,  is  now  the  Mollusk. 


154    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 
The— 


MOLLUSCA 


A  TYPICAL  MOLLUSK. 

plainly  reach  up  toward  the  Vertebrata,  and  in 
character  are  intermediate  between  these  and  the 
Radiata.  The  repetition  of  parts  and  the  radial 
symmetry  are  gone  :  the  body  of  the  Mollusk  is 
"  monomerous  " — an  indivisible  unit.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  sluggishness  of  movement  in  general 
remains,  the  animal  functions  being  only  somewhat 
more  developed  than  in  the  last  case. 

"The  body  of  the  Mollusca  is  almost  entirely  occupied 
by  the  organs  of  nutrition ;  and  the  organs  of  sensation 
and  locomotion  are  entirely  subservient  to  the  supply  of 
these.  We  find  in  the  lowest  tribes  of  this  group  living 
beings  which  are  fixed  to  one  spot  during  all  but  the  earli- 
est period  of  their  lives,  and  which  scarcely  possess  within 
themselves  so  much  power  of  movement  as  that  enjoyed 
by  the  individual  polypes  in  a  mass  of  coral ;  and  yet  these 
exhibit  a  powerful  and  complex  digestive  apparatus,  a 
regular  circulation  of  blood,  and  an  active  respiration. 
But  we  nowhere  find,  throughout  the  whole  animal  king- 
dom, that  the  conformation  of  these  organs  governs  the 


Among  the  Creatures.  155 

shape  of  the  body;  they  rather  adapt  themselves  to  the 
type  which  predominates  in  its  structure,  and  which  is 
principally  manifested  in  the  disposition  of  the  locomotive 
organs.  Thus  the  stomach  of  the  star-fish  sends  a  pro- 
longation into  each  ray ;  whilst  in  the  Articulata,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  find  the  digestive  cavity  prolonged  into  a 
tube,  in  accordance  with  the  form  which  the  body  there 
possesses. 

"Thus  we  see  that,  in  regard  to  external  shape  and 
arrangement,  the  apparatus  of  organic  life  has  no  definite 
plan  of  its  own ;  and  in  the  Mollusca  there  is  an  absence 
of  any  general  type  to  which  it  may  be  made  conformable. 
Hence  the  shape  of  the  body  varies  extremely  in  those 
classes  in  which  it  is  entirely  or  principally  composed  of 
these  organs,  and  no  general  character  can  be  given  which 
shall  apply  to  all  or  even  a  large  part  of  the  animals  com- 
posing them."  (Carpenters  Zoology.) 

In  a  large  part  of  the  sub-kingdom,  while  the 
body  is  thus,  as  one  may  say,  shapeless,  what  gives 
them,  for  the  mass,  most  of  the  interest  they  possess, 
is  the  often  large  and  curiously  made  shell,  on  ac- 
count of  which  they  are  familiarly  known  as  "shell- 
fish" The  beauty  of  form  and  color  which  is  lack- 
ing in  the  animal  itself  is  bestowed  upon  the  shell ; 
and  yet  for  the  animal  itself,  except  as  shelter,  the 
shell  is  of  small  account  apparently,  and  all  this 
elaborate  ornamentation  seems  thrown  away.  The 
shell,  after  the  death  of  the  animal,  is  all  that  re- 
mains to  recognize  it  by,  as  the  body  (as  conveyed 
by  the  name  of    the  group)  is  entirely  soft,  and 


156    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

passes  away,  the  shell,  on  the  other  hand,  abiding 
quite  untouched. 

Thus  the  4  and  1  are  easily  recognizable  in  this 
sub-kingdom.  The  bodily  weakness  and  the  rock- 
shelter  of  the  Radiate  find  place  in  the  Mollusk, 
which  rises  yet  into  an  indivisible  unity  quite  oppo- 
site to  what  we  find  in  the  other,  developing  in  the 
higher  forms  head-characters,  and  even  an  internal 
cartilaginous  sheath  for  the  nerve-centres,  which 
assimilates  these  animals  to  the  Vertebrata. 

But  what  about  the  numerical  stamp  in  its  inner 
meaning? — how  holds  the  spiritual  law  again  in 
regard  to  this  number  5,  which  seems  at  first  sight 
as  if  it  would  be  so  little  capable  of  application  to 
these  lower  creatures  ?  Let  us  see  if  we  can  under- 
stand it. 

The  number  5  has,  as  we  have  seen,  for  its 
fundamental  meaning  the  thought  of  man  in  his 
weakness  in  relation  to  the  almighty  God.  We 
have  seen  it  as  the  centre  of  all  harmony  for  man 
to  be  here  in  his  place,  in  creature-nothingness,  but 
with  God  his  God.  Christ,  in  His  name  "Emman- 
uel," brings  these  two  together, — is,  for  man,  this 
God  in  relationship,  his  strength,  his  hiding-place. 
How  beautifully  does  the  feeble  Mollusk  in  his 
shelter  speak  of  that ! 

Not,  however,  as  one  might  at  first  think,  the 
lesson  of  the  Radiate  over  again.      The  strength 


Among  the  Creatures.  157 

that  is  found  in  weakness  there  images  a  strength 
which  is  imbibed  and  internal.  The  rock  that 
shelters  there  is  yet  within  (in  what  is  most  typical). 
Only  in  the  Mollusk  is  it  really  apart  front,  though 
in  intimate  companionship  with,  the  being  that  it 
shelters.  "  Thou  art  my  hiding-place," — "  Thou 
hast  been  our  dwelling-place,"  (Ps.  xxxii.  7;  xc.  1,) 
is  only  fully  brought  out  in  this  type  of  form. 
Here,  how  true  it  is  that  the  Mollusk  hides  itself  in 
its  shell !  not  merely  as  its  refuge,  let  us  remember, 
but  as  giving  all  the  glory  to  its  place  of  refuge  ! 
How  exquisite,  in  this  light,  are  the  painting  and 
sculpture  of  these  beauteous  shells !  For — let  us 
remember  again — it  is  the  Mollusk  that  makes  its 
shell ;  and  so  do  we,  by  our  own  receptivity  of  the 
divine  revelation,  (as  the  being  we  are  considering, 
by  its  receptivity  of  light  and  air  and  food,  the 
divine  provision  for  it,)  make,  each  for  himself,  the 
One  we  go  with. 

Let  us  not  wonder,  then,  at  the  great  variety,  and 
difference  as  to  beauty,  of  these  shells  ;  or  that 
there  are  naked  Mollusks  also,  wanderers  from  their 
type.  Nature  depicts  for  us,  not  merely  what  is 
normal,  but  the  whole  range  of  what  exists.  And 
with  which  of  us  is  the  God  he  goes  with  the  all- 
glorious  God  He  ought  to  be  ?  How  blessed  yet  to 
be  able,  in  our  measure,  to  glorify  Him  !  Let  the 
being  that  adorns  its  shell  and  not  itself  show  us 


158    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

what  is  the  sure  sign  of  one  who  walks  with  God. 
And  let  the  weak  and  perishable  nature  of  the  being 
that  takes  refuge  in  the  shell,  compared  with  the 
permanence  and  beauty  of  the  shell  itself,  warn  us 
how  the  glory  of  man  shall  perish,  but  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  abide  forever ! 

We  must  not  leave  the  Mollusk,  however,  before 
we  have  noted  that  that  which  is  developed  in  it  is, 
above  all,  the  nutritive  function.  Digestion  is  every- 
where its  strongest  point,  as  we  have  seen :  it  is 
made  up  for  this,  if  we  may  say  so ;  and  this  is  of 
the  very  simplest  application  in  relation  to  the 
spiritual  idea  which  governs  it — of  which  it  is  the 
expression.  We  must  receive  from  Him  to  whom 
we  give,  for  of  His  own  alone  do  we  give  to  Him. 
She  who  had  the  box  of  ointment  for  Christ's  head 
is  that  Mary  who  had  her  place  first  at  His  feet; 
and  if  we  are  to  imitate  her  in  the  last,  we  must  ac- 
quire competence  where  she  did.  It  is  a  good  part 
which  shall  not  be  taken  away,  although  the  service 
to  which  it  leads  may  be  as  little  appreciated,  even 
by  disciples,  as  was  hers. 

In  the  order  in  which  we  have  been  proceeding, 
the  next  group  to  be  considered  would  be  the  Ver- 
tebrata ;  but  as  this  is  the  most  comprehensive  type 
of  all,  and  needs  to  be  compared  with  all  the  rest, 
we  shall  approach  it  now  from  the  other  side,  and 
for  this  purpose  take  up  first  the — 


Among  the  Creatures. 

ARTICULATA. 


159 


A    TYPICAL    ARTICULATE. 

These  constitute,  for  Mr.  Swainson  and  ourselves, 
the  second  or  subtypical  group, — a  most  distinct 
and  easily  comprehended,  as  well  as  excessively 
numerous  one.     What  with  insects,  Crustacea,  and 


160   Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natttral  World. 

worms,  its  numbers  exceed  that  of  all  the  other 
sub-kingdoms  put  together.  According  to  the 
character  ascribed  by  Mr.  Swainson  to  the  sub- 
typical  groups,  we  shall  be  prepared  to  find  it  the 
most  aggressive  and  destructive  of  all  types ;  but, 
as  we  have  already  hinted,  we  must  not  limit  it, 
therefore,  to  what  is  significant  of  evil.  Strife  and 
destruction,  though  incident  to  an  evil  state,  of 
course,  are  not  necessarily  therefore  themselves  evil: 
far  from  it.  Christ  came  that  He  might  "  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil,"  and  "him  that  hath  the 
power  of  death, — that  is,  the  devil"  himself.  And 
we  are  all  enlisted  in  this  strife  ;  Christ's  people 
are  His  soldiers,  and  must  "war  a  good  warfare," 
"fight  the  fight  of  faith,"  "contend  earnestly," 
"  wrestle  with  principalities  and  powers."  And 
though  "the  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal," 
yet  are  they  "  mighty  through  God,  to  the  pulling 
down  of  strongholds." 

The  number  2  is  stamped  upon  the  Articulata  in 
the  most  perfect  way.  In  them,  bilaterality  is  most 
perfectly  developed  from  the  head  to  the  extremity 
of  the  body,  while  the  whole  animal  is  divided  into 
rings,  which  consist  of  an  upper  and  an  under  arch, 
each  of  four  pieces,  arranged  in  pairs  on  each  side 
of  the  middle  line.  Eight  pieces  give  us  thus  the 
cube  of  2. 

"The  different  rings  or  segments  of  the  body  always 


Among  the  Creatures.  161 

bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  each  other,  and  sometimes, 
as  in  the  Julus  [wire-worm]  and  the  Scolopendra  or  Centi- 
pede, they  seem  like  actual  repetitions  of  each  other. 
Each  ring  may  bear  two  pairs  of  appendages,  or  mem- 
bers." (Carpenter.) 

"  The  tendency  to  repetition  exhibited  by  the  segments 
of  the  body  is  as  remarkable  in  the  disposition  of  the 
muscles  and  of  the  nervous  system  as  it  is  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  general  envelope.  In  most  animals  of  this 
sub-kingdom,  each  ring  in  its  complete  state  possesses  a 
pair  of  nervous  ganglia,  united  on  the  central  line;  and 
these  ganglia  are  connected  together  by  a  double  cord  of 
communication  which  runs  along  the  lower  or  ventral 
surface  of  the  body. 

"The  muscles,  like  the  parts  of  the  body  themselves, 
are  arranged  with  great  regularity  and  exactness  on  the 
two  sides  of  the  median  or  central  line ;  so  that  the  lateral 
symmetry  of  the  Articulata  is  most  exact.  Where  the 
segments  and  their  appendages  have  a  similar  form  and 
action,  their  muscles  are  but  repetitions  of  each  other." 

"The  alimentary  tube  frequently  passes  straight  along 
the  central  line,  from  one  extremity  of  the  body  to  the 
other,  with  a  dilatation  near  its  commencement, — the 
stomach ;  and  where  this  is  not  the  case,  the  convolutions 
which  the  intestines  make  are  usually  few  in  number. 
Instead  of  a  heart,  we  find  a  dorsal  vessel — a  long  tube 
placed  on  the  central  line  of  the  back,  and  divided  into 
segments,  corresponding  with  those  of  the  body, — each 
segment  being,  as  it  were,  the  heart  for  its  own  division. 
The  respiratory  apparatus,  too,  is  arranged  with  the  most 
perfect  symmetry." 

We  have  before  suggested  the  connection  of  this 


1 62    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

bilateral  symmetry  with  power  of  movement.  Here, 
as  necessarily  among  what  are  pre-efrrinently  Na- 
ture's warriors,  we  find  the  greatest  activity. 

"The  development  of  the  organs  of  nutrition  in  articu- 
lated animals  would  seem  to  be  altogether  subservient  to 
that  of  the  locomotive  apparatus; — their  function  being 
chiefly  to  supply  the  nerves  and  muscles  with  the  aliment 
necessary  to  sustain  their  vigor.  The  power  of  these 
muscles  is  so  great,  in  proportion  to  their  size,  that,  in 
energy  and  rapidity  of  movement,  some  of  the  articulated 
tribes  surpass  all  other  animals." 

When  we  remember  the  ants,  the  white  ants,  the 
bees,  etc.,  we  realize  that  social  instincts  also  are 
developed  in  a  striking  manner  among  these,  and  in 
the  ants  find  specialized  warrior-forces  acting  like 
a  trained  host.  A  large  proportion  of  the  whole 
group,  as  the  crabs,  beetles,  wire-worm,  centipede, 
have  their  coats  of  mail  also  for  defense. 

Thus  the  spiritual  idea  which  reigns  among  the 
Articulata  is  not  hard  to  trace.  That  it  is  in  com- 
plete harmony  with  their  numerical  place  needs  also 
no  insisting  on.  The  general  thought  is  all  that  we 
can  here  trace  :  for  details,  we  have  no  room  ;  but 
there  is  here  a  fruitful  field  for  any  who  will  labor 
in  it. 

We  come  now,  lastly,  to  what  is  first  in  position 
among  these  types, — that  of  the — 

VERTEBRATA. 

The  Vertebrata  are,  as  every  one  knows,  so  called 


Among  the  Creatures.  163 

from  their  possession  of  a  jointed  column  inclosing 
the  spine,  the  skull  being  only  an  expansion  of  the 
same  in  order  to  protect  the  brain  in  like  manner. 
Brain  and  spine,  rather  than  the  bony  case  which 
environs  them,  are  really  the  distinctive  characters 
of  these  highest  of  the  Animal  Kingdom. 


n  c 

COMPARATIVE   DIAGRAM   OF  YERTEBRATA  (B)  AND  INVERTEBRATA  (A). 

(a)  Body-wall.  (b)  Alimentary  Canal.  (c)  Circulatory  System. 

(n)  Sympathetic  Nervous  System;    (nf)  Cerebro-Spinal  Nervous  System. 

11  In  all  Invertebrate  animals,  without  exception,"  says 
Prof.  Nicholson,  "the  body  may  be  regarded  as  a  single 
tube,  inclosing  all  the  viscera;  and  consequently,  in  this 
case,  the  nervous  system  is  contained  within  the  general 
cavity  of  the  body,  and  is  not  in  any  way  shut  off  from  the 
alimentary  canal.  The  transverse  section,  however,  of  the 
Vertebrate  animal  exhibits  two  tubes,  one  of  which  con- 
tains the  great  masses  of  the  nervous  system, — that  is,  the 
cerebro-spinal  axis,  or  brain  and  spinal  cord — whilst  the 
other  contains  the  alimentary  canal  and  the  chief  circula- 
tory organs,  together  with  certain  portions  of  the  nervous 
system  known  as  the  ' ganglionic'  or  l sympathetic'  sys- 
tem. Leaving  the  cerebro-spinal  centre  out  of  sight  for  a 
moment,  we  see  that  the  larger  or  visceral  tube  of  the 


1 64   Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

Vertebrate  animal  contains  the  digestive  canal,  the  hoemal 
system,  and  the  gangliated  nervous  system.  Now  this  is 
exactly  what  is  contained  in  the  visceral  cavity  of  any  of 
the  higher  Invertebrate  animals ;  and  it  follows  from  this, 
as  pointed  out  by  Von  Baer,  that  it  is  the  sympathetic 
nervous  system  of  Vertebrates  which  is  truly  comparable 
to,  and  homologous  with,  the  nervous  system  of  Inverte- 
brates. The  cerebro-spinal  nervous  centres  of  the  Verte- 
brata  are  to  be  regarded  as  something  superadded,  and 
not  represented  at  all  among  the  Invertebrata." 

It  is  clear  that  this  additional  part  is  that  which 
governs  the  whole,  moreover.  Without  being  able 
to  attribute  to  the  brain  the  mental  power  ascribed 
to  it  by  Dr.  Carpenter,  we  may  assuredly  see  in  it  a 
means  of  concentrating  and  combining  the  powers 
existing  in  those  storehouses  of  nerve-force  which 
we  find  in  the  ganglionic  centres  which  make  up 
the  whole  nerve-system  of  Invertebrates.  And  thus 
a  unity  of  control  is  established  over  every  part 
which  we  do  not  find  in  the  latter, — a  unity  which 
is  to  be  discerned  in  the  fact  that  in  the  Vertebrates 
such  divisions  of  the  one  animal  into  two,  or  even 
replacement  of  lost  members,  as  we  find  in  other 
sub-kingdoms,  is  no  longer  possible.  The  animal 
is  here  one,  and  indivisible,  and  that  not  by  sim- 
plicity of  organization,  as  in  the  Mollusk,  but  by 
subjection  to  one  controlling  power.  Unity,  from 
the  full  harmony  of  many  organs  and  functions, — 
not  the  narrow  unity  of   one  prevalent  idea,  but 


Among  the  Creatures.  165 

that  which  we  have  seen  to  be  characteristic  of 
groups  pre-eminently  typical — distinguishes  the 
Vertebrate. 

The  spiritual  idea  is  easily  read  here  as  harmoni- 
ous obedience,  in  which  is  expressed  that  integrity 
or  oneness  which  is  indeed  the  first  principle  of  the 
life  of  faith,  and  which  produces,  where  it  is  found, 
the  highest  development  of  every  faculty  of  the 
soul.  Thus  in  the  Vertebrate  now  every  function 
is  elaborated  as  in  no  other  type, — digestion  and 
nutrition  beyond  the  Mollusk,  locomotion  more 
perfect  though  not  more  various  than  the  Articulate, 
the  internal  support  without  the  immobility  of  the 
Radiate.  In  the  circulatory  system  a  true  heart  for 
the  first  time  appears,  and  becomes  a  new  centre  of 
force  in  the  body.  Sensation  is  correspondingly 
awake,  as  the  blood  reddens,  and  the  nerve-power 
manifests  itself  in  a  new  energy  and  directness  of 
application.  How  many  pages  could  one  write 
upon  the  spiritual  meaning  of  all  this !  and  yet  I 
shall  not ;  for  my  object  is  not  to  sermonize,  but  to 
bring  my  reader  face  to  face  with  the  God  of  nature 
for  himself,  when  the  application  will  be  easyc 
These  types  are  wonderfully  full,  detailed,  and  life- 
like pictures,  needing  little  help  to  understand 
them,  when  once  we  are  in  a  responsive  attitude  of 
soul.  What  wonder,  when  in  them  God  has  written, 
not  for  the  philosophers,  but  the  whole  race  of  man, 


1 66    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

just  as  He  has  written  His  other  book  of  revelation. 
Near  enough  to  Nature's  heart,  we  shall  find  that  it 
is  God,  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  is  the  Heart  of  Nature. 


\6j 


CHAPTER  XL 
Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle. 

BRIEF  as  our  glance  has  been,  we  must  now 
leave  the  Animal  Kingdom,  to  take  up 
another  volume  of  Nature's  library,  more 
ancient,  and  its  language  perhaps  more  difficult  to 
read,  and  yet  where  diligence  will  assuredly  find 
itself  abundantly  rewarded.  The  place  of  the 
Vegetable  Kingdom  has  been  as  yet  only  just  in- 
dicated. We  must  try  now  to  realize  a  little  what  it 
presents  to  us  in  its  primary  divisions. 

But,  first,  what  is  the  vegetable  type  itself  as 
compared  with  the  animal  ?  It  would  seem  that  if 
spiritual  law  reigns  throughout  nature,  there  should 
be  some  broad  distinction  between  the  two,  which 
we  could  grasp  as  easily  as  we  can  those  of  the 
divisions;  and  it  should  be  found  that  the  classifi- 
cation of  forms  involves,  where  true,  a  classification 
of  thoughts  and  spiritual  principles  also.  A  hard 
test  this  for  the  numerical  system  !  and  yet  if  this 
can  be  shown  to  be  the  case,  even  tolerably,  then 
its  triumph  is  indeed  assured.  For  such  consistency 
as  is  implied  in  this  would  be  as  easy  to  imagine  a 
chance  effect  as  a  child's  box  of  letters  fallen  out 


1 68    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

upon  the  floor  arranging  themselves  into  intelligible 
sentences.  Let  us  see,  then,  how  far  the  thoughts 
we  have  connected  with  the  divisions  of  the  animal 
kingdom  conform  to  this  ideal,  and  what  help  they 
give  us  toward  realizing  the  animal  type  as  a  whole. 

Here  they  are,  then.  We  have,  as  to  the  spiritual 
principles  implied, — 

i.  The  Vertebrata  :  "  harmonious  obedience." 

2.  The  Articulata  :  the  soldier-"  virtue." 

3.  The  Protozoa  :  "  truth  to  the  heavenly  calling." 

4.  TheRadiata:  "  strength  in  weakness." 

5.  The  Mollusca:  "  glorying  in  our  hiding-place." 
Mr.  Swainson  would  have  told  us  that  we  have  to 

prove  the  circularity  of  this  group  to  prove  its  nat- 
uralness. As  far  as  this  is  zoological,  I  think  no 
naturalist  would  question  it  ;*  but  it  is  perfectly  in 
order  to  demand  that  this  should  be  shown  as  to  the 
spiritual  grouping  as  well  as  the  other.  Here  also 
there  is  little  difficulty,  however, — for  those,  at  least, 
whose  minds  are  governed  by  the  Word  of  God. 

1.  Every  thing  must  begin  with  the  spirit  of 
obedience  ;  nor  can  there  be  true  progress  where 
this  is  not,  in  purpose,  at  least,  entire.  Measured 
obedience  Godward  is  not  that :  it  is  the  assertion 
of  one's  own  will  where  we  please.     With  God,  no 

*  Except  it  might  be  the  connection  between  the  Amiulata  and  the 
Protozoa.  But  through  the  Rotifera  and  Hanarice  this  seems  to  be 
found  with  little  difficulty.  Details  and  arguments  of  this  kind  would 
hardly  suit  the  popular  character  of  these  suggestions. 


Life  in  its  Loivest  Circle,  169 

command  is  arbitrary ;  but  wisdom,  love,  and  holi- 
ness shine  in  all.  Thus  there  can  be  no  resistance 
but  in  pride  and  unbelief. 

2.  And  this  is  what  characterizes  the  world  of 
fallen  men,  in  whom  opposition  to  God  is,  alas ! 
open  and  organized.  Clearly,  if  in  such  a  world  we 
would  obey  God,  we  must  expect  at  once  conflict. 
Thus  the  apostle  enjoins  as  the  first  thing,  if  we 
have  faith,  that  we  "add  to"  it  "virtue," — what  in 
Greece  or  Rome  was  called  that — the  soldier-virtue, 
courage.  After  this  come  knowledge,  temperance, 
patience,  godliness,  brotherly  love  ;  but  courage, — 
decision  of  heart  that  presses  on  through  all  oppo- 
sition— this  is  the  prerequisite  to  all  these  things. 

The  conflict  is  everywhere,  and  there  can  be  no 
non-combatants.  Neither  God  nor  the  world  per- 
mits neutrality.  That  which  is  simply  negative,  or 
assumes  to  be  so,  is  positive  enough  in  evil  :  to  be 
indifferent  to  Christ  is  to  be  against  Him.  Thus, 
that  the  second  thing  here  is  the  plain  issue  of  the 
first,  we  see  at  once. 

3.  But  that  the  third  follows  the  second  is  not  so 
evident.  The  connection  is  that  which  the  apostle 
gives,  that  "  no  man  that  warreth  entangleth  himself 
with  the  affairs  of  this  life,  that  he  may  please  Him 
who  hath  chosen  him  to  be  a  soldier."  This  is  the 
spiral  which  is  traced  in  the  orbit  of  obedience, — 
the  upward   movement  of  the  heart  toward   Him 


170    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

who  is,  though  in  heaven,  the  Captain  of  salvation, 
and  by  whom  we  are  called  with  a  heavenly  call- 
ing. If  our  eyes  are  there,  we  shall  be  free  from 
entanglement  with  the  affairs  of  this  life ;  tempta- 
tion will  not  press  upon  us;  our  heads  will  be 
covered  in  the  day  of  battle.  Thus  the  third  par- 
ticular is  intimately  joined  with  what  goes  before, 
as  well  as  with  what  follows  also. 

4.  For  with  all  this  will  go  the  sense  of  weakness, 
the  conscious  need  of  strength  not  one's  own,  the 
craving  and  the  finding  it  as  inward  realization, 
though  leaving  one  still  to  the  conviction  that  it  is 
not  one's  own.  This  is  the  coral  type,  which  has 
its  manifold  and  beauteous  forms,  as  has  its  anti- 
type. Here  association  has  also  its  recognized 
place,  where  those  who  are  agreed  are  found  to- 
gether, and  "God  sets  the  solitary  in  families,"  In 
all  these  things,  how  large  a  field  opens  up  before 
us  !  but  we  cannot  enter  upon  it  here.  It  is  very 
plain  how  this  unites  with — 

5.  The  glorifying  of  Him  in  whom  the  soul  has 
found  its  refuge  and  its  hiding-place,  and  that  in 
this  way  we  return  to  that  with  which  we  set  out, 
God's  " statutes"  being  " songs  in  the  house  of  our 
pilgrimage."  Thus  the  life — not  ends,  for  it  never 
ends,  but — completes  its  orbit,  and  returns  afresh 
to  begin  its  course  with  God  in  psalm.  How  beau- 
tiful here  is  the  unending  circle,  the  type  of  eternity! 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  171 

Can  one  conceive  that  all  this  is  mere  imag- 
ination ?  Does  not  its  very  sweetness  speak  for 
its  truth? 

This  circle  of  animal  life,  then,  how  as  a  whole 
shall  we  define  it  ?  what  is  the  animal  type,  as  told 
out  in  it?  We  have  seen  that  "the  living  soul  that 
moveth  "  is  the  Scripture  definition  ;  we  have  seen 
that  the  number  2,  which  is  that  of  the  kingdom, 
speaks  of  service,  as  it  does  of  conflict  and  even  of 
destruction,  on  which  account  Mr.  Swainson  makes 
his  subtypical  groups,  too  exclusively  by  far,  the 
types  of  evil,  while,  in  truth,  the  work  of  Him  who 
is  above  all  the  typical  Servant  is  to  destroy,  but  to 
destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  the  lion,  for  ex- 
ample, is  one  type  of  Himself.  Thus,  putting  all 
together,  and  in  connection  with  what  the  circle  of 
its  primary  groups  declares,  the  animal  kingdom 
seems  to  furnish  us  with  the  types  of  active  life  of 
the  soul  in  a  scene  where  service  becomes  necessa- 
rily conflict,  and  where  hate  is  as  necessary  in  its 
place  as  love,  and  is  the  fruit  of  it:  "Ye  that 
love  the  Lord,  hate  evil "  is  the  motto  of  it.  (Ps. 
xcvii.  10.) 

Only  we  must  remember  that,  while  this  is  the 
prevailing  and  characteristic  thought,  we  shall  find 
that,  as  the  shadow  accompanies  the  sun,  so  the 
types  of  evil  are  to  be  found  in  it  also,  as  we  have 
been    reminded,    and   that   numerously.      For   the 


172    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

world  pictures  for  us  the  whole  strife ,  betwixt  good 
and  evil,  and  only  so  could  it  present  to  us  the 
conflict  of  good  at  all. 

We  must  also  remember  that  there  are  many 
minor  but  necessary  types  that  come  in  to  fill  out 
the  picture,  "aberrant"  as  well  as  truly  "typical" 
forms  having  their  necessary  place  in  it,  as  we  have 
seen.  God's  thoughts  are  not  narrow,  nor  possess- 
ing the  mere  symmetry  that  we  would  often  give 
them.  While  our  thoughts  of  order  are  often  like 
the  close-clipped  bushes  of  an  antique  garden,  or 
the  dead  level  of  a  Dutch  landscape,  He  delights  in 
the  wild  luxuriance  of  the  forest,  and  the  bold  out- 
lines of  the  breezy  hills. 

But  it  is  time  to  come  back  to  our  question,  What 
is  the  meaning  of  the  vegetable  type  as  a  whole, 
when  compared  with  the  animal?  And  here  it  is 
plain  at  once  that  the  vegetable,  whatever  else  it 
may  be,  is  not  the  type  of  external  activity.  Excep- 
tionally we  may  find  among  the  animals  (in  their 
aberrant  forms)  a  mollusk  anchored  for  life  to  its 
dwelling-place,  or  even  the  coral-reefs  of  many 
generations ;  but  the  law  of  the  plant  is  that  it  is 
fixed:  as  another  has  said,  its  root  is  its  fetter; 
although  this  be  a  thought  which  after  all  has  its 
incongruity  also.  For  the  root  is  hand  and  mouth 
to  it  rather,  by  which  it  makes  the  soil  in  which  it 
is  rooted  minister  to  its  sustenance,  and  turns  the 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  173 

dead  inorganic  dust  into  living  forms  of  wondrous 
beauty  and  magic  power. 

Yea,  this  root  is  the  underground  workshop  of  a 
life-force  which  is,  as  long  as  it  abides,  ever  pushing 
out  into  the  earth  its  mines,  and  manufacturing  its 
products  of  many  patterns  and  for  many  uses, 
which  it  perfects  then  in  leaf  and  flower  and  fruit 
in  its  factories  above-ground,  where  it  clothes  itself, 
in  the  assurance  of  the  dignity  of  labor,  in  glorious 
apparel  beyond  Solomon's.  Here,  in  this  manufac- 
turing power,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  significance 
of  the  plant.  In  the  life,  which  is  its  characteristic, 
having  no  higher  qualities  of  soul  as  the  beast  has, 
it  develops  a  marvelous  power  such  as  we  never 
find  again,  by  which  it  becomes  the  tender  nurse 
and  bounteous  provider  for  all  other  life.  It  is  the 
natural  vitalizer  and  regenerator  of  the  dead  and 
lifeless ;  typically  this,  and  thus  filling  its  place  as 
the  third  kingdom,  reflecting  in  its  measure  the 
operation  of  the  third  Person  of  the  Godhead. 

Its  activity  is  not  external,  like  that  of  the  animal, 
but  internal,  manifested  in  growth  and  production, 
processes  of  life  alone ;  which  in  the  animal  also 
are  the  necessary  basis  and  support  of  the  external 
activity.  The  world,  like  any  other  building,  is  not 
built  down  from  the  top,  but  upward  from  the  bot- 
tom,— a  fact  which  has  crazed  the  evolutionists, — 
and  thus  that  which  is  higher  rests  upon  what  is 


174    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

lower,  and  "much  more  that  which  is  feeble  is  nec- 
essary," as  the  apostle  teaches.  Yet  not  in  the  way 
of  evolution,  but  as  here,  where  that  which  is  higher 
is  not  produced  by  the  lower,  but  roots  itself  in  it, 
and  transforins  it.  Life  is  never  except  from  life  : 
so,  in  opposition  to  theory,  the  facts  teach.  Yet  the 
lower  is  necessary  to  the  higher,  but  as  a  basis  only: 
it  does  not  rise  to  the  higher  level,  but  is  raised. 
And  this  is  the  constant  law. 

The  vegetable  kingdom,  then,  does  not  speak  of 
outward,  but  of  internal  activity, — of  growth  and 
production, — of  root  and  leaf  and  flower  and  fruit. 
Spiritually,  this  is  easy  to  interpret.  Here,  the  root 
is  faith, — unseen,  hidden,  yet  active,  and  the  elabo- 
rator  of  all  that  is  developed  in  the  plant.  Let  us 
not  be  stumbled  by  the  fact  that  the  root  is  not 
always  this  :  we  have  seen  that  in  natural  types  the 
false  is  shown  to  us  with  the  true,  the  evil  with  the 
good.  There  are  roots  which  dangle  in  the  air, 
flourished  before  men's  eyes,  but  never  reaching 
the  earth  at  all :  so  is  there  a  faith  which  is  for 
show,  not  use,  and  useless, — "faith,  if  it  have  not 
work,  is  dead,  being  alone."  These  roots  cannot 
alter  the  significance  of  the  root,  and  this  faith 
cannot  take  from  the  value  of  true  faith. 

The  leaf  is,  as  is  well  known,  the  lungs  of  the 
plant,  that  in  which  the  root-sap  is  elaborated 
by  exposure  to  air  and  sun.     It  is  that  "confession 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  175 

of  the  mouth,"  of  which  Scripture  makes  much, 
in  which  that  which  faith  has  produced  comes 
to  light  and  air,  and  is  ripened  and  invigor- 
ated. The  leaf  has  a  beauty  of  its  own,  and  gives 
the  tree  its  character  before  men  also.  There 
would  be  no  fruit  without  leaf  :  let  us  not  disparage 
the  leaf  ;  though  here  again  there  may  be  the  leaf 
which  signifies  nothing— /r<?fession,  not  ^^fession, 
— a  parasite  upon  the  plant  instead  of  something 
integral.  None  the  less  is  the  leaf  as  the  leaf  a 
beautiful  and  significant  thing. 

Then  the  flo.wer,  what  shall  we  say  of  it  ?  It  is, 
most  of  all,  what  they  say  all  is,  and  with  a  trans- 
cendent spiritual  meaning  which  yet  they  generally 
miss,  the  reproduced  sunshine,  the  face  that  greets 
you  with  welcome,  the  host  with  his  honey-cup,  the 
smile  that  anticipates  the  fruit  in  store  for  you. 
There  are  deceitful  smiles,  we  know,  and  poisonous 
advances,  and  pleasures  that  intoxicate  :  and  yet 
the  flower — something  spent  of  God  in  mere  delight 
for  you — may  well  speak  of  what  is  in  store  against 
the  leaf-fall  and  the  winter,  and  of  the  love  that 
planted  Eden  once,  and  yet  shall  make  the  wilder- 
ness to  blossom  as  the  rose, — may  be  witness  against 
mere  utilitarianism,  or  that  God  has  a  use  for  pleas- 
ure also,  and  joys  at  His  right  hand  for  evermore. 

Lastly,  the  fruit :  and  the  fruit  is  promise  fulfilled; 
something  of  no  utility  to  the  tree,  but  a  draft  upon 


176    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World, 

its  resources,  a  sacrifice  that  it  makes  in  order  to 
minister  to  you  :  all  true  fruit  is  not  for  one's  self, 
but  for  our  Master,  and  we  can  easily  distinguish 
between  work  and  fruit. 

Here,  then,  are  the  elements  of  the  plant-life. 
They  show  the  character  we  have  before  ascribed 
to  it :  they  speak  of  internal  activity,  the  product 
and  manifestation  of  the  life  itself,  the  sign  of  that 
strange  regenerative  power  that  belongs  to  it,  and 
by  which  alone  are  sustained  the  external  activities 
of  service  and  of  conflict. 

To  come,  then,  to  the  divisions  of  the  vegetable 
kingdom  :  botanists  are  coming  to  agree  that  there 
are  five  divisions  ;  three  of  which,  too,  are  plainly 
united  also  among  themselves  in  more  than  the  fact 
that  they  are  all  cryptogamous,  or  flowerless,  plants. 
The  flowering  plants  have  two  main  types  of  struc- 
ture— the  dicotyledonous  or  exogenous,  and  the 
monocotyledonous  or  endogenous  plants.  We  may 
arrange  them  thus,  then  : — 

1.  Exogens :   plants  with  a  central  woody  axis, 

two    seed-leaves,    and    the    others    netted- 
veined. 

2.  Endogens  :  plants  with  a  woody  circumference, 

one  seed-leaf,  and  the  rest  parallel-veined. 

3.  Thallogens :  growing  from  a  thallus,  in  which 

root,  stem,  and  leaves  are  fused   into  one 
general  mass. 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  177 

4.  Anogens :   stem  distinct  from  leaves,  without 

vessels. 

5.  Acrogens:    stem   vascular    in    part,    growing 

from  the  top. 

Between  these  divisions  and  those  of  the  animal 
kingdom  there  seems  some  real  analogy,  which,  in 
his  edition  of  Agassiz  and  Gould's  "  Outlines,"  Dr. 
Wright  has  pointed  out.  As  he  makes  only  three 
divisions  of  each,  however,  I  can  avail  myself  only 
partially  of  his  remarks,  especially  as  he  puts  the 
Mollusca,  along  with  the  Radiates,  into  his  second 
division.  The  analogy,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able 
to  trace  it,  runs  thus  : — 

1.  Between  the  Vertebrata  and  the  Exogens  it 
consists  in  this,  that  the  latter — 

"  grow  by  the  addition  of  concentric  layers  or  rings  of 
wood  made  to  their  outer  surface,"  the  softer  parts  being 
thus  outside,  the  solidity  more  "  internally,  like  the  osse- 
ous skeleton  of  the  Vertebrata.  The  central  pith  is  in- 
closed in  a  sheath,  analogous  to  the  spinal  canal,  extend- 
ing through  the  entire  length  of  the  plant." 

While— 

2.  In  the  endogenous  plants  "the  marrow  or  pith 
is  interwoven  with  their  vegetable  fibres,  as  the  nervous 
system  is  disseminated  by  ganglia  through  the  bodies  of 
the  Invertebrata :  there  is  no  osseous  skeleton  in  the  one, 
nor  is  there  any  true  wood  in  the  other;  but  in  both,  the 
circumference  is  more  solid  than  the  centre.  We  see 
among  some  families  of  this  section,  (as  the  grasses,  lilies, 


t  78    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World, 

palms,  etc.,  the  same  as  among  insects,  Crustacea,  and 
annelids,)  the  integument  more  or  less  indurated,  and  in 
some  families  containing  a  quantity  of  silicious  particles. 
The  knotty-jointed  stems  of  many  grasses  represent  the 
articulated  body  of  worms,  Crustacea,  and  myriapods. 
Many  families  in  this  division  produce  seed  only  once  in 
their  lives,  like  some  worms  and  insects  that  cease  to  exist 
after  having  deposited  their  ova.  None  of  these  endoge- 
nous vegetables  grow  by  layers,  but  by  a  swelling  out  of 
their  internal  structure,  just  as  the  horny  or  calcareous 
envelope  of  insects  and  Crustacea  is  periodically  shed  to 
allow  of  a  general  increase  from  within." 

Thus  far  I  thankfully  follow  Dr.  Wright,  and  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  analogy  shown  under  this 
second  group  is  all  with  the  Articulata.  Although 
grouping  the  Mollusca  with  these,  he  traces  no  link 
of  resemblance  between  the  endogens  and  the 
former.  Indeed,  between  the  two  animal  groups 
themselves  there  is  no  special  resemblance. 

3.  I  go  on,  therefore,  to  the  Thallogens,  where, 
among  the  Algae,  there  are  so  many  forms  that 
resemble  animalcules,  that  there  has  been  even  a 
difficulty  to  decide  whether  they  were  vegetable  or 
Protozoa. 

4.  The  Mosses  are  simple-tissued,  stemmed,  and 
social,  so  far  like  the  corals. 

5.  While  the  scalariform  vessels  of  the  Fern  may 
answer  to  the  development  of  the  circulatory  system 
in  the  Mollusk,  beyond  the  other  aberrant  animal 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  179 

divisions.  The  fibrous  cylinder  of  the  tree-ferns, 
constituted  of  the  bases  of  the  fallen  leaf-stalks, 
may  remind  one  somewhat  of  the  Mollusk's  shell. 

Between  the  types  of  life  so  far  apart  as  the 
animal  and  vegetable  these  analogies,  though  some- 
times faint,  seem  true.  I  certainly  do  not  think 
that  any  thing  like  them  could  be  shown  between 
the  divisions  which  do  not  correspond  in  the  two 
lists ;  and  if  this  be  so,  it  is  strong  proof  that  they 
are  real.  But  let  us  now  look  at  the  divisions  of 
the  vegetable  kingdom  in  their  inner  meaning,  and 
as  connected  with  the  numerals  severally  attached. 

I.    THE    EXOGEN. 


EXOGENOUS   WOOD. 

(A)  Sapwood.        (B)  Heartwood.        (C)  Bark. 

The  exogen  is  distinguished  by  the  woody  axis  of 
its  stem,  its  netted  leaves,  its  two  cotyledons :  we 


1 80    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

will  begin  with  that  to  which  it  owes  its  name — the 
stem.  This,  of  course,  is  only  to  be  seen  in  its  full 
meaning  in  the  tree,  and  all  the  trees  of  our  tem- 
perate and  colder  climes  are  exogens. 

If  we  cut  across  the  stem  or  branch  of  an  exogen- 
ous tree,  we  shall  find  it  composed  of  three  parts 
essentially.  There  is,  first,  a  central  pith :  this  is 
the  tissue  of  which  the  whole  plant  is  at  first  com- 
posed, and  from  which  all  other  is  formed.  It  is 
composed  of  cells,  the  primary  elements  of  all  living 
things,  in  which  is  contained  the  "  protoplasm,"  the 
substance  in  which  alone  life  manifests  itself,  and  of 
which  the  simplest  living  forms,  whether  plant  or 
animal,  seem  wholly  to  consist.  Cellular  tissue  is 
therefore  the  typical  life-tissue,  in  which  the  activity 
characteristic  of  life  manifests  itself,  the  actual 
workshop  in  which  the  inorganic  matter  received 
into  it  becomes  living,  and  then  takes  its  place  in  the 
organism  to  fulfill  its  destined  purpose  in  it. 

We  do  not  wonder,  then,  to  find  this  cellular  tissue 
in  the  middle  of  the  stem,  connected  with  "  rays," 
— the  " medullary  rays,"— which  proceed  from  it  to 
the  outer  portion.  As  the  tree  or  branch  gets  older, 
the  life-tissue  diminishes  and  dries  up  in  the  heart, 
and  the  tree  (alas !  as  we  do,)  grows  old  fast  in  this 
way.  Yet  the  medullary  rays  remain,  and  serve  an 
important  purpose,  of  which  we  shall  presently  have 
to  speak. 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  181 

The  pith  is  surrounded  by  the  woody  layers,  the 
number  and  thickness  of  which  increase  yearly  with 
the  growth  of  the  tree  itself.  These  woody  layers 
constitute,  of  course,  the  strength  of  the  tree,  by 
virtue  of  which  it  lifts  its  glorious  foliage  and  its 
harvest  of  fruit  into  the  light  and  air  of  heaven.  In 
the  exogen,  these  woody  layers,  the  product  of 
transformed  living  cells,  are  pressed  close  to  the 
heart  of  the  tree,  as  if  it  knew  and  clung  to  its  sup- 
port. Would  that  we  knew  as  well  !  But  at  least 
we  do  know,  for  we  have  seen  it  already  in  the 
Radiate,  what  this  axis  of  support  represents.  It  is 
Christ  with  all  that  is  revealed  to  us  in  Him,  and  as 
He  is  received  by  the  soul  in  living  reality,  that  is 
the  stay  and  support  of  it.  Well  may  He  be  clasped 
to  our  hearts,  and  become  the  prop  upon  which  our 
whole  life  hangs,  with  all  the  weight  it  carries. 

Only  observe,  as  you  may  in  the  herbaceous  stem, 
how  the  woody  layers  form,  namely,  in  strings: 
"each  string  separated  from  its  neighbors  by  a 
prolongation  of  the  pith,  which  thus  maintains  its 
connection  with  the  bark."  For  the  reception  of 
Christ  is  by  the  Word, — the  "doctrine  of  Christ," — 
and  this  must  thus  (every  string  or  line  of  truth)  be 
wrapped  up — to  speak  according  to  the  type, — in 
living  tissue.  Alas  !  the  accumulation  of  this  woody 
fibre,  all-valuable  as  it  is,  may  choke  up  these  life- 
channels,  through  which  the  sap  penetrates  through- 


1 82    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

out  the  stem  of  the  tree,  and  sad  injury  be  done. 
The  medullary  rays  are  to  remain  :  all  the  truth  of 
God  must  abide  in  connection  with  the  life,  and  the 
life-pulses,  as  it  were,  ramify  through  it. 

But  the  woody  layers  must  increase  :  year  by 
year,  a  ring  of  wood  is  added  to  the  central  axis, 
the  tree  enlarging  to  make  room  for  it:  this  is  the 
way  too  for  us  to  acquire  truth  without  being 
choked  up  by  it — the  only  way.  And  the  tree,  at 
least,  never  neglects  to  lay  up  its  store.  You  may 
count  its  years  of  growth  by  these  annual  rings ! 
Thus  too  with  us  should  the  new  truth  apply  itself 
to,  wrap  round,  and  strengthen  what  we  possessed 
before ;  and  thus  that  which  was  first  received 
becomes  like  the  " heart-wood" — stronger  and  more 
solid  continually. 

The  bark  is  formed  on  the  outside  of  the  wood, 
but  grows  from  the  inside  out,  the  outer  layers  grad- 
ually decaying,  and  dropping  off.  With  every  fresh 
life-burst  in  the  spring,  the  bark  is  loosened  from 
the  wood  by  the  newly  organizing  substance;  so 
that  the  new  wood  clothes  itself  afresh  with  a  coat 
to  suit  it.  So  should  it  be  with  our  outward  life:  it 
should  receive  its  expansion  from  within,  and  be 
always  ready  to  receive  expansion  and  new  model- 
ing. These  changes  are  incident  to  growth,  and 
should  not  subject  us  to  the  charge  of  fickleness 
or  inconstancy.     The  expansive  power  of  life  is  a 


Life  in  its  Lozvest  Circle.  183 

mighty  energy,  and  if  it  can  be  resisted,  yet  there 
is  death  in  the  resistance. 

The  stem  as  the  ascending  axis  of  the  plant  is 
fittingly  accompanied  by  that  spiral  arrangement  of 
the  leaves  in  which  we  have  the  type  of  orbital  and 
upward  progress.  The  leaf  itself,  it  is  assured  us,* 
gives  the  pattern  of  the  whole  tree,  supposing  the 
branches  were  brought  into  one  plane,  as  the  veins 
of  the  leaf  are.  If  the  leaf  speak  of  profession,  then 
we  are  reminded  here  of  the  needful  consistency 
between  what  we  profess  and  what  we  are.  In  the 
reticulated  veins  of  Exogens  we  have  an  arrange- 
ment by  which  the  sap  is  more  completely  and  per- 
sistently exposed  to  light  and  air  than  it  is  in  the 
parallel  veins  of  the  Endogenous  leaf.  And  this 
corresponds  in  measure  to  the  more  perfect  oxygen- 
ation of  the  blood  in  the  Vertebrata  than  in  the 
other  divisions  of  the  animal  kingdom. 

In  that  living  and  internal  activity  which  we  have 
seen  the  plant  typifies, — that  in  which  alone  fruit  is 
found,  the  Exogen  has  clearly  the  highest  place. 
As  already  said,  all  the  trees  of  temperate  climes, 
and  the  largest  number  of  all  trees  by  far,  belong 
to  this  division.  It  is  the  type  of  endurance,  as  it 
is  of  perpetuity,  in  its  duration  of  life  surpassing  all 
other  trees.    As  taking  first  rank  among  vegetables, 


*  "Typical  Forms  and  Special  Ends  in  Creation."    By  Drs.  McCosh 
&  Dickie, 


1 84    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

its  numerical  place  speaks,  as  I  think,  of  that  har- 
monious, full-rounded  life  in  which  alone  is  power 
and  perpetuity ;  and  the  peculiarity  of  its  growth 
assuredly  should  remind  us  that  it  is  Christ  in  the 
heart,  Lord  and  Master  there,  that  communicates 
this  power.  For  this,  doctrine — dogma,  if  you 
please, — is  absolutely  needful :  that  is,  the  Word  of 
God  received  in  the  love  of  it.  We  are  sanctified 
by  the  truth, — not  by  what  we  think  truth  merely, 
nor  by  sincerity.  We  take  form  by  it ;  we  are  cast 
in  the  mould  of  the  doctrine.  That  there  is  danger 
for  us  here  we  have  already  admitted,  but  the 
danger  in  the  present  day  is  comparatively  little  in 
the  direction  of  adherence  over-much  to  dogma ; 
it  is  much  more  that  of  careless  indifference  and 
unbelief.  Let  these  concentric  rings  of  animal 
growth  in  the  Exogen  be  our  admonition  :  for  the 
life  of  the  plant  is  shown  in  these  new  acquirements; 
here  it  is  that  the  circulation  of  the  vital  sap  is 
mainly  carried  on,  which  ceasing,  the  tree  is  dead. 

2.    THE    ENDOGEN. 

The  Endogen  has  no  proper  woody  axis :  it  is 
rather,  in  idea,  a  woody  cylinder ;  it  is  sometimes, 
as  in  the  grasses,  almost  a  hollow  one.  Its  stem  is 
a  walled  stem,  a  fortified  inclosure,  as  if  built 
against  assault.  In  the  trailing  palms,  and  in  the 
grasses,  the  stems  are  "  additionally  hardened  by  a 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  185 

copious  deposition  of  silex  ;  this  is  especially  the 
case  in  the  Rattan,  which  will  readily  strike  fire 
with  steel."  In  the  interior,  the  cellular  tissue  is 
mingled  with  bundles  of  woody  fibres  carrying 
vessels  :  there  is  no  proper  wood.  The  palms,  in- 
deed, are  the  only  real  trees  among  the  endogens ; 
and  for  value,  they  are  far  exceeded  by  the  grasses, 
which  to  men  and  cattle  furnish  so  large  a  propor- 
tion of  their  food.  The  biblical  notices  have  to  do 
almost  entirely  with  these  two, — the  grasses  and 
the  palms. 


STEM  OF  A  PALM  \     ENDOGENOUS. 

The  palm-tree  is,  in  Scripture,  the  figure  of  the 
righteous,  taking  its  name  from  that  uprightness 
which  furnishes  so  ready  a  similitude. 

"The  familiar  comparison,  'The  righteous  shall  flourish 
like   the   palm-tree,' "   says    Dr.   Howson,    "suggests   a 


1 86   Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

world  of  illustration,  whether  respect  be  had  to  the 
orderly  and  regular  aspect  of  the  tree,  its  fruitfulness,  the 
perpetual  greenness  of  its  foliage,  or  the  height  at  which 
the  foliage  grows, — as  far  as  possible  from  earth  and  as 
near  as  possible  to  heaven.  Perhaps  no  point  is  more 
worthy  of  mention,  if  we  wish  to  pursue  the  comparison, 
than  the  elasticity  of  the  fibre  of  the  palm,  and  its  deter- 
mined growth  upward,  even  when  loaded  with  weights." 

To  which  Tristram  adds  that  it  flourishes  in  a 
barren  soil ;  being  characteristic  of  sandy  and  semi- 
tropical  deserts,  but  requires  constant  moisture,  and 
has  died  out  of  much  of  Palestine  from  the  lack  of 
human  care. 

The  palms  in  the  hands  of  those  come  out  of 
great  tribulation,  therefore,  in  the  book  of  Revela- 
tion, may  well  speak,  not  only  of  the  desert  out  of 
which  they  have  come,  but  no  less  of  the  divine  love 
which  had  there  tended  and  nurtured  them  ;  for 
thus  all  human  righteousness  is  dependent  upon 
the  grace  of  God  and  the  "  living  water"  of  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

At  the  other  extreme  from  the  stately  palm,  the 
grasses  render  to  man  incomparable  service. 

"When  it  is  considered, "  says  Dr.  Carpenter,  "that  all 
the  wheat,  barley,  oats,  rye,  and  other  corn-grains  used  as 
food  by  man, — as  also  rice  and  maize,  or  Indian  corn, 
which  support  an  even  larger  number  than  the  former, — 
the  sugar,  which  is  now  become,  not  only  an  article  of 
luxury  to  him,  but  of  necessity, — and  the  various  grasses, 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  187 

which  form  the  staple  food  of  nearly  all  the  animals,  upon 
which  he  relies  for  the  supply  of  his  appetite,  and  for 
assistance  in  his  labors, — it  will  be  at  once  seen  that  no 
single  tribe  can  be  compared  with  the  Graminese  in  im- 
portance to  him.  We  have  had  to  notice  other  tribes,  and 
even  particular  species,  which  are  of  the  most  important 
benefit  in  certain  situations;  such  are  the  date  and  the 
cocoa-nut.  But  these  are  valuable  just  because  the 
grasses,  which  are  otherwise  universal  in  their  distribu- 
tiou,  are  prevented,  by  peculiarities  of  climate,  or  other 
causes,  from  flourishing  in  those  particular  spots.  In  all 
but  the  very  coldest  parts  of  Europe  we  find  some  of  the 
corn-grains  affording  the  principal  supplies  of  food; — 
barley  and  oats  in  the  north,  rye  in  latitudes  a  little  more 
southern,  and  then  wheat.  In  the  southern  parts  of  Eu- 
rope, rice  and  maize  come  into  ordinary  cultivation;  and 
the  use  of  these  extends  throughout  the  tropics. 

"The  various  provisions  for  the  natural  propagation  of 
these  important  vegetables  are  extremely  interesting. 
The  animals  which  browse  upon  them  usually  prefer  the 
foliage,  leaving  the  flowerstalks  to  ripen  their  seed;  or,  if 
they  destroy  both,  the  plant  spreads  by  offsets  from  the 
underground  stems.  Even  if  they  be  trodden  down,  they 
are  not  destroyed  ;  for  buds  are  developed  from  the 
several  nodes  of  the  stem,  which  thus  multiply  the  plant. 
It  is  on  exposed  downs  and  barren  places,  where  the  heat 
is  insufficient  to  ripen  the  seeds,  and  where  there  is  no 
germination,  that  we  find  the  tendency  to  multiply  by  buds 
most  remarkable." 

Not  only  do  the  grasses  minister  thus  directly  to 
man,  but  they  even  preserve  for  him  the  fertility  of 


1 88    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

the  ground,  and  the  ground  itself.    The  Sand-Reed 
and  other  species — 

"Can  vegetate  amidst  dry  and  drifting  sand,  and  are 
hence  employed  to  give  firmness  to  embankments,  which 
they  pierce  with  an  entangled  web  of  living  structure,  that 
offers  a  resistance  rarely  overcome  by  the  force  of  storms, 
and  is  renewed  as  fast  as  it  is  destroyed.  Cattle  will  not  eat 
them,  and  hence  they  are  providentially  adapted  to  escape 
that  mode  of  destruction ;  but  when  they  have  been  up- 
rooted by  the  thoughtlessness  or  ignorance  of  man,  the 
most  serious  evils  have  arisen.  In  Scotland,  for  example, 
large  tracts  of  once  fertile  country  have  been  rendered 
barren  by  the  encroachment  of  sand  hills,  which  have 
given  them  the  desertlike  aspect  of  Egyptian  plains;  and 
this  encroachment  has  resulted  from  the  wanton  destruc- 
tion of  the  mat-grasses." 

Thus  service  has  here  also  to  take  the  form  of 
conflict,  and  the  service  of  the  grass  is  largely  of 
this  character. 

"Indeed,"  says  Macmillan,  "the  great  primary  object 
which  God  intended  to  serve  by  the  universal  diffusion  of 
the  grass,  seems  to  be  the  protection  of  the  soil.  Were 
the  soil  freely  exposed  to  heaven  without  any  organic 
covering,  it  would  speedily  pass  away  from  the  rocks  on 
whose  surface  it  was  deposited.  The  floods  would  lay 
bare  one  district,  and  encumber  another  with  the  accumu- 
lated heaps.  The  sun  would  dry  it  up,  and  deprive  it  of 
all  its  nourishing  constituents;  the  winds  would  scatter 
it  far  and  near,  and  fill  the  whole  atmosphere  with  its 
blinding,  choking  clouds.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine  all 
the  disastrous  effects  that  would  be  produced  over  the 


Life  in  its  Loivest  Circle.  189 

whole  earth,  were  the  disintergration  of  the  elements  not 
counteracted  by  the  conservative  force  of  vital  growth,  and 
the  destructive  powers  of  nature  not  kept  in  check  by  the 
apparently  insignificant,  but  actually  irresistible  emerald 
sceptre  of  the  grass.  The  earth  would  soon  be  deprived 
of  its  vegetation  and  inhabitants,  and  become  one  vast 
desert  catacomb,  a  gigantic  lifeless  cinder,  revolving 
without  aim  or  object  round  the  sun." 

For  its  place  in  this  conflict  it  is  marvelously 
adapted. 

"The  root,  in  proportion  to  its  size,  is  more  fibrous  and 
tenacious  than  that  of  any  other  plant.  In  some  instances 
it  is  so  vital  that,  like  Hercules  hydra,  the  more  it  is  hacked 
and  cut,  the  faster  it  spreads  itself ;  and  it  runs  so  exten- 
sively, each  joint  sending  up  a  new  shoot,  that  it  encloses 
a  considerable  space  of  soil.  .  .  .  The  stem,  or  culm,  is 
hollow,  provided  at  intervals  with  knots,  and  invested,  as 
if  by  some  mysterious  process  of  electrotype,  with  a  thin 
coating  of  flint.  It  is  constructed  in  this  manner  so  as  to 
combine  the  utmost  strength  with  its  light  and  elegant 
form;  and  so  efficient  are  these  mechanical  appliances, 
that  it  rarely  gives  way  under  the  force  of  the  most 
violent  winds." 

The  endogenous  growth  in  such  opposite  devel- 
opments, then,  as  the  grasses  and  the  palms,  gives 
a  true  indication  of  the  thought  which  is  embodied 
in  this  division  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  ;  and  the 
grasses  refer  us  to  the  Articulata  in  more  than 
their  jointed  stems.  But  while  nutritive  products 
abound  among  the  endogens,  there  are  few  that  are 


190    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

injurious:  the  " types  of  evil"  of  which  Mr.  Swain- 
son  speaks,  are  found  but  seldom  throughout  this 
class.  They  are  largely  the  benefactors  and  minis- 
ters to  the  need  of  man  ;  uniting  with  this  the 
thought  of  separation  from  surrounding  influences. 
The  walled  stem  is,  as  it  were,  a  "garden  inclosed." 
The  love,  as  well  as  the  "fear  of  the  Lord,  is  to  de- 
part from  evil. 

As  a  second  division,  and  in  this  way  correspond- 
ing with  the  animal  kingdom,  it  is  natural  that  it 
should  approach  this  in  its  spiritual  idea.  But  the 
endogen  is  still  vegetable,  not  animal,  life  not  soul, 
and  its  very  fruits  and  stored  up  nutriment  are  in- 
dicative of  this.  They  are  the  result  of  growth,  and 
internal  :  they  are  as  fruits  of  love  enriching  the 
heart,  but  which  of  course  necessarily  imply  the 
ministry  of  love  which  will  be  the  issue. 

3.    THE    THALLOGEN. 

Although  the  lowest  form  in  the  vegetable  world, 
the  thallogens  nevertheless  find,  through  the  Duck- 
weed and  the  Grasswrack  of  the  last  division,  their 
connection  with  it.  These  two  orders,  says  Car- 
penter,— 

"Both  consisting  of  aquatic  plants,  may  be  considered 
as  presenting  a  near  approach  to  the  aquatic  Cryptogamia 
in  general  structure;  and  some  species  are  very  like  Alga? 
in  external  aspect.   They  are  clearly  separated  from  them, 


Life  in  its  Loivcst  Circle.  191 

however,   by   their  organs   of  fructification;    but  these 
seem  reduced  to  almost  their  simplest  possible  form." 

Thallogens  are  flowerless  plants,  composed  of 
cellular  tissue  without  vessels,  and  in  which  root, 
stem,  and  leaves  are  fused  in  one  general  mass, 
which  is  the  thallus.  While  on  the  one  hand  we 
must  consider  them  the  lowliest  form  of  life,  there 
are  on  the  other  hand  none  in  which  the  power  of 
life  is  more  manifest  and  more  pervasive.  In  the 
stately  tree  a  large  part  is  considered  to  be  dead,  as 
no  longer  active,  however  much  it  may  have  its  use 
and  its  necessity  in  relation  to  the  welfare  of  the 
whole.  But  in  the  algae,  the  lichen,  and  the  fungi, 
— the  three  orders  into  which  the  thallogens  are 
divided, — there  is  no  part  dead.  An  intensity  of  life 
characterizes  them,  and  almost  every  function  of 
life — in  the  lowest  forms  absolutely  so — is  per- 
formed by  every  part.  They  are  all  root,  all  leaf, 
and  often  with  various  modes  of  propagation,  they 
diffuse  everywhere  their  microscopic  spores,  to  find 
wherever  they  may  a  place  favorable  to  develop- 
ment. They  fill  the  water  and  the  air ;  they  germ- 
inate on  barren  rock,  amid  snow  and  ice,  on  the 
bark  of  trees,  on  decaying  or  living  organisms,  and 
their  tremendous  power  in  the  production  of  epi- 
demic and  other  diseases  has  only  of  late  begun  to 
be  appreciated.  Like  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  which 
are  in  every  place  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good, 


192    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

they  are  His  ministers  and  messengers  for  wrath  or 
mercy. 

Some,  as  the  lichens,  with  slow  growth,  seem 
types  of  endurance  and  longsuffering,  resisting  cold 
and  heat,  and  the  fury  of  the  storm,  and  able — 

4  s  When  scorched  by  the  summer  sunshine,  deprived  of 
all  their  juices,  and  reduced  to  shapeless,  hueless  masses, 
which  crumble  into  powder  under  the  slightest  touch  of 
the  hand  or  the  foot — to  revive  again  when  exposed  to  the 
genial  influences  of  the  rain,  assume  their  fairest  forms 
and  develop  their  organs  of  fructification  for  the  disper- 
sion of  their  kind." 

On  the  other  hand,  some,  like  the  final  outbreak 
of  long-slumbering  judgment,  burst  out  in  a  night, 
spotting  the  face  of  nature  with  an  eruptive  growth, 
from  which  some  malignant  formations  are  called 
"  fungous."  Yet  these  also,  as  judgment  passes  in 
the  divine  compassion  from  the  penitent,  pass 
quickly  away  as  they  arise.  They  are  the  signs  of 
existing  corruption,  as  an  ordinance  of  God  for  its 
removal,  and  the  work  being  done,  they  pass  away. 

Looking  at  these  plants  as  in  the  third  rank  of 
vegetable  existence  there  seems  in  them  as  a  whole 
the  assurance  of  the  life  they  represent  as  having  in 
it  the  pledge  and  power  of  resurrection.  The  lichen 
is  above  all  that  in  which  the  generative  power 
which  characterizes  the  plant  is  found.  It  is  the 
first  growth  which,  diminutive  as  it  may  be,  "  plows 
upon  the  rock,"  where  no  plow  of  man  will  venture, 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  193 

and  prepares  the  way  for  future  harvests.  The 
Fungi  more  plainly  still  speak  of  resurrection, 
springing  as  they  do  out  of  decay  and  death ; 
though  we  must  unite  to  this  the  permanence  of  the 
lichen,  to  find  the  tyye  filled  out.  Each  type,  in 
Scripture  as  in  Nature,  emphasizes  its  special  point. 

Our  life  as  children  of  God  is  indeed  a  resurrec- 
tion, and  if  this  be  the  point  emphasized  here,  we 
need  not  wonder  if  there  be  mystery  accompanying 
it,  though  this,  rather  than  discouraging,  should 
awaken  interest.  Here  we  touch  some  of  the  deep- 
est problems  of  divine  work  in  the  soul ;  and  the 
humble  forms  before  us,  while  in  their  lowliness 
they  remind  us  of  what  our  own  origin  is,  indicate 
power  and  forces  which  are  in  themselves  inscruta- 
ble. We  see  them  in  their  operations  only,  and 
indeed  as  " through  a  glass,  darkly." 

It  may  be  thought  that,  as  to  the  fungus,  the  type 
of  resurrection  is  incongruous  with  that  character 
of  it,  as  representing  judgment,  which  had  been 
before  referred  to,  and  which  seems  in  many  cases 
to  be  less  a  figure  than  a  fact.  Smut,  ergot,  bunt, 
mould,  in  all  their  varied  forms,  are  surely  this  ;  and 
it  would  be  useless  to  dispute  it.  The  reconciling 
truth,  however,  may  be  found  in  different  ways. 
First  in  this,  that  even  the  new  life  given  to  us 
when  born  again  is  in  itself  a  judgment  upon  the 
old  ;  and  it  begins  in  us  with  the  apprehension  of 


194    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

such  judgment.  And  note  here  that  in  fact  in  the 
fungi,  (and  strangely  enough  in  forms  as  low  as 
these,)  some  tokens  of  a  higher  life  appear. 

4  In  many  of  their  properties,"  says  one  of  the  most 
appreciative  observers  of  nature,  "the  fungi  are  closely 
allied  to  some  members  of  the  animal  kingdom.  They 
resemble  the  flesh  in  animals  in  containing  a  large  propor- 
tion of  albumenous  proximate  principles;  and  they  are 
almost  the  only  plants  that  contain  azote  or  nitrogen, 
formerly  regarded  as  one  of  the  principal  marks  of  dis- 
tinction between  plants  and  animals.  This  element  re- 
veals itself  by  the  strong  cadaverous  smell,  which  most  of 
them  give  out  in  decaying,  and  also  by  the  savory  meatlike 
taste  which  others  of  them  afford.  Unlike  other  vegeta- 
bles, they  possess  the  remarkable  property  of  exhaling 
hydrogen  gas;  and  the  great  majority  of  species,  like  ani- 
mals, absorb  oxygen  from  the  atmosphere." 

He  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  luminosity  of  some  of 
them  as  another  link,  and  adds, — 

"It  may  be  remarked  in  connection  with  this  luminous 
property,  that  many  fungi  are  capable  of  generating  con- 
siderable heat.  Dutrochet  ascertained  that  the  highest 
temperature  produced  by  any  plant,  with  the  exception  of 
the  curious  cuckoo-pint  of  our  woods,  was  generated  by  a 
species  of  toad-stool  called  Boletus  ceneus.  Such  being 
the  curious  properties  exhibited  by  these  plants  it  is  not 
surprising  that  at  one  period  they  should  have  been  sus- 
pected to  be  animal  productions,  formed  by  insects  for 
their  habitations,  somewhat  like  the  coral  structures  of 
zoophytes  and  sponges.  Though  this  view  has  long  been 
felt  to  be  utterly  untenable,  inasmuch  as  they  have  the 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  195 

growth  and  texture  of  plants,  and  it  is  well  ascertained 
that  they  produce,  and  are  produced  from  seeds  like  other 
plants,  yet  they  are  evidently  one  of  the  links  in  the  chain 
of  nature  which  unite  the  vegetable  to  the  animal  kingdom 
and  show  how  arbitrary  and  unfounded  were  the  old 
definitions  which  served  to  distinguish  them  from  each 
other." 

This  would  surely  strongly  confirm  the  view  that 
the  fungi  really  stand  as  types  of  resurrection,  an 
ascent  as  this  is  to  a  higher  life.  But  this  is  not  all 
that  is  to  be  said  in  answer  to  the  question  asked  as 
to  how  they  can  be  types  of  judgment  also.  The 
answer  is  that  here  as  elsewhere  we  have  many 
forms,  and  types  of  many  things,  evil  as  well  as 
good  ;  and  that  there  is  a  resurrection  of  judgment 
as  well  as  a  resurrection  of  life.  All  kinds  of  resur- 
rection possibly  have  here  their  representatives,  as 
well  as  connected  truths  of  many  sorts.  It  is 
enough  for  us  now  to  be  able  to  find  what  seems 
the  leading  thought,  already  expressed  by  one 
whom  we  have  often  quoted,  "  fungi  the  resurrec- 
tion of  plant-death." 

4.    THE    ANOGEN. 

We  pass  now  to  the  mosses.  That  they  fill  a  gap 
between  the  lichens  and  the  ferns  needs  no  insisting 
on  :  it  is  the  place  they  fill  for  every  botanist.  They 
can  be  described,  however,  rather  negatively  than 
positively.     They  are  composed  of  cellular  tissue 


196    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

without  either  vessels  or  woody  fibre,  although  roots 
and  stem  and  leaves  appear  again  in  them ;  humble 
plants,  of  small  size,  often  minute.  Their  spores  are 
carried  in  seed-vessels  whose  mouths  are  fringed 
with  a  single  or  double  row  of  teeth,  the  "  teeth  be- 
ing ranged  in  each  row  in  the  geometrical  progres- 
sion of  4,  8,  16,  32,  or  64,  there  never  being  by  any 
chance  an  odd  number."  Thus,  in  a  singular  man- 
ner, the  number  of  its  place  in  the  vegetable  circle 
is  impressed  on  the  Anogen. 

The  meanings  of  this  number  are  so  few,  however, 
and  the  characters  of  the  moss  apparently  so  nega- 
tive, that  it  would  seem  difficult  to  trace  any  cor- 
respondence. The  number  4  is  that  which  speaks 
of  weakness  and  passiveness,  as  we  have  seen  in  the 
Radiates  and  in  the  mineral  kingdom.  "  Capacity 
for  division  "—4  being  the  first  number  susceptible 
of  this — suits  also  these.  It  is  the  earth-number 
also,  and  in  this  respect  again  agrees  with  them. 
What  will  it  yield  as  to  the  moss  ? 

Here  is  one  character  in  which  they  are  assimila- 
ted to  the  Radiates  : — 

"Mosses  possess  in  a  high  degree  the  power  of  repro- 
ducing such  parts  of  their  tissue  as  have  been  injured  or 
removed.  They  may  be  trodden  underfoot;  they  may  be 
torn  up  by  the  plow  or  the  harrow ;  they  may  be  cropped 
down  to  the  earth,  when  mixed  with  grass,  by  graminivo- 
rous animals;  they  may  be  injured  in  a  hundred  other 
ways;    but  in  a  marvelously  short  space  of  time  they 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  197 

spring  up  as  verdant  in  their  appearance,  and  as  perfect 
in  their  form,  as  though  they  had  never  been  disturbed. 
The  necessity  of  such  a  power  of  regeneration  as  this  is 
abundantly  manifest,  when  we  consider  the  numberless 
casualties  to  which  they  are  exposed  in  the  bare,  shelter- 
less positions  which  they  occupy." 

Again,— 

"  Mosses  were  fancifully  termed  by  Lumoeus  servi — 
servants,  or  workmen ;  for  they  seem  to  labor  to  produce 
vegetation  in  newly  formed  countries,  where  soil  can 
scarcely  yet  be  said  to  be.  This  is  not  their  only  use, 
however.  They  fill  up  and  consolidate  bogs,  and  form 
rich  vegetable  mold  for  the  growth  of  larger  plants, 
which  they  also  protect  from  cold  during  the  winter. 
They  likewise  clothe  the  sides  of  lofty  hills  and  mountain- 
ranges,  and  powerfully  attract  and  condense  the  watery 
vapors  floating  in  the  atmosphere,  and  thus  become  the 
living  fountains  of  many  streams." 

Lichens  are  similarly  credited  with  the  power  to 
produce  soil  on  barren  spots :  it  is,  however,  by  a 
different  method  : — 

"The  mode  in  which  they  prepare  the  sterile  rock  for 
the  reception  of  plants  that  require  a  higher  kind  of  nour- 
ishment is  most  remarkable.  They  may  be  said  to  dig  for 
themselves  graves  for  the  reception  of  their  remains, 
when  death  and  decay  would  otherwise  speedily  dissipate 
them.  For  whilst  living,  these  lichens  form  a  considerable 
quantity  of  oxalic  acid  (which  is  a  peculiar  compound  of 
carbon  and  oxygen,  two  ingredients  supplied  by  the  at- 
mosphere) ;  and  this  acts  chemically  upon  the  rock,  (espe- 
cially if  of  limestone,)  forming  a  hollow  which  retains  the 


198    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

particles  of  the  structure,  when  their  term  of  connected 
existence  has  expired.  The  moisture  which  is  caught  in 
these  hollows  finds  its  way  into  the  cracks  and  crevices  of 
the  rocks,  and,  when  frozen,  rends  them  into  minute  frag- 
ments by  its  expansion,  and  thus  adds  more  and  more  to 
the  forming  soil." 

The  moss  does  not  produce  soil  by  such  action 
upon  the  rock,  and  on  the  other  hand  is  a  manufac- 
turer of  it  on  a  larger  scale,  gathering  from  the  air 
the  materials  of  its  growth,  and  then  giving  them  to 
the  formation  of  soil  while  it  grows  on.  Says 
Ruskin, — 

"  That  blackness  at  the  root — though  only  so  notable  in 
this  wood-moss  and  collateral  species,  is  indeed  a  general 
character  of  the  mosses,  with  rare  exceptions.  It  is  their 
funeral  blackness ; — that,  I  perceive,  is  the  way  the  moss- 
leaves  die.  They  do  not  fall—they  do  not  visibly  decay ; 
but  they  decay  mvisibly,  in  continual  secession,  beneath 
the  ascending  crest.  They  rise  to  form  that  crest,  all 
green  and  bright,  and  take  the  light  and  air  from  those 
out  of  which  they  grew ;  and  those,  their  ancestors,  darken 
and  die  slowly,  and  at  last  become  a  mass  of  moldering 
ground.  In  fact,  as  I  perceive  farther,  their  final  duty  is 
to  die.  The  main  work  of  other  leaves  is  in  their  life, — 
but  these  have  to  form  the  earth  out  of  which  all  other 
leaves  are  to  grow." 

He  adds,  in  a  note  written  at  an  after-time, — 

"  Bringing  home  here,  evening  after  evening,  heaps  of 
all  kinds  of  mosses  from  the  hills  among  which  the  Arch- 
bishop Ruggieri  was  hunting  the  wolf  and  her  whelps  in 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle,  199 

Ugolino's  dream,  I  am  more  and  more  struck,  every  day, 
with  their  special  function  as  earth-gatherers,  and  with 
the  enormous  importance  to  their  own  brightness,  and  to 
our  service,  of  that  dark  and  degraded  state  of  the  inferior 
leaves.  And  it  fastens  itself  in  my  mind  mainly,  as  their 
distinctive  character,  that,  as  the  leaves  of  a  tree  become 
wood,  so  the  leaves  of  a  moss  become  earth,  while  yet  a 
normal  part  of  the  plant.  Here  is  a  cake  in  my  hand 
weighing  half  a  pound,  bright  green  on  the  surface  with 
minute  crisp  leaves ;  but  an  inch  thick  beneath,  in  what 
looks  at  first  like  clay,  but  is  indeed  knitted  fibre  of 
exhausted  moss." 

Here,  then,  comes  the  meaning  for  it,  quite  in 
accordance  with  its  place  in  the  vegetable  series : 
exhaustion  and  decay  doing  God's  work  in  renewal, 
as  spiritually  is  indeed  the  case.  " Man's  day"  has 
to  close  in  ruin,  and  give  place  to  that  "  day  of  the 
Lord"  which  is  "  upon  every  one  that  is  proud  and 
lofty,  and  upon  every  one  that  is  lifted  up,  and  he 
shall  be  brought  low,"  that  the  Lord  alone  may  be 
exalted  in  that  day. 

Even  failure  and  evil,  under  God's  hand,  thus 
work  often  with  us  that  humiliation  in  which  is  the 
secret  of  future  blessing.  Out  of  defeat  comes  vic- 
tory ;  out  of  the  experience  of  weakness,  strength  : 
the  discipline  of  the  wilderness  is  the  training  for 
the  battles  by  which  in  the  end  the  land  of  the  in- 
heritance is  to  be  possessed.  Nothing  could  be  a 
more  needful  lesson  than  that  which  here  is  taught 


200    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 

us  by  the  lowly  moss — dying  to  take  possession  of 
the  earth. 


But  there  is  another  property  of  the  moss,  upon 
which  largely  depends  its  ability  to  fill  the  place  for 
which  it  is  destined.  It  is  its  already  mentioned 
affinity  for  water.  "Every  part  of  them,  and  espe- 
cially the  leaves,  is  endowed  to  a  remarkable  degree 
with  the  power  of  imbibing  the  faintest  moisture 
from  the  air,"  and  thus  clothing  the  sides  of  lofty 
hils  and  mountain-ranges,  they  "  powerfully  attract 
and  condense  the  watery  vapors  floating  in  the  at- 
mosphere, and  become  the  living  fountains  of  many 
streams." 

How  wonderful  a  property  is  this  of  a  lowly 
plant !  and  spiritually,  the  thought  is  quite  easy  to 
be  read.  It  is  the  humble  to  whom  God  looks  ;  the 
proud  He  knoweth  but  afar  off.  It  is  our  empti- 
ness, when  apprehended  in  the  soul,  which  makes 
us  fit  vessels  for  the  Spirit  of  God  to  dwell  in. — fit 
channels  by  which  His  fullness  can  be  poured  out 
for  the  refreshment  of  others.  This  is  a  simple 
thought,  and  as  sweet  as  simple,  while  assuredly  we 
need  to  be  reminded  of  it.  The  insignificant  moss 
may  help  to  impress  upon  us  what  is  of  inestimable 
value  for  our  souls. 

We  shall  have  yet  to  see  this  in  its  place  when  we 
review    presently   this   circle    of    nature-teachings. 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle,  201 

One  group  only  now  remains  to  be  considered, — 
that  of  the  ferns,  or — 

5.    ACROGENS. 


STEM  OF  TREE-FERN.     ACROGENOUS. 

With  the  ferns  are  grouped  also  the  club-mosses 
and  the  horse-tails,  the  former  of  which  "are 
usually  found  iu  bleak,  bare,  exposed  situations  in  all 
parts  of  the  world,  and  sometimes  attain  a  large  size, 
forsaking  the  creeping  habit  peculiar  to  the  family,  and 
becoming  arborescent  in  tropical  countries,  particularly 
New  Zealand,  rivaling  in  rank  luxuriance  the  surrounding 
trees  and  shrubs  of  the  forest.  .  .  .  Lycopocls  may  be 
said  to  present  the  hignest  type  of  cryptogamic  vegetation, 
the  highest  limit  capable  of  being  reached  by  flowerless 
plants.  Indeed,  they  are  said,  by  botanists  of  the  highest 
reputation,  to  bear  a  close  affinity  to  coniferous  trees, — 
to  be,  in  fact,  pine-trees  in  miniature." 


202    Spiritual  Law  in  the  Natural  World. 


The  Acrogens,  therefore,  lead  us  back  toward  the 
Exogens,  and  the  circle  here  too  is  complete. 

Is  it  complete  from  the  other  side — the  spiritual 
one  ?  This  has  been  the  case  so  often,  that,  even 
before  knowing,  one  cannot  but  have  a  peaceful, 
happy  confidence  that  so  it  must  be  here  ;  but  I  did 
not  know,  until  I  just  now  came  to  ask  myself  the  . 
question,  that  so  indeed  it  is.  We  have  traveled 
round    in   the   vegetable    circle,   just    as   we    did 

in  the  animal,  until  we 
have  got  to  the  fifth  place, 
just  opposite  the  mollusk  : 
what  link  can  there  be  be- 
tween a  fern  and  a  mollusk? 
True,  there  was  some  kind 
of  analogy  attempted  to 
be  traced  between  them 
awhile  ago,  but  it  seemed 
after  all  a  faint  one,  espe- 
cially the  comparison  of  the 
mollusk's  shell  with  the 
cylinder  of  the  tree-fern. 
Now,  as  v/e  look  at  this 
last  vegetable  form,  what 
impresses  one  is,  how 
thoroughly  the  leaf  ap- 
pears to  be  the  whole  thing. 
the  leaf.  The    scars    of    the    fallen 


FROND  OF  A  FERN. 

Showing  the  seed  (or  spore)  in^ 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  203 

leaves  mark  the  stem  outside  in  the  whole  length 
of  it ;  the  living  leaves  are  thrown  out  at  the  top, 
but  they,  with  the  ducts  and  vessels  which  rise  up 
into  them,  and  the  base  of  the  old  leaf-stalks,  form 
the  solid  part  of  the  trunk  ;  the  centre,  which  is  of 
cellular  tissue,  often  is  deficient,  so  that  the  cylinder 
is  hollow;  then  the  spores,  which  answer  to  the 
seeds  in  higher  plants,  are  on  the  under  side  of  the 
leaves  :  so  that  the  whole  growth  of  the  plant  seems 
to  be,  as  it  were,  leaf.  Just  as  the  mollusk  seems 
to  exist  but  for  its  shell,  so  does  the  fern  throw  all 
its  vigor  and  energy  into  that  which  is  its  crown 
of  glory  upon  its  summit,  its  crest  of  leaves. 

But  what  is  the  leaf  ?  Here  what  it  is  elsewhere, 
of  course ;  if  we  are  to  interpret  it  spiritually,  as 
our  rule  is.  And  thus,  if  the  leaf  be  the  glory  of 
the  fern,  it  glorifies,  as  the  mollusk  does,  its  confes- 
sion :  and  this,  for  us,  if  we  are  His,  is  Christ.  So 
that  the  mollusk  and  the  fern  are  really  akin,  more 
nearly  than  at  first  we  could  have  believed.  There 
is  a  spiritual  relationship  which  goes  beyond,  while 
it  enforces  the  natural.  And  the  fern  fills  thus  the 
fifth  place,  as  the  mollusk  does.  It  is  the  rounding 
off  of  the  life  with  God,  that  God  is  confessed  with 
the  tongue,  as  glorified  in  the  ways.  And  thus  the 
circle  is  closed,  and  we  are  brought  back  to  the  be- 
ginning again.  In  the  Exogen,  it  is  Christ  held  in 
the  heart;    in  the  Acrogen,  Christ  confessed  with 


204   Spiritual  Laiv  in  the  Natural  World. 

the  lips ;  and  if  He  be  confessed  because  dear,  yet 
He  will  be  more  dear  for  the  confession.  Yea,  "  if 
ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ,  happy  are 
ye  ;  for  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth  upon 
you." 

Notice  here,  that  in  the  fern,  there  is  no  flower, 
no  fruit :  the  seed  is  in  the  leaf  itself.  And  how 
fruitful  is  this  confession  of  Christ,  when  it  comes 
in  its  place  in  the  filled  out  circle, — when  it  is  itself 
fruit,  as  we  may  say,  the  fern-leaf  is.  What  better 
fruit  is  there  than  this,  when  the  testimony  to  Christ 
comes  out  of  a  heart  filled  with,  and  a  life  given  to, 
Him! 

Here,  then,  we  close  our  glance — mere  glance 
it  is — at  the  Vegetable  Kingdom.  We  began  with — 

i.  Christ  dwelling  in  the  heart  by  faith,  known 
by  the  Word  of  truth,  growingly  more  and  more 
known,  the  stay  and  support  of  the  soul,  which  de- 
velops into  power  and  individuality  as  it  is  built 
up  on  Him.  Nothing  is  more  individual  than  the 
exogenous  tree,  strictly  as  it  adheres  to  the  divine 
plan  for  it. 

2.  Then  we  had  the  fruitful  life,  separate  from 
the  world,  armed  against  evil,  elastic  under  pressure, 
— the  result  of  the  former.  This  is  the  walled  and 
fruitful  Endogen. 

3.  Then  we  go  deeper,  to  see  this  life  as  a  life  in 
resurrection,  a  life  which  thus  has  power  over  death, 


Life  in  its  Lowest  Circle.  205 

though  it  implies  the  judgment  of  the  old  man,  and 
the  old  things  passed  away.    This  is  the  Thallogen. 

4.  Then  in  the  lowly  moss,  we  learn  the  weakness 
which  is  strength,  a  humiliation  which  implies  ex- 
altation, a  discipline  which  is  a  Father's  hand,  and 
how  our  need  and  nothingness  attract  the  dew  and 
ministry  of  the  Spirit. 

5.  And  lastly,  what  this  leads  us  to  is  joy  in 
Christ,  and  the  confession  of  His  name.  Who  else 
is  worthy  ?  what  remains  to  us  as  the  necessary  con- 
sequence, but  that  "  Christ  is  all "  ? 

And  now  I  have  but  to  close  this  fragmentary 
sketch  with  the  expression  of  the  hope,  that,  poor 
as  it  is,  it  will  yet  help  some  to  a  new  reading  of  the 
facts  of  nature, — be  even  in  some  measure  a  key  to 
the  language  of  what  the  finger  of  God  has  written 
for  our  learning ;  that  He  Himself  may  be  better 
known  and  nearer,  nature  witnessing  of  Him  as 
Scripture  does,  and  one  with  Scripture  in  its  wit- 
ness,— Christ  the  theme  of  both. 

"And  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on 
the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in 
the  sea,  even  all  that  are  in  them,  heard  I  saying, 
*  Blessing,  and  glory,  and  honor,  and  power  be  unto 
Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the 
Lamb  forever  and  ever.'  " 

THE   BIBLE   TRUTH    PRESS,    NEW   YORK. 


BY  THE   SAME  AUTHOR. 


BEING 

A  Revised  Translation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures ;  arranged, 
divided,  and  briefly  characterized  according  to  the  princi- 
ples of  their  Numerical  Structure.  With  entirely  new  and 
carefully  compiled  References  by  Mr.  Sam'l  Ridout. 


This  study  of  the  Scriptures  developed  by  this  system 
brings  out  of  them  new  treasures  in  every  page.  At  a  time 
when  Divine  Inspiration  is  everywhere  assailed,  this  work 
appears  as  a  rebuke  to  the  assailants,  and  a  fresh  encour- 
agement to  the  people  of  God. 

Among  others  who  appreciate  it,  Dr.  Brookes  of  St. 
Louis  writes, — 

St.  Louis,  June,  1891. 
It  is  a  real  pleasure  and  privilege  to  commend  very 
heartily  The  Numerical  Bible,  edited  by  Mr.  F.  W.  Grant.  It  is 
worth  a  dozen  ordinary  commentaries.  There  is  nothing  like  it, 
because  there  is  nothing  that  so  gets  at  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  revealed  in  the  inspired  Scriptures.  It  must  be  most  helpful  to 
the  believer,  who  delights  to  bow  his  intellect  and  reason  to  the 
authority  of  God's  infallible  and  inerrant  Word. 

JAMES  H.  BROOKES. 

Vol.  I.,  now  publishing,  comprises  the  five  books  of 
Moses.  Subscription-price,  post-paid,  $2.00.  It  is  pub- 
lished in  quarterly  parts,  at  50  cts.  each. 

FACTS  AND  THEORIES  AS  TO  A  FUTURE  STATE. 

The  Scripture  Doctrine  Considered 

with  reference  to  current  denials  of  Eternal 

Punishment. 

This  book  is  composed  of  three  parts :  I.  Man  as  he  is ;  II.  Death 
and  the  Intermediate  State ;  III.  The  Eternal  Issues.  It  will  be 
found  an  exhaustive  examination  and  refutation,  by  the  light  of 
Scripture,  of  the  views  of  leading  annihilationists  and  restoration- 
ists  of  these  times. 

Eminently  useful  for  thoughtful  Christians.  Pastor  C. 
H.  Spurgeon  warmly  comments,  and  speaks  of  it  as  an 
exhaustive  work  on  the  subject  it  treats.  Bishop  Nichol- 
son and  many  others  have  expressed  themselves  in  a  mosd 
forcible  way  as  to  its  value. 

New  and  enlarged  edition,  640  pages,  $1.50. 


BY  THE   SAME   AUTHOR. 


Atonement :  in  Type,  Prophecy,  and  Accomplish- 
ment.    The  Doctrine  traced  throughout  J  Paper,$0  35 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments \  Cloth,      60 

Genesis  in  the  Light  of  the  New  Testament. — 

Contents  :—  Par t  I.    God's  Counsels  in  Creation. 
Part  II.     Divine    Life    in    its    Various   Aspects. 
1.  Adam.     2.  The  Carnal  and  Spiritual  Seed.    r  TDo^^y,      on 
3.  Noah.     4.  Abraham.     5.  Isaac.     6.  Jacob.  J  ^rp ,  >     ^u 
7.  Joseph.  \  Cloth,      50 

Tne  Numerical  Structure  of  Scripture:  A  Seal 
upon  its  Perfect  Inspiration,  and  a  divinely  given 
help  to  its  right  interpretation  .... p  .  n 

The  Bible  looked  at  as  a  whole,  and  in  the*{  piiiy, '     hk 
relation  of  the  books  to  one  another.  t  oioiu,      t  o 

Present  Things,  as  Foreshown  in  the  Book  of 
Revelation.    A  detailed  examination  of  f  Paper,    35 
the  first  three  chapters \  Cloth,     60 

Pour  Lectures.     (1882.)  18 

1.  The  Mediator.     2.  Outside  the  Camp.     3.  Conflict 
and  Progress.     4.    "From  the  Top  of  the  Rocks." 

The  Mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven;    as 

developed  especially  in  the  parables  of  Matt.  xiii.     18 

Deliverance :    What  is  it  ?.     (Rom.  vii.) 5 

The  Man  of  God :  3  lectures  on  1  Kings  xvi. ,  xvii.  6 

Creation  in  Genesis  and  in  Geology 12 

Christian  Holiness :  Its  Roots  &  Fruits.  (A  Review)  20 

Dr.  Waldenstrom,  and  Non- Vicarious  Atonement.  8 

A  refutation  of  the  anti christian  doctrines  of  this  author. 
Papers  on  Eternal  Punishment 4 

1.  Eternal  Destruction:    is  it  Annihilation? 

2.  Eternal  Life :    what  is  it  ?   and  when  do  we  have  it  ? 

3.  Does  Scripture  speak  of  an  Immortal  Soul? 

Help  and  Food.  (A  Monthly  Magazine)  in  yearly- 
volumes.    8  vols each,    80 


The  above  sent  carriage  free  on  receipt  of  price. 
Full  Catalogue  sent  on  application. 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  013  541  768  3 


