LVEDERE  TIBURON  LIBRARY 


3  1111  01102  1381 


Art  of  Tibet 


a* 

R*i 

^^^^^v 

i- 

■1  • '  --% 

— 

Wfc  '*' 

L    jS^h^H 

k-^';^ 


rt^c^ 


I 


SK             vSbMBSr^irtfQftVAr^ 

pwsa»r»-qwL  •.'-!..        .  .  _  .  ^ 

— 

twag^^ii 

lH" 

^fe=.  l^j^i '.T*'^- "I 

2r   "l  *  *^^rH 

-i". 

^S£  r 

[    - 

•*r* . 

IivB              H 

-      i          4 

--■TOI 

jjs«^nmv^«*al 

' 

-  ■■  - 


*^ 


>  M 


■B^Y-*** 


BRT 

« 

^4 

[  ;.": 

• 

W 

fci    I. 

i^ 

\  / 


■23QH 


lonll 

fW?s5g^K 

r 


I 


3  1111   01102  1381 


I 


MvMwwRfS 


.-•♦  I 


^m 


iwP'aw 


■MMW 


-  ■  * 


Btfb^fJK 


:X:\.M-^, 


p#mB8C3«X 


^  •#*•!«.»■* 


'%4   « 

-  ■  UV- 


I*    I  '**T  r>***' 


>-J'SL 


/3- 


Art  of  Tibet 


Art  of  Tibet 


A  Catalogue  of  the  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art  Collection 


with  an  Appendix  on  Inscriptions  by 

H.E.  Richardson 


by 


Pratapaditya  Pal 


Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art 

in  association  with 

University  of  California  Press 

Berkeley,  Los  Angeles,  and  London 


Library  of  Congress 
Cataloging  in  Publication  Data 

Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art 
Art  of  Tibet. 

Bibliography:  p. 

Includes  index. 

i.  Art,  Tibetan— Catalogs.    2.  Art,  Tibetan— Influ- 
ence-Catalogs.   3.  Art-California-Los  Angeles— Cata- 
logs.   4.  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art-Catalogs. 

I.  Pal,  Pratapaditya.      II.  Richardson,  Hugh  Edward, 
1905-  III.  Title. 

N7346.T5L6      1983      709'      .51 '5074019494     83-8194 
ISBN  0-87587-1 12-7  (paper,  LACMA) 
ISBN  0-520-05214-5  (paper,  UC  Press) 
ISBN  0-520-05140-8  (cloth,  UC  Press) 


Co-published  by  the 

Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art 

5905  Wilshire  Boulevard 

Los  Angeles,  California  90036 

and 

University  of  California  Press 

Berkeley,  Los  Angeles,  and  London 

Photographs  ©  1983  by  the  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art, 
unless  otherwise  indicated.  Catalogue  first  published  in  1983  by  the 
Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art.  All  rights  reserved.  No  part 
of  the  contents  of  this  book  may  be  reproduced  without  the  written 
permission  of  the  publishers. 

Edited  by  Phil  Freshman  and  Dorothy  J.  Schuler 

Designed  in  Los  Angeles  by  Gregory  Thomas 

Photography  by  Lawrence  S.  Reynolds,  Peter  Brenner,  and 
Jack  Ross 

Text  set  in  Garamond  typefaces  by  RS Typographies, 
North  Hollywood,  California 

Printed  in  an  edition  of  6,000  softcover  and  1,000  hardcover  on 
Espel  paper  by  Nissha  Printing  Co.,  Ltd.,  Japan. 


This  project  is  supported  by  a  grant  from 
the  National  Endowment  for  the  Arts. 


Cover: 
Sakyapa  Monks 

(cat.  no.  P15) 


Contents 


9     Foreword 

Earl  A.  Powell  m 

1 1     Preface  and  Acknowledgments 

Pratapaditya  Pal 

General  Introduction 

15  Mountains  and  Men 

23  Monks  and  Monarchs 

35  The  Way  and  the  Goal 

41  Images  and  Symbols 

49  The  Patron  and  the  Artist 

55  Form  and  Fantasy 

65       Color  Plates 

Painting 

1  14       Introduction 
123       Catalogue 

Sculpture 

185       Introduction 
1 9 1       Catalogue 

Ritual  Objects 

232       Introduction 
240      Catalogue 

Appendix: 

258       Text  and  Translation  of  Selected  Inscriptions 
on  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Museum's  Collection 
H.  E.  Richardson 

264  Tibetan  Pronunciation  Key 

265  Glossaries  of  Selected  Sanskrit  and  Tibetan  Terms 
272     Bibliographies 

276     Index 

280    Trustees  and  Supervisors 


1.  Leh  (capital  of Ladakh) 

2.  Tsaparang  (capital  of  ancient  kingdom  ofGuge) 

3.  Toling  ( monastery  founded  by  Yeshe  0  and  Rinchen  Sangpo) 

4.  Gartok  (most  important  city  in  western  Tibet) 

5.  Kathmandu  (capital  of  Nepal) 

6.  Dingri  (area  where  Dampa  Sangye  apparently  lived) 

7.  Sakya  (monastery;  headquarters  of  Sakyapas) 

8.  Ngor  (Sakyapa  monastery) 

9.  Shalu  (Sakyapa  monastery) 

10.  Narthang  (monastery) 

1 1 .  Shigatsc  (important  commercial  town) 

12.  Tashilumpo  (Gelukpa  monastery;  seat  of  Pane  hen  Lamas) 

13.  Gyantse  (important  commercial  and  religious  center) 

14.  Lhasa  ( capital  of  Tibet ) 

15.  Sera  (Gelukpa  monastery) 

16.  Reting  (Gelukpa  monastery) 

17.  Samye  (earliest  Tibetan  monastery) 

18.  Tshurphu  (monastery;  headquarters  of  Karmapas) 

19.  Iwang  (early  Kadampa  monastery) 


N 

W     E 

S 


Foreword 


With  this  volume,  the  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art  begins  pub- 
lication of  its  series  of  catalogues  raisonnes  on  its  extensive  holdings  of  the  art  of  the 
Indian  subcontinent  and  Tibet. 

The  development  of  these  holdings  was  given  its  basis  with  the  acquisition 
of  the  highly  important  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck  Collection  of  Indian,  Nepal- 
ese,  and  Tibetan  Art,  which  began  in  1969.  Under  the  guidance  of  Dr.  Pratapaditya 
Pal,  Senior  Curator  of  Indian  and  Southeast  Asian  Art,  the  commitment  was  made 
to  cultivate  collections  of  exceptional  quality  in  these  areas.  In  recent  years,  as  this 
commitment  has  reached  significant  realization,  Dr.  Pal  and  the  Museum's  Board  of 
Trustees  have  accorded  priority  to  the  publication  of  this  series. 

In  the  area  of  Tibetan  art,  the  Museum's  collection  is  unmatched  outside 
Tibet  itself.  Contained  here,  for  example,  is  a  more  comprehensive  group  of 
twelfth-  to  nineteenth-century  paintings  and  illustrated  manuscript  pages  than  can 
be  found  anywhere  in  the  United  States.  The  collections  of  sculptures  and  ritual 
objects  are  likewise  wide-ranging  and  impressive. 

Because  a  great  many  of  these  pieces  have  remained  unpublished  until 
now,  it  is  with  particular  pride  that  we  make  the  scholarship  on  them  and  the  rest 
of  the  Tibetan  collection  available  in  Art  of  Tibet.  In  this  regard,  we  are  deeply 
grateful  to  the  National  Endowment  for  the  Arts  for  providing  a  grant  that  greatly 
facilitated  the  publication  of  this  volume. 

We  look  forward  eagerly  to  the  subsequent  catalogues  in  this  series. 


Earl  A.  Powell  in 
Director 

Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art 


Preface  and  Acknowledgments 


The  Museum's  Tibetan  holdings  make  up  one  of  the  most  significant  and 
comprehensive  collections  of  Tibetan  art  outside  that  country.  The  core  of  the  col- 
lection was  acquired  from  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck  Collection  beginning  in 
1969.  Since  then  the  collection  has  been  substantially  augmented  with  purchases 
and  gifts  from  many  generous  donors,  to  whom  we  are  most  grateful. 

The  Museum  is  especially  fortunate  in  having  a  great  many  fine  Tibetan 
paintings.  While  other  institutions  possess  interesting  collections  of  thankas,  none 
is  so  comprehensive  as  the  Museum's  for  the  study  of  early  painting.  The  history  of 
Tibetan  painting  stretches  from  the  eleventh  through  the  nineteenth  century,  and  a 
glance  through  this  catalogue  will  demonstrate  how  well  represented  the  earlier  cen- 
turies are  in  the  collection.  Indeed,  the  group  of  manuscript  illuminations  and  book 
covers  is  perhaps  without  parallel.  This  eminence  is  in  no  small  measure  due  to  the 
efforts  of  Professor  Giuseppe  Tucci,  the  greatest  Tibetologist  of  modern  times,  who 
was  responsible  for  recovering  (in  the  1930s)  some  of  the  priceless  early  thankas  and 
manuscript  pages  which  the  Heeramanecks  later  acquired.  Paintings,  however,  are 
not  the  only  strength  of  the  collection;  the  bronzes  and  ritual  objects  are  equally 
varied  and  rich. 

The  study  of  Tibetan  art  history  is  beset  with  unusual  problems.  Most 
objects  have  emerged,  and  continue  to  do  so,  from  the  numerous  monasteries  which 
are,  generally  speaking,  inaccessible  to  us.  Most  of  the  art  was  created  primarily  for 
use  in  these  monasteries,  but  no  proper  inventory  of  the  material  in  situ  nor  a  sys- 
tematic, art  historical  study  of  these  works  has  been  made  to  date.  Perhaps  the  task 
is  impossible  given  the  present  political  circumstances.  While  Professor  Tucci's 
Indo-Tibetka ,  long  out  of  print,  is  of  fundamental  importance,  and  while  attention 
has  been  given  in  recent  years  to  the  monuments  of  Ladakh  and  the  western 
Himalayas,  the  present  insufficient  state  of  our  knowledge  prevents  any  accurate 
determination  of  the  various  styles  and  periods  of  Tibetan  art.  The  attempt  made 
here — despite  the  limitations  of  a  single  collection — to  suggest  a  basic  framework 
for  the  study  of  styles,  both  of  painting  and  sculpture,  must  therefore  be  regarded 
as  tentative  and  is  meant  to  provide  preliminary  guidelines  for  future  scholars. 

Another  problem  encountered  in  writing  a  catalogue  of  this  nature  is  that 
frequently  one  must  use  both  Sanskrit  and  Tibetan  words,  a  potential  source  of  con- 
fusion. Because  Sanskrit  names  and  terms  are  by  and  large  more  familiar  than 
Tibetan  ones,  I  have  employed  Sanskrit  wherever  possible.  I  have  done  so  because 
this  catalogue  is  the  first  in  a  projected  series — other  volumes  planned  will  concern 
the  arts  of  Nepal  and  India — and  so  cross-referencing  between  volumes  will  be 
easier  if  thematic  terms  and  names  appear,  consistently,  in  one  language.  Moreover, 
in  order  to  make  this  book  easier  to  read,  diacritical  marks  for  Sanskrit  words  have 


1 1 


been  omitted  in  the  text.  All  appropriate  diacritical  marks,  however,  are  provided  in 
the  glossary  of  Sanskrit  terms  at  the  back  of  the  book.  The  system  for  transliteration 
of  Tibetan  into  English  produces  spellings  that  at  times  bear  a  remote  relationship 
to  correct  Tibetan  pronunciation.  For  that  reason,  Tibetan  words  appear  phoneti- 
cally spelled  in  the  text,  while  a  pronunciation  key  has  been  added,  at  the  back  of 
the  book,  which  joins  the  phonetic  spellings  of  frequently  used  words  with  their 
correct  transliterations. 

Since  some  readers  may  be  unfamiliar  with  the  terminology  and  person- 
alities discussed  in  this  catalogue,  a  glossary  of  selected  Sanskrit  terms  (just  men- 
tioned) and  a  glossary  of  Tibetan  terms  have  been  included.  Terms  mentioned 
only  once  in  the  text  and  accompanied  there  by  an  explanation  have  generally  been 
excluded  from  the  glossaries.  Chinese  names  and  terms  appearing  in  the  text  are 
given  according  to  the  recently  codified  piny  in  system  of  romanization;  those  which 
are  most  commonly  known  by  their  former  Wade-Giles  romanized  spellings  appear 
parenthetically  following  the  pinyin. 

Catalogue  entries  in  this  volume  are  keyed  to  a  letter-number  system, 
with  the  letters  AI,  P,  S,  and  R  representing,  respectively:  Manuscript  Illumina- 
tions and  Book  Covers;  Paintings  and  Applique  Hangings;  Sculptures;  and  Ritual 
Objects.  The  catalogue  numbers  of  those  entries  illustrated  by  color  plates  appear  in 
boldface  type  throughout  the  text  (e.g.  S36).  All  bibliographic  references  in  the 
text  and  catalogue-entry  sections  are  presented  in  abbreviated  form,  consisting  sim- 
ply of  author,  publication  date  (if  more  than  one  publication  by  a  given  author  has 
been  included  in  the  bibliography),  and,  where  applicable,  page  numbers.  These  are 
keyed  to  a  full  listing  of  citations  to  be  found  in  the  bibliographies  at  the  back  of 
the  catalogue.  Publications  referred  to  only  once  are  fully  cited  in  the  text. 

♦ 
Many  people  have  helped  in  the  preparation  of  this  catalogue,  and  I  am 
greatly  indebted  to  them  all.  Most  of  all,  however,  I  must  thank  Mr.  H.  E. 
Richardson,  a  great  Tibetologist  and  a  fine  gentleman,  who  has  honored  us  by  being 
associated  with  this  enterprise.  He  has  read  most  of  the  inscriptions  to  be  found  on 
many  of  the  manuscripts,  paintings,  and  sculptures  in  the  collection  and  has  pro- 
vided us  with  an  appendix  in  which  selected  inscriptions  have  been  transliterated, 
translated,  and  commented  upon.  In  all,  he  has  cooperated  most  cheerfully  in  shar- 
ing his  vast  knowledge  of  Tibetan  civilization. 

The  success  of  a  catalogue  depends  largely  upon  the  quality  of  photography 
in  it.  It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  thank  the  Museum's  Photography  Department, 
headed  from  1966  until  1980  by  Edward  Cornachio  and  now  by  Larry  Reynolds, 
for  its  excellent  work.  Of  the  various  other  Museum  staff  members  who  have  been 
directly  involved,  and  have  provided  ungrudging  cooperation,  mention  must  be 
made  of  the  following:  Eleanor  Hartman,  the  Museum's  librarian,  and  her  staff; 
Assistant  Director  Myrna  Smoot;  the  editors  of  the  Publications  and  Graphic 
Design  Department;  Dr.  Robert  Brown,  Dr.  Sheila  Canby,  and  Sheila  Sklar  in  the 
Department  of  Indian  and  Southeast  Asian  Art;  the  staff  of  the  Museum's  Conser- 
vation Center;  and  the  many  diligent  volunteers  of  the  Museum  Service  Council. 
A  special  word  of  appreciation  is  due  to  paper  conservator  Victoria  Blyth-Hill  and 
objects  conservator  Billie  Milam  of  the  Conservation  Center  and  to  Yasuhiro  Iguchi 
of  Boston's  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  for  their  patient  efforts  in  the  cleaning,  restoring, 
and  mounting  of  the  paintings  and  sculptures  in  the  collection.  We  are  also  grateful 
to  Mr.  Suresh  K.  Neotia  for  permission  to  use  the  photograph  of  text  figure  2  and 
to  Mr.  Robert  Skelton  for  supplying  the  photograph. 


12 


The  publication  of  this  catalogue  would  have  been  unduly  costly  without 
the  financial  support  it  received  from  several  important  sources.  In  addition  to  the 
National  Endowment  for  the  Arts,  we  are  grateful  to  the  late  Christian  Humann  for 
establishing  a  publications  fund  in  the  Museum  which  will  subsidize  this  and  sub- 
sequent volumes  in  this  series. 


Pratapaditya  Pal 

Senior  Curator 

Indian  and  Southeast  Asian  Art 

September  1982 


13 


General  Introduction 


Since  art  consists  of  body,  speech  and  mind,  in  truth  it  must  be  understood  as  the 
harmonious  coalescence  of  all  learning. 

Lama  Sumpa  Khenpo  (1702-1775) 


M 


Mountains  and  Men 


This  centre  of  heaven. 
This  core  of  the  earth. 
This  heart  of  the  world. 
Fenced  round  by  snow, 
The  headland  of  all  rivers, 
Where  the  mountains  are  high  and 
the  land  is  pure.' 


The  above  extract  from  the  Dunhuang  documents,  which  form  the  earliest 
surviving  examples  of  Tibetan  literature  (eighth  or  ninth  century),  may  sound 
hyperbolic,  but  it  merely  anticipates  some  of  the  equally  romantic  expressions,  such 
as  "land  of  snow"  and  "rooftop  of  the  world,"  that  gained  currency  in  the  last  cen- 
tury to  describe  the  little-known  and  mysterious  country  called  Tibet.  The  land  is 
indeed  fenced  by  snow,  for  in  the  north,  south,  and  west,  Tibet  is  surrounded  by 
some  of  the  most  awesome  mountains  in  the  world.  In  the  northwest  are  the  lofty 
Karakoram;  in  the  north  the  formidable  Kunlun;  and  in  the  south  the  extensive  and 
majestic  Himalayas,  which  act  as  a  natural  border  with  India.  Although  Tibet  is  not 
the  "headland  of  all  rivers,"  certainly  two  of  the  greatest  rivers  of  India,  the  Indus 
and  the  Brahmaputra  (known  as  the  Tsangpo  in  Tibet),  rise  in  the  western  moun- 
tains, while  the  Salween,  the  Mekong,  and  the  mighty  Yangtse  of  China  rise  in  the 
eastern  part  of  the  country.  Undeniably,  too,  as  the  extract  tells  us,  both  the  land 
and  the  air  were  once  pure;  perhaps,  in  much  of  the  country,  they  still  are. 

Although  Tibet  today  forms  a  semiautonomous  region  or  state  within  the 
People's  Republic  of  China,  during  the  period  (iooo  through  1940)  when  the  works 
discussed  in  this  catalogue  were  created,  Tibet  was  an  independent  country.  Two  of 
its  most  powerful  neighbors  then  were  China  and  India.  Both  these  ancient  civiliza- 
tions played  a  pivotal  role  in  molding  Tibetan  culture.  Equally  important  was  the 
contribution  of  Nepal,  a  less  formidable  southern  neighbor.  As  will  be  apparent  in 
this  catalogue,  the  history  of  Tibet's  relationships  with  her  neighbors  is  obstensibly 
reflected  in  her  artistic  traditions  and  styles. 

It  would  be  wrong  to  presume,  however,  that  Tibet  has  always  remained 
at  the  receiving  end.  Tibetan  cultural  influence  extended  far  beyond  her  political 
boundaries.  Both  Bhutan  and  Sikkim  (now  part  of  India)  may  well  be  regarded  as 
cultural  satellites  of  Tibet.  Large  areas  of  Nepal,  especially  the  northern  and  north- 
western parts  of  the  country,  are  inhabited  by  peoples  who  are  ethnically  and  cul- 
turally a  part  of  Tibetan  civilization.  Even  in  the  central  Kathmandu  Valley  (the 
cradle  of  Nepali  culture)  the  principal  architects  of  that  culture,  the  Newars,  have 
remained  closely  associated  with  Tibet.  The  Newars  played  a  fundamental  role  in 
the  story  of  Tibetan  art  and  were  themselves  influenced  by  Tibetan  culture.  Much  of 
Ladakh,  Zanskar,  Lahoul,  Spiti,  and  other  neighboring  regions  of  the  northwestern 
Indian  Himalayas  are  today  part  of  India,  but  culturally  they  are  far  more  Tibetan 
than  Indian.  In  fact,  most  of  these  regions  once  owed  political  allegiance  to  Tibet 
and  were  at  times  integral  parts  of  her  empire. 

Tibet  occupied  much  of  Chinese  Turkestan  and  irritated  the  Tang  dynasty 
(618-907)  for  almost  two  centuries  (c.  632-822),  and  her  influence  was  also  felt  in 
the  southwestern  states  of  China  where  there  were  several  Tibeto-Burman  tribes.  In 

15 


the  north  the  Xixia  (Hsi-Hsia)  kingdom  (1032— 1226),  which  was  comprised  of  part 
of  northwest  China,  was  a  strongly  Tibetanized  state,  while  the  religion  in  Mon- 
golia drew  its  spiritual  nourishment  from  Tibet,  just  as  Tibet  once  did  from  India. 
From  the  thirteenth  through  the  nineteenth  century  Tibetan  monks  were  a  constant 
presence  at  the  imperial  Chinese  court  and,  acting  as  royal  preceptors,  exerted 
considerable  influence  upon  the  Chinese  emperors. 

The  area  of  Tibet  is  about  one  and  a  half  million  square  miles,  but  the 
country  has  a  population  of  only  about  four  million.  Because  of  the  extensive  Chang 
Tang  desert  in  the  north,  as  well  as  the  intimidating  mountain  ranges,  the  actual 
habitable  land  area  is  only  a  fraction  of  the  total  available  space.  Despite  its  awe- 
some mountains  and  fifteen-thousand-foot-high  passes,  its  vast  deserts  and  virgin 
forests,  Tibet  is  neither  so  isolated  nor  so  inhospitable  as  one  may  have  been  led  to 
believe  in  recent  times;  and  certainly,  the  habitable  areas  are  not  so  snowbound  as 
the  expression  "land  of  snow"  indicates.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  but  for  the  mountain 
peaks,  snow  is  rarely  a  familiar  feature  in  the  lives  of  most  Tibetans,  certainly  far 
less  so  than  in  the  lives  of  most  North  Americans  or  Russians.  However,  the 
climate  is  harsh,  especially  at  high  elevations,  and  the  mountains,  the  passes,  the 
forests,  and  the  rivers  made  a  journey  in  the  old  days  an  extremely  hazardous  and 
grueling  experience.  There  is  no  doubt  that  all  these  features  contributed  to  the 
molding  of  Tibetan  civilization. 

This  natural  harshness  is  mirrored  in  the  architecture  of  Tibet  (P20,  P27),# 
consisting  primarily  of  majestic,  fortresslike  structures  which  not  only  reflect  the 
severe  austerity  and  the  imperturbable  solidity  of  the  mountains  around  them,  but 
which  once  served  as  impregnable  forts  against  the  onslaught  of  both  man  and 
nature.  The  buildings  were  designed  to  keep  out  the  cold  winds.  Because  of  the 
scarcity  of  both  rain  and  snow,  their  roofs  were  made  flat.  Hailstorms,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  frequent  and  disastrous  for  crops;  the  religion,  consequently,  has  many 
rituals  to  prevent  this  variety  of  natural  calamity. 

Nature  has  always  remained  extremely  important  in  the  spiritual  life  of 
the  Tibetan.  All  the  mountains  are  sacred,  as  they  are  believed  to  be  inhabited  by 
gods  and  spirits  who  must  constantly  be  appeased.  These  deities  of  the  mountains 
and  passes  were  given  places  in  the  pantheon  and  hence  in  the  world  of  visual 
images.  Similarly,  the  rivers  and  lakes  (the  most  celebrated  being  Lake  Mipham,  or 
Manasarowar,  in  the  west)  are  also  sacred  entities  and  contain  spirits  that  are  differ- 
ent from  those  inhabiting  the  mountains,  but  are  equally  prominent  in  religion, 
mythology,  and  the  arts.  The  preeminence  of  wrathful  deities,  demonology,  and 
oracles  in  the  daily  life  of  Tibetans  may  have  been  brought  about  by  the  generally 
hostile  environment  in  which  they  live. 

Who  the  original  inhabitants  of  Tibet  were  remains  a  mystery.  Legend 
claims  that  they  descended  from  a  forest  monkey  and  a  rock  demoness.  Later,  when 
Buddhism  became  dominant,  the  monkey  was  identified  with  Avalokitesvara  and 
the  demoness  with  Tara.  The  first  king  and  his  two  wives  were  also  regarded  as 
incarnations  of  these  same  two  deities  (S41).  The  myth  may  disguise  the  memory 
of  the  early  symbiosis  between  the  nomadic,  non-Chinese  Chang  tribes  (thought 
to  be  among  the  earliest  settlers  in  Tibet),  represented  by  the  rock  ogress,  and  the 
agricultural  tribes  of  the  southern  valleys,  symbolized  by  the  monkey. 

The  vast  region  from  Amdo  in  the  northeast  to  Ladakh  in  the  west  is 
-The  catalogue  numbers  of  those  entr.es      inhabited  bY  a  diversity  of  peoples  who  have  over  the  centuries  either  coexisted  or 
illustrated  by  color  plates  appear  in  coalesced  to  create  the  ethnic  mosaic  that  has  come  to  be  known  as  Tibet.  These 

boldface  type  throughout  the  text  range  from  the  "savage"  tribes  of  the  Amdo  forest,  the  Golok  nomads  of  the  north, 


16 


and  the  dwarfish  people  of  Chala  (a  district  in  Kham),  to  the  Dards  and  Baltis  of 
Ladakh  who  may  have  been  the  original  settlers  in  that  region.  The  Tibetans  call 
themselves  Bodpas  (pronounced  Popa)  and  their  country  Bod.  (The  Indian  name  for 
the  country  is  Bhota,  while  in  Chinese  it  is  called  Tufan.)  Besides  Tibetans  there  are 
other  peoples,  such  as  the  Horpas  and  the  Mon,  but  what  seems  clear  is  that  the 
predominant  ethnic  strain  in  the  population  is  Mongoloid.  The  major  language, 
with  several  regional  dialects,  which  binds  the  various  tribes  and  races  together  is 
Tibetan;  it  belongs  to  a  group  known  among  linguists  as  the  Tibeto-Burman. 
A  monosyllabic  language,  it  is  written  in  a  script  that  was  derived  from  India, 
specifically  from  Kashmir,  in  the  seventh  century. 

Broadly,  Tibetan  society  consists  of  three  classes  of  people:  the  commoners, 
the  nobility,  and  the  clergy.  The  common  people  are  farmers,  pastoral  nomads, 
craftsmen,  and  traders,  with  the  two  former  groups  predominating.  Thus,  the  basic 
economy  of  Tibet  is  derived  from  animal  husbandry  and  cereal  agriculture.  The 
pastoral  nomads  provide  the  meat,  milk  products,  and  the  wool  used  by  the  society, 
while  the  sedentary  farmers  grow  the  staple  foodstuffs,  consisting  largely  of  barley, 
maize,  and  buckwheat.  As  the  Tibetologist  R.  A.  Stein  has  so  succinctly  written, 
"The  habitat,  by  its  very  nature,  gives  Tibetan  life  a  dualistic  form.  Sometimes  this 
governs  one  and  the  same  group  in  a  seasonal  rhythm  (summer  and  winter),  and 
sometimes  two  groups  live  in  symbiosis."2 

Although  the  Chinese  claim  that  in  early  times  the  Tibetans  were  essen- 
tially a  pastoral  and  nomadic  people  may  have  been  colored  by  a  romantic  view  of 
their  past,  the  nomads  are  still  an  important  component  of  Tibetan  life.  By  tending 
their  sheep  and  yaks  (as  distinctive  an  animal  of  the  Tibetan  plateau  as  the  llama  is 
in  Peru  and  the  kangaroo  is  in  Australia),  the  nomads  provide  Tibetans  with  food 
and  clothing  and  also  with  one  of  the  country's  most  important  cash  crops,  wool. 
Another  export  provided  by  the  nomads  is  the  yak  tail,  which,  as  the  camara  (fly 
whisk)  was  a  royal  symbol  par  excellence  in  much  of  Asia  and  in  India  is  still  an 
essential  implement  in  Hindu  temple  ritual.3 

The  influence  of  nomads  in  Tibetan  life  is  evidenced  by  the  widespread  use 
of  tents,  even  among  royalty  and  the  nobility.  Their  mansions  and  castles  were  once 
used  mostly  during  the  winter;  much  of  the  summer  was  spent  in  beautiful  tents 
pitched  in  verdant  parks.  While  traveling,  the  rich  and  powerful  used  tents  and, 
like  the  Moghul  emperors  in  sixteenth-century  India,  exalted  monks  traveled  with 
a  virtual  "city  of  tents"  as  they  made  their  long  and  arduous  journeys  to 
China,  Mongolia,  or  across  their  own  country.4  It  is  hardly  surprising,  therefore, 
that  Mahakala  (P10,  Pll),  the  Indian  god  who  protected  the  monastery,  when  trans- 
ported to  Tibet  became  the  protector  of  the  tent  (gur  gyi  mgon  po)  as  well.  In  the 
mysterious  cho  rite  the  tent  and  its  peg  play  an  important  role,  and  the  peg  may 
well  have  been  the  prototype  of  the  most  distinctive  of  all  Tibetan  ritual  imple- 
ments, the  phurpa  (R6,  R7),  frequently  referred  to  as  the  "magic  dagger." 

The  less  popular  Bon  religion,  with  its  gods  of  the  mountains  and  the 
lakes — many  of  whom  were  later  incorporated  into  the  Buddhist  pantheon — very 
likely  reflects  the  religious  needs  of  the  nomads.  Similarly,  the  shamanistic  rites  and 
many  of  the  oracles  that  have  survived  in  the  religious  life  of  Tibet  may  well  have 
been  inherited  from  the  earlier  cultures  of  the  nomads.5  The  yak,  the  mythical 
khyung  bird  (later  identified  with  the  Indian  garuda),  and  the  lu,  the  malevolent 
serpents  that  inhabit  the  lakes,  all  familiar  creatures  in  Tibetan  iconography,  are 
among  the  many  contributions  of  the  nomadic  component  of  Tibetan  society. 


17 


The  dedicatory  inscriptions  on  paintings  and  sculptures  make  it  abundantly 
clear  that  the  common  people  of  Tibet,  however  devout,  were  not  directly  respon- 
sible for  commissioning  any  of  the  objects.  That  privilege  was  reserved  largely 
for  the  wealthy  nobility  and  the  clergy.  Nonetheless,  the  wealth  was  generated  by 
the  common  people  whose  labor  with  their  flocks  and  in  their  fields  not  only  fed 
and  clothed  the  rich  but  also  created  the  surplus  that  could  be  expended  for  reli- 
gious purposes.  It  was  also  the  faith  and  piety  of  the  common  people  that  formed 
the  solid  foundation  of  the  Buddhist  religion  for  which  much  of  the  art  in  Tibet  was 
created.  Except  for  foreign  artists  and  some  monks,  the  majority  of  artists, 
craftsmen,  and  artisans  were  commoners  who  were  neither  rich  nor  very  literate. 
And  yet  their  skill  and  devotion  produced  works  of  art  which,  universally  admired 
today,  inspired  countless  Tibetans,  both  lay  and  religious,  in  their  quest  for 
spiritual  bliss. 

It  is  neither  necessary  nor  possible  here  to  provide  a  detailed  account  of  the 
structure  and  morphology  of  Tibetan  society,  but  a  few  additional  remarks  are  perti- 
nent in  order  to  understand  some  of  its  religious  and  iconographical  features.  A 
major  element  of  the  religious  structure  of  Tibet  is  the  great  emphasis  placed  on  the 
twin  principles  of  absolute  authority  and  stringent  hierarchy  in  the  various  monastic 
lineages.  As  R.  A.  Stein  very  clearly  states: 

Twin  principles  exemplified  in  the  family  are  found  again  when  we  turn  to  con- 
sider the  structure  of  authority:  cohesion  and  the  strength  of  the  group,  on  the 
one  hand;  the  hereditary  authority  of  one  person  and  a  keen  sense  of  hierarchy, 
on  the  other.  Time  and  again  one  has  the  feeling  that  the  second  of  these  princi- 
ples has  won  the  day,  but  that  the  first  continues  to  counterbalance  it. 

While  this  authoritarianism  may  partly  be  explained  by  the  predominance  of  the 
concept  of  guru  or  preceptor,  which  is  fundamentally  important  in  tantric  Bud- 
dhism, it  does  not  give  the  whole  picture.  Tantric  Buddhism  flourished  in  India  as 
well  as  in  other  Asian  countries,  including  Nepal,  China,  Japan,  Java,  and  Cam- 
bodia, and  while  the  arts  of  some  of  those  regions  also  portrayed  their  monks  and 
teachers,  nowhere  is  the  emphasis  on  authority  and  hierarchy  so  pervasive  and 
paramount  as  in  Tibet.  One  is  less  surprised,  therefore,  by  the  cohesion  and  perva- 
sive influence  of  monastic  organizations  and  the  authoritarian  arrangement  of  the 
monks  within  each  religious  order.  Transplanted  into  Tibet,  the  Indian  concept  of  the 
guru  found  a  fertile  soil  and  his  Tibetan  counterpart,  the  lama,  ultimately  came  to 
enjoy  both  spiritual  and  temporal  power  and  authority.  The  twin  principles  of  cohe- 
sion and  hierarchy  not  only  underlie  the  structure  of  the  monastic  orders  but  also  of 
the  divine  pantheon  itself,  particularly  in  the  organizations  of  the  numerous  gods 
and  demons,  monks  and  mystics  who  populate  Tibetan  paintings. 

As  Stein  has  further  stressed,  the  hierarchic  structure  is  strongly  evident  in 
the  language  itself. 

The  latter  [the  language]  is  altogether  different  when  talking  to  a  superior,  an 
equal,  or  an  inferior;  and  that  is  true  in  all  spheres  of  human  intercourse — gov- 
ernment, the  family,  or  spiritual  relations.  The  whole  vocabulary  is  affected;  not 
only  by  joining  the  honorific  words,  as  in  the  polite  speech  of  China  and  else- 
where, but  by  different  sets  of  nouns  and  verbs,  as  in  Japan.7 

Religion  has  often  been  characterized  as  the  handmaiden  of  commerce;  in 
no  other  country  have  the  two  flourished  in  such  harmony  as  in  Tibet.  If  religion  is 
considered  to  be  the  heart  of  a  Tibetan,  trade  must  be  regarded  as  his  lungs.  As  has 
often  been  observed,  every  Tibetan  is  a  natural  trader.  The  nomads  come  down  from 

18 


the  mountains  and  plateaus  to  trade;  the  farmers  supplement  their  income  by  trad- 
ing; at  least  one  member  of  every  landowning  family  is  a  merchant,  just  as  another 
is  a  monk;  and  even  the  monks  and  monasteries  engage  in  vigorous  commerce. 
A  monk  from  Zanskar  may  go  all  the  way  to  Amdo  to  trade  his  goods  for  the  horses 
for  which  that  region  is  famous.  Indeed,  Tibetan  traders  used  to  go  all  the  way 
down  to  the  agricultural  fairs  in  northern  Bihar  to  sell  horses  and  yak  tails.  They 
went  down  to  Nepal  to  sell  wool  and  turquoises;  they  went  to  Kashmir  and  the 
markets  of  the  northwestern  part  of  the  Himalayas  to  sell  yak  tails  and  woolen 
goods.  Across  the  forbidding  Karakoram  passes  (in  places  over  nineteen  thousand 
feet  high)  they  went  to  Yarkand  and  Kashgar,  and  merchants  from  those  regions 
visited  Leh,  the  capital  of  Ladakh.  The  famous  metalwork  of  Derge  in  the  northeast 
was  sought  all  across  Tibet,  Mongolia,  and  deep  into  China.  (Tibet  still  provides  a 
large  market  for  Chinese  brick  tea,  by  far  the  most  popular  national  beverage.) 

Indeed,  commerce  had  something  to  do  with  that  much-discussed  Tibetan 
social  institution  known  as  fraternal  polyandry.  Although  polyandry  was  practiced 
principally  to  encourage  familial  cohesion  by  keeping  property  and  land  within  one 
family,  its  success  depended  largely  upon  the  fact  that  brothers  rarely  shared  a  wife 
at  the  same  time.  One  brother  usually  stayed  at  home  to  look  after  the  property 
while  the  others  were  away  in  military  or  ecclesiastical  service,  or  off  on  a  commer- 
cial journey. 

More  pertinent  here  is  the  influence  trade  exerted  upon  the  arts.  Most 
traders  visited  the  monasteries  and  temples  on  their  journeys;  thus  a  commercial 
journey  was  also  a  pilgrimage.  They  carried  with  them  their  portable  shrines,  or 
gau  (R15),  as  well  as  thankas.  They  purchased  thankas,  bronzes,  and  tsha  tsha 
(votive  plaques)  (R16)  in  the  places  they  visited  much  as  the  modern  tourist  buys 
souvenirs.  This  is  one  way  large  quantities  of  Indian  bronzes  found  their  way  into 
Tibet;  why  thankas  painted  in  an  eastern  Tibetan  style  now  hang  in  a  monastery  in 
Zanskar;  and  why  the  same  style  may  be  seen  in  western  Tibetan  temples  as  in 
paintings  recovered  from  Kharakhoto  in  China.  The  piety  of  the  traders  and  the  pil- 
grims was  just  as  responsible  for  the  wide  dispersion  of  styles  and  iconography  as 
was  the  mobility  of  the  artists. 

As  can  be  seen,  religion  has  exerted  a  major  influence  on  the  Tibetan  mind 
and  civilization.  Although  religion  has  remained  a  predominant  trait  of  Indian 
civilization  as  well,  neither  its  political  nor  its  intellectual  life  has  been  so  pro- 
foundly dominated  by  religion  as  has  Tibet's.  This  is  partly  due  to  Tibet's  environ- 
mental and  self-imposed  isolation  and  also  to  its  hostile  climate.  As  Charles  Bell  has 
so  perceptively  observed: 

The  wide,  open  spaces  of  the  earth,  deserts  and  semi-deserts,  are  the  homes  of 
religion.  .  .  .  Buddhism,  of  the  type  that  has  been  formed  in  Tibet  and  Mongolia, 
flourishes  characteristically  in  their  great  expanses,  which  though  not  absolute 
desert,  came  near  to  being  so.  The  dry,  cold,  pure  air  stimulates  his  intellect, 
but  isolation  from  the  cities  of  men  and  from  other  nations  deprives  the  Tibetan 
of  subjects  on  which  to  feed  his  brain.  So  his  mind  turns  inwards  and  spends  it- 
self on  religious  contemplation,  held  still  further  by  the  monotony  of  his  life  and 
the  awe-inspiring  scale  on  which  Nature  works  around  him.  .  .  .  There  is  all  the 
difference  in  the  world  between  the  devout,  religious  outlook  of  Tibet  and  the 
philosophic  materialism  of  agricultural  China."8 

Because  of  the  predominance  of  religion  in  Tibetan  life,  monastic  orders 
and  organizations  were  the  most  prominent  force  in  the  civilization,  and,  ultimately, 
must  bear  some  of  the  responsibility  for  the  country's  loss  of  independence  to  China 
in  195 1.  Ever  since  the  thirteenth  century,  the  monasteries  had  repeatedly  invited 

19 


the  Chinese  to  interfere  in  their  internal  rivalries,  which  assured  a  strong  Chinese 
presence  on  Tibetan  soil  and  ultimately  led  to  the  mid-century  subjugation  of  the 
country  by  the  People's  Republic.  Tibet's  history  has  at  times  been  compared  with 
that  of  Medieval  Europe,  where  life  was  also  governed  principally  by  the  ecclesias- 
tical and  feudal  classes.  But  the  influence  of  religion  remained  much  more  pervasive 
in  Tibet  and  the  power  of  the  monasteries  that  sprang  up  after  the  revival  of  Bud- 
dhism in  the  eleventh  century  was  far  more  extensive  and  led  finally  to  the  complete 
fusion  of  church  and  state  in  the  peculiarly  Tibetan  institution  of  the  Dalai  Lama. 

Although  the  castles  of  the  feudal  lords  and  princes  are  of  imposing  pro- 
portions, it  is  the  monastic  complex  that  dominates  the  Tibetan  landscape.  The 
large  monasteries  are  virtually  self-contained  cities,  and  even  in  pictures  the  majesty 
of  the  Potala,  the  official  residence  of  the  Dalai  Lama  in  Lhasa,  is  awesome.  The 
number  of  monks  far  exceeded  the  number  of  nobles,  by  at  least  three  to  one  if  not 
more,  and  often  the  important  monks  were  scions  of  princely  and  influential 
families.  Every  family,  rich  or  poor,  was  expected  to  provide  at  least  one  son  for  the 
monastery.  From  the  tenth  century  on,  both  political  and  economic  power  were 
increasingly  shared  by  the  nobility  and  the  monasteries;  but  it  would  be  wrong  to 
presume  that  they  always  made  compatible  bedfellows.  On  the  contrary,  the  history 
of  Tibet — from  the  fall  of  the  Yarlung  dynasty  in  the  ninth  century  until  the  con- 
centration of  both  spiritual  and  temporal  authority  in  the  institution  of  the  Dalai 
Lama  in  the  sixteenth — is  a  turbulent  saga.  It  is  a  story  of  the  struggle  for  power 
between  the  nobility  and  the  ecclesiastical  establishments  and  among  the  various 
religious  orders  themselves,  aided  and  abetted  by  the  princes  and  the  landed  aris- 
tocracy, as  well  as  by  the  Mongols  and  the  Chinese  whose  interest  in  the  political 
affairs  of  Tibet  had,  as  we  have  just  suggested,  a  long  history. 


20 


I 


V    V 


'<#Ji\^ 


y* 


Monks  and  Monarchs 


When  the  curtain  lifts  once  more  and  a  few  gleams  of  light  fall 
on  the  scene,  Tibetan  civilization  is  definitely  taking  on  the 
aspect  it  has  retained  till  modem  times.  Him 
concerned  with  kings  but  with  monasteries  and  religious  orders. 
The  princes  or  heads  of  noble  houses  are  now  no  more  than 
benefactors  and  partisans  of  one  ecclesiastical  establishment  or 
another.  It  is  the  eleventh  century. 

R.  A.  Stein9 


The  earliest  works  of  art  in  the  Museum's  collection  are  from  the  eleventh 
century,  which  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  periods  in  the  history  of  Tibet.  It  wit- 
nessed both  the  revival  of  Buddhism  and  the  foundation  of  most  of  the  important 
monasteries  and  religious  orders  with  which  the  works  of  art  were  directly  associated. 

Just  as  Tibetan  art  is  mostly  religious,  so  also  is  its  history,  and  since  Bud- 
dhism is  the  predominant  religion  in  the  country,  all  chronicles  are  woven  around  the 
history  of  this  faith.  Political  events  are  recorded  only  if  they  are  relevant  to  the  spread 
of  Buddhism.  Lives  of  monks  are  hagiographies  rather  than  biographies,  empha- 
sizing spiritual  progress  and  the  mystical  rather  than  the  historical  life.  Events 
are,  therefore,  always  spiritualized  and  sublimated,  just  as  the  portraits  are  idealized. 
In  writing  the  religious  histories  and  hagiographies  of  the  monks,  Tibetans  appear  to 
have  made  a  compromise  between  the  Indian  love  of  mythology  and  fantasy  and  the 
Chinese  sense  of  history  and  pragmatism. 

Buddhism  was  introduced  into  Tibet  during  the  reign  of  King  Songtsen 
Gampo  (r.c.  609—49),  whose  rare  portrait  is  included  in  the  collection  (S41).  Two  of  his 
queens  were  from  China  and  Nepal,  and  both  were  said  to  have  been  ardent  followers 
of  Buddhism.  The  Chinese  princess  brought  with  her  an  image  of  Buddha  Sakyamuni 
which  was  housed  in  a  temple  in  Lhasa.  During  the  next  two  hundred  years,  most  of 
Songtsen  Gampo 's  successors  espoused  the  cause  of  the  imported  religion,  and  one  of 
the  most  fervent  adherents  was  King  Thisong  Detsen  (b.  742).  With  the  help  of  two 
Indians,  the  monk  Santarakshita  and  the  mystic  Padmasambhava,  the  king  estab- 
lished the  first  great  monastery  at  Samye  around  the  year  779. 

Santarakshita  was  an  erudite  teacher  but  apparently  no  match  for  the  occult 
powers  of  the  followers  of  the  pre-Buddhist  religious  beliefs  in  the  country,  which 
were  mostly  animistic  and  shamanistic.  Thus,  Padmasambhava,  a  celebrated  mystic, 
was  invited  from  Uddiyana  (identified  with  the  Swat  region  in  modern  Pakistan)  to 
control  the  indigenous  spirits  and  demons,  which  he  did,  probably  by  incorporating 
many  of  the  local  cults  into  the  Buddhist  fold.  It  appears  that  during  this  early  period 
both  Indian  and  Chinese  monks  (known  as  hoshang)  were  present  in  Tibet,  and  fric- 
tion arose  between  the  two  groups  as  to  whose  system  of  Buddhism  was  the  superior. 
This  was  settled  by  a  debate  at  Samye  in  792,  sponsored  by  King  Thisong  Detsen.10 
Apparently,  the  Indian  side  was  victorious,  and,  thereafter,  Tibet  maintained  closer 
relations  with  India  in  religious  matters,  until  the  disappearance  of  Buddhism  from 
the  subcontinent  around  1300.  Consequently  also,  Indian  Buddhist  art  exerted 
a  greater  influence  on  Tibetan  art  than  did  that  of  China. 

The  dynasty  of  Songtsen  Gampo,  which  ruled  much  of  Tibet  from  about  the 
mid-seventh  until  the  mid-ninth  century,  is  known  as  the  Yarlung  dynasty  since  the 

23 


family  originated  in  the  Yarlung  Valley,  southeast  of  Lhasa.  Although  his  successors 
continued  to  patronize  the  imported  Buddhist  religion — and  despite  Padmasam- 
bhava's  efforts  and  those  of  other  Indian  monks  and  mystics  who  visited  Tibet  at  the 
invitation  of  the  royal  family — Buddhism  continued  to  encounter  opposition  both 
from  practitioners  of  indigenous  religious  traditions  and  from  the  nobility.  The  polit- 
ical power  of  the  feudal  lords  of  Tibet  had  been  controlled  by  Songtsen  Gampo  but 
not  obliterated.  They  remained  a  constant  source  of  irritation  to  the  dynasty  and  were 
hostile  to  Buddhism.  Around  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century,  the  disgruntled  nobles 
found  an  ally  in  King  Langdarma  (803-842?),  who  was  virulently  anti-Buddhist. 
Regarded  as  the  "apostate  king"  by  Buddhists,  he  is  remembered  by  later  historians 
as  a  relentless  persecutor  of  the  faith.  He  was  assassinated  by  a  pious  Buddhist,  proba- 
bly in  842  (there  is  disagreement  as  to  the  exact  date,  some  scholars  placing  the  event 
later),  and  thus  ended  the  rule  of  the  only  centralized  political  authority  Tibet  was  to 
know  until  the  seventeenth  century,  the  period  during  which  the  authority  of  the 
Dalai  Lama  was  consolidated. 

Little  is  known  of  the  political  or  religious  history  of  Tibet  from  the  fall  of 
the  Yarlung  dynasty  until  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century,  when,  in  Stein's 
words,  "the  curtain  lifts  once  more,"  though  it  lifted  in  western  rather  than  in  central 
Tibet.  This  largely  unrecorded  period  was  probably  the  time  during  which  the  more 
ancient  beliefs  and  religious  practices  were  coalesced,  though  with  considerable 
Buddhist  influence,  into  the  only  other  Tibetan  religion,  known  as  Bon.  According 
to  Buddhist  historians,  their  own  religion  during  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries 
became  highly  contaminated  by  unsavory  cultic  practices  which  were  both  native  and 
imported.  Buddhism  appears  to  have  been  almost  nonexistent  in  the  central  region 
of  the  country  and  flickered  dimly  in  outlying  areas  both  in  the  east  and  west.  It  was 
in  the  west  that  the  lamp  was  made  to  burn  brighter  once  again  in  the  eleventh 
century  due  to  the  zeal  and  piety  of  yet  another  royal  family  and  of  monks,  both  Indian 
and  Tibetan. 

One  of  Langdarma's  sons  had  moved  west  and,  subsequently,  his  descen- 
dants carved  out  three  kingdoms,  one  of  which  came  to  be  known  as  Guge.  Members 
of  the  Guge  royal  family  were  devout  Buddhists.  One  of  them,  known  as  Yeshe  O 
(lived  c.  1000),  abdicated  the  throne,  along  with  his  two  sons,  to  devote  himself 
entirely  to  rejuvenating  the  religion  in  the  country.  Disturbed  by  the  moribund  and 
degenerate  state  of  the  religion,  Yeshe  O  sent  monks  to  India,  built  temples  and 
monasteries  in  Guge,  and  invited  Indian  teachers  to  alter  the  situation.  Among  the 
monks  he  sent  to  India  was  Rinchen  Sangpo  (958-1055);  but  the  most  celebrated 
Indian  teacher  to  visit  Tibet  was  Atisa  (982-1054),  who  came  from  the  Vikramasila 
monastery  to  western  Tibet  in  1042.  It  was  due  largely  to  the  efforts  of  these  two, 
with  the  enthusiastic  support  of  the  Guge  royal  family,  that  Buddhism  not  only  re- 
vived in  Tibet,  but  ultimately  became  the  predominant  aspect  of  Tibetan  civilization. 

A  great  scholar  and  translator,  Rinchen  Sangpo  was  one  of  several  young 
Tibetans  handpicked  by  Yeshe  6  and  sent  to  Kashmir  to  continue  their  studies.  Upon 
his  return,  Rinchen  Sangpo  proved  to  be  a  zealous  champion  of  the  religion  and, 
apart  from  translating  numerous  Buddhist  texts  from  Sanskrit  into  Tibetan,  founded 
several  temples  and  monasteries.  Thus,  Buddhism  was  already  flourishing  in  western 
Tibet  when  Atisa  arrived.  After  three  years  in  the  west,  Atisa  moved  to  central  Tibet 
where  he  died  in  1054  after  reestablishing  Buddhism  in  the  heart  of  the  country.  He 
was  assisted  by  his  three  disciples,  Khuton,  Ngokton,  and  Dromton,  who  were 
from  Kham  in  the  east — the  other  region  where  the  lamp  of  Buddhism  was  kept  flick- 
ering by  small  groups  of  monks  and  wandering  teachers,  such  as  Smriti  of  Nepal.  In 
1056-57  Dromton  founded  the  famous  Reting  monastery  north  of  Lhasa  and  the 
religious  order  that  came  to  be  known  as  the  Kadam  and  its  adherents  as  Kadampas. 

24 


Pi 


While  Atisa  was  the  inspiring  force  behind  the  revival,  it  was  Dromton's  organiza- 
tional ability  that  was  responsible  for  the  rapid  spread  of  the  religion. 

Atisa  was  only  one — though  the  most  eminent — of  the  many  monk- 
teachers  from  India  who  contributed  to  the  rapid  expansion  of  Buddhism  in  Tibet. 
Between  the  tenth  and  the  thirteenth  century,  when  Buddhism  was  for  all  intents  and 
purposes  destroyed  in  India,  scores  of  monks  and  mystics  from  Kashmir,  Orissa, 
Bihar,  Bengal,  and  also  from  Nepal  undertook  the  difficult  journey  to  Tibet.  While 
the  Indians  have  forgotten  these  enterprising  teachers,  they  are  remembered  with 
affection  and  reverence  in  the  Tibetan  religious  tradition.  Along  with  their  Tibetan 
colleagues,  most  of  the  Indian  monks  spent  much  of  their  time  translating  religious 
texts  from  Sanskrit  into  Tibetan,  as  had  been  done  once  before,  in  the  ninth  century. 
Most  of  these  translated  texts  are  now  included  in  the  two  monumental  compilations 
of  Tibetan  Buddhist  canonical  literature  known  as  the  Tanjur  (original  treatises)  and 
Kanjur  (commentaries).  Translating  and  organizing  the  religious  literature  and  found- 
ing monasteries  and  religious  orders  seem  to  have  been  the  principal  occupations  of 
the  Tibetans  from  the  tenth  to  the  thirteenth  century.  Thus,  this  phase  of  Tibetan 
religious  history  may  be  characterized  as  the  "age  of  the  lotsawas"  (translators). 

Most  major  monasteries  and  religious  orders  of  Tibet  were  founded  in  the 
eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries.  Apart  from  Reting,  Shalu  was  founded  in  1040,  Sakya 
in  1073,  Thel  in  1158,  Drigung  in  1167,  Tshel  in  1175,  and  Tshurphu  in  1189.  Some 
of  the  more  ancient  groups  had  combined  to  form  what  came  to  be  known  as  the 
Nyingmapas  (or  the  ancient  order),  while  the  Kadampas,  as  mentioned,  were  the  fol- 
lowers of  Dromton.  The  influential  order  of  the  Kagyupas  was  founded  by  Marpa, 
about  whom  we  will  have  something  to  say  later.  The  three  principal  suborders  that 
stemmed  from  the  Kagyupas  were  the  Drigungpas,  the  Phagmotrupas,  and  the  Kar- 
mapas.  The  Kagyupas  and  their  derivatives  were  more  mystically  oriented  than  most 
of  the  other  orders. 

Although  the  reasons  are  not  clear,  Buddhism  was  more  successful  this  time 
around  in  gaining  the  support  of  the  local  principalities  and  the  nobility.  The  Sakya 
monastery  was  founded  by  the  powerful  Khon  family,  the  Che  founded  Shalu,  and  the 
Phagmotru  family  was  responsible  for  establishing  the  order  derived  from  that  name. 
The  lords  of  Gyantse,  an  important  commercial  and  religious  center  in  central  Tibet, 
became  the  supporters  of  the  principal  religious  establishments  there.  As  will  be 
apparent  in  the  catalogue  section,  many  of  the  paintings  in  the  collection  were  associ- 
ated with  the  monasteries  of  the  various  orders  mentioned  above.  The  eleventh-century 
manuscript  pages  (Ml)  were  recovered  from  the  monastery  at  Toling  in  the  kingdom 
of  Guge.  Founded  by  Yeshe  O,  Toling  was  intimately  connected  with  both  Rinchen 
Sangpo  and  Atisa.  Two  of  the  most  important  thankas  in  the  collection  (PI,  P2) 
were  very  likely  rendered  for  Kadampa  monasteries  in  south-central  Tibet,  while  an 
impressive  group  (P10-P13)  were  associated  with  Sakyapa  monasteries.  At  least  one 
thanka  (Pll)  may  have  been  executed  by  the  same  artists  who  were  responsible 
for  painting  murals  in  one  of  the  major  shrines  at  Gyantse  in  the  fifteenth  century. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  royal  house  of  Guge  not  only  sup- 
ported the  monasteries,  but  that  many  of  its  rulers  and  their  sons  became  monks,  too. 
Members  of  other  noble  families  in  western  Tibet  as  well  as  Ladakh,  such  as  the  Dro 
clan,  also  gave  up  their  purple  mantles  to  don  the  monastic  robes.  This  was  true  of 
noble  families  in  other  parts  of  Tibet  as  well.  In  some  instances,  as  was  the  case  with 
the  Sakyapas,  when  two  brothers  joined  the  monastery,  one  was  allowed  to  marry  so 
that  the  abbotship  could  pass  from  the  uncle  to  the  nephew.  Such  arrangements 
ensured  close  ties  between  the  nobility  and  the  religious  establishments  and  also 
increased  the  wealth  of  the  monasteries,  which  in  turn  enhanced  their  political  power 
and  ambition. 


25 


Apart  from  the  encouragement  of  the  ruling  families,  Buddhism  could  not 
have  spread  as  rapidly  as  it  did  without  the  support  of  the  general  populace;  it  re- 
ceived this  support,  in  large  part,  due  to  several  vital  economic  factors.  Beginning  in 
the  eleventh  century,  monasteries  began  to  own  land  and  to  become  one  of  the  princi- 
pal sources  of  employment.  Enormous  supplies  of  labor  and  materials  were  necessary 
to  build  the  gargantuan  monastic  establishments  and  their  furnishings,  and  to  supply 
their  religious  images  and  ritual  necessities.  Trade,  too,  flourished  because  of  the 
monasteries,  which  as  a  result  became  the  chief  economic  power  in  the  areas  surround- 
ing them.  Need  we  wonder  why  the  traders,  the  peasants,  the  craftsmen,  and  the  artists 
met  this  faith  with  greater  zeal  than  they  did  the  Bon  or  other  primitive  religions? 

While  the  interests  of  the  monks  and  the  monarchs  sometimes  merged,  at 
other  times  they  did  not.  Because  of  their  wealth  and  power,  the  monasteries  were  not 
only  frequently  drawn  into  feudal  politics,  but  were  often  mired  in  bloody  wars,  with 
each  other  and  with  the  monarchs,  often  over  trivial,  temporal  matters.  And  the  more 
they  quarreled  among  themselves,  the  more  they  openly  encouraged  the  Mongols  and 
the  Chinese  to  interfere  in  their  internal  affairs — a  policy,  as  we  have  noted,  that  ulti- 
mately led  to  the  annexation  of  Tibet  by  the  People's  Republic  of  China.  The  history 
of  Tibet  from  the  thirteenth  century  until  the  punitive  expedition  sent  into  the 
country  by  the  Chinese  emperor  Kangxi  (K'ang-hsi)  (r.  1662— 1722)  in  1720  is  a 
dreary  tale  of  the  sanguine  and  internecine  struggle  for  political  hegemony  among  the 
Sakyapas,  Karmapas,  Phagmotrupas,  and  the  Gelukpas. 

The  Gelukpa  order  was  founded  by  the  principal  disciples  of  Tsongkhapa 
(1357-1419),  the  great  reformer  of  Tibetan  Buddhism.  Tsongkhapa's  reformation 
did  not  really  involve  any  fundamental  innovation  either  in  doctrine  or  ritual.  As 
Stein  writes: 

No  more  than  Atisa,  whose  teachings  he  followed,  did  he  neglect  the  Tantras 
with  all  the  rituals  and  meditations  that  go  with  them  which  he  had  studied 
with  the  Karma-pas  and  Sakya-pas.  But,  like  Atisa  and  his  Kadam-pa  order,  he 
insisted  once  more  on  the  need  for  monastic  discipline  and  the  gradual  path 
(morality,  etc.),  for  the  generality  of  men  and  even  as  preliminary  to  total 
liberation." 

The  rise  of  the  Gelukpas  in  the  fourteenth  century  was  meteoric,  perhaps 
because  the  Tibetan  people  were  tired  of  the  constant  feuds  among  the  older  orders 
and  of  the  frequent  interference  and  raids  by  foreigners.  They  probably  expected  the 
Gelukpas  to  help  the  country  to  return  to  sanity.  If  this  indeed  was  their  expectation 
they  were  to  be  disappointed,  for  the  Gelukpas  played  an  equally  questionable  role  in 
the  struggle  for  hegemony,  and  certainly  encouraged  foreign  intervention  with  no  less 
zeal  than  had  the  older  monastic  orders. 

Like  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries,  the  fifteenth  century  witnessed  the 
foundation  of  a  number  of  great  monasteries,  several  of  which  were  established  by  the 
Gelukpas.  Ganden,  where  the  Gelukpa  order  originated,  was  founded  in  1409, 
Drepung  seven  years  later,  and  Sera  in  1419;  all  were  located  in  U  in  central  Tibet, 
where  the  Gelukpas  had  consolidated  their  power.  (The  Tsang  region  was  then  under 
the  influence  of  the  Sakyapas,  while  the  Karmapas  were  predominant  in  Kham.)  The 
rapidity  of  the  Gelukpa  rise  can  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  within  four  decades  of  the 
foundation  of  Ganden,  they  had  won  important  footholds  by  establishing  the 
Chamdo  monastery  between  1436  and  1444  in  Kham  and  the  Tashilumpo  monastery 
in  Tsang  in  1447.  Until  the  country's  loss  of  independence  to  the  People's  Republic  of 
China,  the  Gelukpas  were  the  most  important  religious  order  in  Tibet. 


26 


In  the  following  century  the  institution  of  the  Dalai  Lama  was  created. 
From  that  time  until  1956,  when  the  present  incumbent  fled  the  country — he  now 
lives  in  exile  in  India — the  Dalai  Lama  was  the  figure  in  whom  all  temporal  and 
spiritual  authority  over  the  country  was  invested.  The  first  to  receive  the  title  (Ta  le. 
or  "ocean,"  in  Tibetan)  was  a  Gelukpa  abbot,  Sonam  Gyatso  (1543-1588),  from  the 
Drepung  monastery;  it  was  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  Mongol  ruler  Altan  Khan. 

Assessing  post-eleventh-century  Tibetan  history,  Giuseppe  Tucci  has 
written  that  the  "great  religious  communities  arose  out  of  a  symbiosis  of  sacred  and 
secular  power."12  This  symbiosis  had  certain  predictable  results.  Nineteenth-century 
British  historian  Lord  Acton's  famous  dictum,  "Power  corrupts,  and  absolute  power 
corrupts  absolutely,"  fittingly  characterizes  the  story  of  the  monasteries  in  this  time, 
despite  the  zealousness  and  genuine  commitment  of  some  reformers  and  despite  the 
saintliness  and  wisdom  of  some  monks.  In  this  regard,  the  following  passage  from  the 
Gesar,  the  most  popular  Tibetan  epic,  though  written  in  a  sarcastic  vein,  is  highly 
illuminating: 

The  lama,  the  godlike,  is  learned  in  sermons;  possessions  are  impermanent, 
bubbles  on  the  water's  surface,  says  he;  life  is  impermanent,  a  play  of  lightning, 
says  he.  But  his  acts  are  different  from  his  words.  Is  he  pleased?  That  depends  on 
the  amount  of  the  offerings.  Does  he  find  fault  with  someone?  That  depends  on 
whether  they  are  handsome  or  ugly.  Wealth,  he  considers,  is  for  his  control.  His 
hand  clasps  it  in  the  knot  of  avarice.'3 

Other  literary  sources  tend  to  confirm  such  monastic  excesses.  In  his  biography,  the 
sixteenth-century  Drukpa  saint  Kiinlek  is  quoted  as  remarking,  after  a  visit  to  Druk: 

I  have  visited  the  monasteries  of  Druk.  In  those  in  Upper  Druk  there  were  internal 
quarrels  about  landed  property.  ...  As  for  me,  the  yogin,  I  refrain:  I  should  be 
afraid  of  stirring  up  strife  between  cousin  brothers.  .  .'4 

Kiinlek  was  one  of  a  type  of  yogi,  often  considered  the  "mad"  or  inspired 
type,  who  were  especially  revered  by  rural  Tibetans  and  who  contributed  immensely 
toward  popularizing  Buddhism  in  the  countryside;  the  monasteries  concentrated 
their  efforts  in  the  urban  centers.  These  mystics,  many  of  whom  came  to  be  regarded 
as  saints,  were  mostly  wandering  poets  who  communicated  their  simple  messages 
through  songs  and  through  personal  example.  They  owned  no  personal  property,  re- 
jected all  material  comforts,  and  laid  greater  emphasis  on  love  and  compassion  than 
on  performing  rites  and  rituals.  Indeed,  these  singing  yogis  of  Tibet  continued  a 
tradition  that  had  prevailed  in  India  from  very  ancient  times.  Known  as  mahasiddhas 
in  India,  they  were  totally  emancipated  beings  who  were  not  concerned  with  either 
formal  religions  or  with  social  norms.  Since  they  played  an  important  role  in  Tibetan 
art,  more  will  be  said  about  the  mahasiddhas  in  a  later  chapter.  The  phenomenal 
success  of  such  simple  but  inspired  mystics  in  Tibet  may  in  a  large  measure  have  been 
due  to  the  ordinary  Tibetan's  disenchantment  with  the  excesses  and  avarice  of  orga- 
nized religion.  The  singing  saints,  on  the  other  hand,  made  no  demands,  and  often 
were  both  amusing  and  easy  to  follow. 

The  most  famous  of  these  saints  lived  in  the  eleventh  century.  One  was 
Dampa  Sangye  (d.  1117),  who  was  an  Indian  mystic  though  he  lived  most  of  his  life  in 
Dingri  near  the  border  with  Nepal.  He  did  not  sing  but  was  a  folk  hero  all  the  same. 
He  organized  no  order  or  sect,  but  had  a  large  number  of  followers  who  spread  his 
doctrine  and  teachings  in  many  different  parts  of  the  country.  He  mingled  with  the 
people,  mystified  and  awed  them  by  performing  mystical  rites  (see  introduction, 
Ritual  Objects),  and  helped  them  directly  in  their  search  for  salvation. 

27 


Pi4 


Another  such  saint  was  Marpa  (1012— 1096),  who  was  a  remarkable  person- 
ality. Although  he  did  not  belong  to  any  organized  religion,  he  is  regarded  as  the 
founder  of  the  Kagyupa  order.  Like  many  others,  he  did  not  live  like  yogis  but  was  a 
married  householder.  Highly  neurotic,  he  was  a  man  of  violent  temper  and  difficult  to 
approach,  as  is  clear  from  passages  in  the  biography  of  his  most  famous  disciple, 
Milarepa  (1040— 1123).  Marpa  is  best  remembered,  however,  for  introducing  "a  new 
kind  of  Tibetan  poetry,  often  religious  and  didactic  on  the  Indian  model,  but  also  ex- 
pressive of  their  personal  feelings  and  observations."15  His  successors  in  the  Kagyupa 
order  continued  to  preach  through  poetry,  which  appealed  greatly  to  the  masses 
precisely  because  the  poems  expressed  personal  feelings  and  observations. 

The  greatest  of  Tibet's  mystics  and  singing  poets  was  Milarepa.  The  collec- 
tion contains  a  splendid  painting  representing  the  mystical  life  of  this  extraordinary 
figure  (Pl4).  Unlike  his  guru,  Marpa,  Milarepa  was  a  strict  ascetic  who  truly  re- 
nounced the  mundane  world.  Although  a  mixture  of  fantasy  and  history,  his  biog- 
raphy, which  is  available  in  an  English  translation,  makes  fascinating  reading,  as 
does  his  poetry.  Because  of  their  sincerity,  poignancy,  and  simple  elegance,  his  poems 
and  songs  have  remained  extremely  popular  among  all  classes  of  Tibetans.  How  direct 
and  effective  his  instruction  was  may  best  be  gauged  from  the  following  verse: 


Hearken,  my  sons!  If  you  want 

To  climb  the  mountain  peak 

To  enjoy  the  view. 

You  should  hold  the  Self -mind's  light, 

Tie  {it}  with  a  great  "Knot." 

And  catch  it  with  a  firm  "Hook." 

If  you  practice  thus 

You  can  climb  the  mountain  peak 

To  enjoy  the  view.  ' 

Apart  from  the  mystics,  monks,  and  monarchs  of  Tibet,  there  were  other 
kings  and  emperors — all  of  them  foreigners,  either  Mongol  or  Chinese — who  made 
significant  contributions  to  the  religious  and  political  history  of  the  country.  A  brief 
knowledge  of  both  the  Mongol  and  the  Chinese  connections  is  essential  in  order  to 
appreciate  the  extent  to  which  Chinese  art  contributed  toward  the  formation  of  the 
Tibetan  aesthetic. 

During  the  Yarlung  dynasty  period,  in  spite  of  that  ruling  group's  occasional 
raids  into  Nepal  and  northern  India,  Tibet  was  preoccupied  with  fighting  the  Tang  in 
Chinese  Turkestan,  no  doubt  in  an  effort  to  capture  the  lucrative  trade  along  the  Silk 
Route.  The  Tibetans  occupied  Dunhuang  and  other  Central  Asian  sites  from  about 
670  to  822,  cutting  off  trade  between  China  and  Western  Asia.  On  one  occasion  they 
sacked  the  then  Chinese  capital  of  Xian  (Ch'ang-an).  It  is,  therefore,  both  ironic  and 
amusing  to  read  that  when  a  Tibetan  envoy  asked  for  some  Chinese  classics,  a  court 
minister  recommended  to  the  emperor  that  the  request  be  denied  on  the  grounds  that 
the  Tibetans,  who  "were  steadfast  in  purpose,  intelligent  and  industrious,  intent  on 
learning  undistractedly"17  would  gain  too  much  knowledge  about  arms  and  warfare. 

Although  little  information  is  available  about  the  extent  of  Chinese  influence 
on  Tibetan  religious  or  cultural  life  during  this  period,  we  can  assume  that  it  was 
not  inconsiderable.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  the  prolonged  presence  of  the  Tibetans 
in  Chinese  Turkestan  must  have  exposed  them  to  the  strong  influences  of  Chinese 
culture,  several  of  the  Tibetan  monarchs  married  Chinese  princesses.  The  religious 
debate  at  Samye,  already  mentioned,  indicates  that  the  influence  of  Chinese  Buddhism 
at  the  time  was  significant.  There  was  some  impact  by  Chinese  architecture  as  well,  as 


28 


is  evident  from  the  tradition  that  one  of  the  floors  of  the  Samye  monastery  was  deco- 
rated in  the  Chinese  manner.  Among  the  lasting  contributions  of  Chinese  civilization 
to  Tibet  during  the  period  of  the  Yarlung  dynasty  were  paper  and  ink,  silks  and  tea. 
And,  although  due  to  Songtsen  Gampo's  influence  some  sons  of  the  nobility  were 
given  a  Chinese  education,  by  and  large,  from  the  ninth  century,  "Chinese  studies 
were  never  fostered  in  Tibet,  and  the  Tibetans  have  remained  to  this  day  as  ignorant 
of  Chinese  literature  and  philosophy  as  of  Chinese  historical  records."18  While  this 
contention  may  be  true,  less  acceptable  is  the  statement  that  "Chinese  cultural  in- 
fluence in  Tibet  has  been  so  slight  compared  with  what  it  might  have  been,  and  is 
virtually  limited  to  a  few  artifacts."19  This  is  certainly  not  borne  out  by  the  evidence 
of  the  visual  arts. 

Little  is  known  of  Tibet's  political  relations  with  the  various  Chinese  dynas- 
ties between  the  fall  of  the  Tang  in  906  and  the  rise  of  the  Yuan  in  the  thirteenth 
century.  There  was  no  central  authority  in  Tibet,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Tibetans 
appear  to  have  been  preoccupied  with  their  own  internal  affairs.  The  Chinese,  too, 
had  become  rather  introspective  and  chauvinistic  under  the  Song  dynasty  (960-1279), 
after  the  glorious  and  cosmopolitan  age  of  the  Tang,  and  showed  little  interest  in 
Tibetan  affairs.  Buddhism  no  longer  enjoyed  the  same  status  in  China  as  it  had 
during  the  Tang  dynasty.  However,  it  continued  to  flourish  in  the  north  under  the 
Khitan  Liao  (907-1125)  and  the  Jurchen  Jin  (1115-1234)  dynasties,  both  of  which 
maintained  religious  ties  with  Tibet. 

More  important  was  the  close  connection  between  Tibet  and  the  Xixia  king- 
dom, which  dominated  the  Kokonor  and  parts  of  northwest  China,  including  Gansu. 
Consisting  of  a  mixed  population  of  Tibetans,  Turko-Mongols,  Sumpas,  Chiangs, 
and  Chinese,  Xixia  was  highly  Tibetanized  culturally.  Both  the  Drigungpas  and  the 
Tshelpas  were  influential  in  the  Xixia  kingdom,  and  because  of  such  associations,  a 
strongly  Tibetan  style  of  painting  prevailed  at  this  time  in  Dunhuang  and  Kharakhoto. 
The  Russian  historical  expedition  of  1908-09  discovered  a  large  number  of  paint- 
ings and  illustrated  Buddhist  texts  at  Kharakhoto  that  definitely  indicate  the 
presence  of  Tibetan  artists  in  Xixia. 

The  Xixia  kingdom  was  devastated  by  Genghis  Khan  (1162— 1227),  the 
Mongol  emperor,  but  Tibet  was  spared  as  it  readily  submitted  to  the  Mongols.  After 
Genghis'  death,  Tibet  became  the  heritage  of  the  conqueror's  second  son,  Godan.  It 
was  at  Godan's  invitation  that  the  abbot  of  the  Sakya  monastery,  along  with  his 
nephew,  went  to  the  Mongol  court  and  was  made  the  regent  of  Tibet.  After  the  uncle's 
death  the  nephew,  Phakpa  (1235-1280),  became  a  friend  of  Kublai  Khan  (1216-1294), 
the  founder  of  the  Mongol  dynasty,  who  was  now  the  emperor  of  China.  Kublai 
invested  Phakpa  with  the  title  of  Ti  sbib  which  made  the  Sakya  abbot  the  virtual 
ruler  of  Tibet.  From  this  time,  as  Snellgrove  and  Richardson  have  written,  "dates 
that  peculiar  relationship  between  Tibet  and  China,  known  as  Yon-mchod,  'Patron  and 
Priest,'  by  which  the  ruler  of  Tibet  in  the  person  of  the  predominant  grand  lama  was 
regarded  as  the  religious  adviser  and  priest  of  the  Emperor,  who  in  return  acted  as 
patron  and  protector."20 

The  close  relationship  between  the  Mongol  emperors  and  the  Tibetan  lamas 
had  significant  political  effects  in  Tibet,  but  more  important  for  us  are  the  cultural 
exhanges  which  were  mutually  beneficial.  The  Mongol  emperors  were  generous  in 
presenting  the  Sakyapas  with  lavish  gifts,  both  in  cash  and  kind.  There  were  constant 
exchanges  of  images  and  other  religious  objects  between  the  monks  and  the  monarchs. 
While  it  is  more  difficult  to  find  Chinese  statues  and  paintings  of  this  period  in 
Tibetan  monasteries,  there  is  much  more  evidence,  both  artistic  and  literary,  to  indi- 
cate the  strong  influence  exerted  by  the  Tibetans  on  Chinese  Buddhist  art.  Tibetan 


29 


colors  and  gilding  are  frequently  mentioned  in  Chinese  texts,  and  several  monuments 
survive  northwest  of  Beijing  and  in  Hangzhou  in  southeast  China  that  were  designed 
by  Tibetan  monks  and  were  very  likely  built  and  carved  by  both  Tibetan  and 
Chinese  artists.21  It  is  especially  significant  that  Tibetan  influence  is  perceptible 
in  Feilai  Feng,  the  ancient  capital  of  the  Southern  Song.  For  as  we  shall  see  in  the 
introduction  to  the  paintings  portion  of  the  catalogue,  the  arhat  paintings  of  the 
Southern  Song  period  may  have  provided  some  of  the  models  for  Tibetan  paintings  of 
the  same  theme. 

Mongol  rule  in  China  ended  in  1368  with  the  establishment  of  the  native 
Chinese  Ming  dynasty  (1368— 1644),  which  was  subsequently  overthrown  by  the 
Manchus,  who  established  the  Qing  (Ch'ing)  dynasty  (1644— 1912).  Nevertheless, 
emperors  of  both  dynasties  continued  to  patronize  Tibetan  lamas,  though  the  Sakyapa 
hegemony  had  ended  with  the  fall  of  the  Mongols.  Unlike  the  Mongols,  the  Ming 
emperors  supported  various  Tibetan  religious  orders,  especially  the  Karmapas  and  the 
Gelukpas.  But  like  the  Mongols,  they  too  were  generous  in  sending  gifts  to  the 
Tibetan  monasteries,  and  Chinese  art  exerted  the  strongest  influence  on  the  art  of 
Tibet  during  this  period. 

The  Karmapa  Dehzin  Shegpa  (1384-1415),  the  head  of  his  order,  had  the 
same  kind  of  priest  and  patron  relationship  with  the  Ming  emperor  Yongle  as  the 
Mongol  emperors  had  had  with  the  Sakyapa  monks.  On  a  visit  to  Nanjing  in  1406, 
the  Karmapa  was  lodged  in  the  palace  and  among  other  presents  received  one  hundred 
ounces  of  gold,  1000  of  silver  and  silks.  Since  such  gifts  were  bestowed  frequently, 
one  can  well  imagine  how  the  resources  of  the  monasteries  swelled  as  a  result  of  their 
close  association  with  the  Chinese  emperors.  Statues  and  paintings  were  exchanged, 
too.  As  Heather  Karmay  has  pointed  out,  between  1406  and  1417  images  were  sent 
from  Tibet  to  China  at  least  seven  times,  while  between  1408  and  1419  Chinese 
images  were  taken  to  Tibet  at  least  six  times. 

Even  more  interesting  was  the  exchange  of  gifts  between  Tsongkhapa  and 
the  Chinese  emperor,  recorded  in  a  letter  of  1408,  in  which  the  monk  declined  the 
emperor's  invitation  to  visit  China.  Chinese  silks  and  ritual  objects  figure  prominently 
among  the  gifts  sent  by  the  emperor.  Among  the  silks  were  three  rolls  that  were 
unpatterned,  two  that  had  fine  flower  and  cloud  patterns,  seven  rolls  of  natural  colors, 
and  "silk  for  thangka  curtains."22  These  are  the  silks  that  the  Tibetans  used  to  mount 
their  thankas  and  to  provide  curtains  or  coverings  for  them.  The  tradition  may  have 
been  older,  but  certainly  it  may  be  dated  from  the  early  fifteenth  century.  Among 
the  ritual  objects  were  one  crystal  rosary,  one  set  of  bell  and  thunderbolt,  two  porce- 
lain bowls,  two  altar  cloths,  and  three  aprons  with  mandala  designs.  Indeed,  the 
magnificent  set  of  ritual  weapons  of  crystal  and  gilt  metal  in  the  collection  (R9)  may 
well  have  been  sent  by  a  Chinese  emperor  to  a  grand  lama  in  Tibet.  Among  the 
objects  sent  as  presents  by  Tsongkhapa  were  several  gilt-bronze  images,  relics  of 
both  Buddha  and  Atisa,  and  a  statue  of  Avalokitesvara  which  was  brought  from 
Li-yul,  generally  identified  with  Khotan  in  Central  Asia.  Because  of  this  we  know 
that  Khotanese  bronzes  were  familiar  in  Tibet,  but  none  has  been  identified  so  far. 
Such  exchanges  of  artworks  aside — objects  which  must  have  served  as  models  in  both 
countries — it  is  also  well  known  that  artists  were  invited  from  China  to  paint  murals 
at  Shalu  and  Gyantse. 

Although  the  Mongol  dynasty  in  China  fell  in  1368,  the  Mongols  were  still, 
in  the  fifteenth  century,  a  strong  presence  in  that  part  of  Asia  known  today  as  Inner  and 
Outer  Mongolia.  Both  the  Ming  and  Qing  emperors  realized  the  political  advantage 
of  patronizing  and  humoring  the  lamas  of  Tibet,  for  this  was  the  easiest  way  to  keep 
both  the  Mongols  and  the  Tibetans,  as  well  as  their  cousins  in  Yunnan  and  Sichuan, 

30 


under  imperial  control.  Thinking  also  that  Tibetan  Buddhism  might  have  a  salutary 
effect  in  containing  the  aggression  and  militancy  of  the  Mongols,  the  Chinese  emper- 
ors encouraged  the  lamas  to  associate  closely  with  the  Mongols.  This  association 
resulted  in  a  momentous  meeting  in  1578  between  Sonam  Gyatso,  the  head  of  the 
Gelukpas,  and  Altan  Khan,  the  chief  of  the  Turned  branch  of  the  Mongols.  As  noted, 
it  was  Altan  Khan  who  bestowed  the  title  of  Ta  k  on  Sonam  Gyatso,  thus  originating 
the  institution  of  the  Dalai  Lama.  When  Sonam  Gyatso  died  in  1588,  the  Gelukpas 
were  smart  enough  to  declare  the  grandson  of  Altan  Khan  as  the  next  emanation  and 
Dalai  Lama,  which  further  cemented  the  bond  between  the  Mongols  and  the  Geluk- 
pas. This  relationship  was  strengthened  further  still  when  the  Fifth  Dalai  Lama 
(1617-1679)  became  the  preceptor  of  Gushri  Khan. 

Known  as  the  "Great  Fifth,"  the  Fifth  Dalai  Lama  was  the  man  who  first 
combined  both  spiritual  and  temporal  authority  in  the  office  of  the  Dalai  Lama.  An 
able  administrator,  he  also  ushered  in  an  age  of  grandeur  for  the  Gelukpas,  sym- 
bolized best  by  his  erecting  of  the  majestic  Potala,  the  palace  of  the  Dalai  Lamas 
which  overlooks  Lhasa  with  such  commanding  presence.  He  visited  China,  but  also 
revived  the  glories  of  Tibet's  past  by  receiving  visits  from  some  of  her  southern  neigh- 
bors. Unfortunately,  his  successor  was  a  libertine  and  a  romantic  poet,  and  was  unfit 
to  be  either  a  spiritual  or  a  temporal  leader.  The  Mongols  interfered  once  again,  but 
now  the  Chinese  were  intent  upon  counterbalancing  the  growing  Mongol  influence. 
So  the  emperor  Kangxi  took  matters  into  his  own  hands,  sending  imperial  representa- 
tives to  Lhasa  in  1721.  Thus  the  monarch,  even  though  a  foreigner,  finally  triumphed 
over  the  monk  in  Tibet. 

Tradition  claims  that  the  great  monastery  of  Samye  was  built  in  the  eighth 
century  on  the  model  of  Odantapuri  in  India,  but  each  of  its  three  floors  was  designed 
according  to  Indian,  Nepali,  and  Chinese  modes.  This  amalgamation  symbolizes  the 
fact  that  these  three  countries  were  the  ones  principally  responsible  for  the  molding  of 
Tibet's  religious  life  and  her  arts.  The  impact  of  India  and  Nepal  was  felt  primarily 
through  their  monks,  artists,  and  their  artistic  creations.  Indian  influence  was 
strongest  between  the  seventh  and  the  thirteenth  century — during  which  time  Bud- 
dhism disintegrated  as  a  religious  force  in  India — and  it  stemmed  mostly  from  Kash- 
mir and  eastern  India.  The  Newars  of  Nepal  were,  beginning  in  the  seventh  century, 
another  constant  presence,  and  contributed  greatly  to  Tibet's  trade  and  to  her  arts.23 
But  no  monarchs,  from  either  India  or  Nepal,  played  any  role  in  Tibet's  history. 

The  only  strong  and  unifying  secular  authority  in  Tibet's  history  was  the 
Yarlung  dynasty,  which  introduced  and  ardently  supported  Buddhism.  With  the  fall  of 
the  dynasty  in  the  ninth  century,  however,  the  religion  suffered  a  setback,  and  it  was 
not  until  the  eleventh  century  that  the  torch  was  picked  up,  once  again  by  a  royal 
family,  but  this  time,  as  noted,  in  western  Tibet.  With  the  revival  of  Buddhism  and 
the  foundation  of  the  monasteries  between  the  eleventh  and  the  thirteenth  century, 
the  power  of  the  monks  increased  continually,  and  there  evolved  what  Tucci  has 
described  as  a  "symbiotic"  relationship  between  the  religious  and  secular  powers 
in  Tibet. 

Although  some  monarchs  of  the  Yarlung  dynasty  married  Chinese  princesses, 
the  relationship  between  China  and  Tibet  during  the  early  period  was  primarily 
hostile;  the  cultural  impact  of  China  in  Tibet  at  the  time  was  limited.  After  the  fall  of 
the  Tang  in  the  ninth  century  and  until  the  establishment  of  the  Yuan  in  the  thir- 
teenth, very  little  is  known  of  the  Sino-Tibetan  relationship.  Thereafter,  a  very  special 
kind  of  religious  bond  developed  between  the  Tibetan  lamas  and  the  Chinese  emperors. 
Although  these  religious  ties  were  strongest  under  the  Yuan,  they  did  not  slacken 
under  the  Ming  or  the  Qing.  A  similar  relationship  also  evolved  with  the  Mongols 

31 


of  Mongolia,  starting  in  the  sixteenth  century.  While  this  prolonged  religious 
and  political  intercourse  between  the  Tibetan  monks  and  the  monarchs  of  China  and 
Mongolia  proved  in  the  long  run  to  be  unhealthy  for  Tibet's  freedom,  it  did  have 
beneficial  consequences  for  the  history  of  Tibetan  art. 


32 


*s'r> 


**•'•, 


The  Way  and  the  Goal 


Master,  pupil,  instruction,  these  three. 
Effort,  fortitude,  faith,  these  three. 
Wisdom,  Compassion .  Absolute,  these  three. 
All  these  are  constant  knouers  of  the  way. 
Milarepa24 


Here  there  is  no  beginning, 

no  middle,  no  end. 
Neither  samsara  nor  nirvana. 
In  this  state  of  highest  bliss 
There  is  neither  self  nor  other. 
Saraha2^ 


These  two  songs  by  Milarepa  (P14,  S40),  the  greatest  of  Tibet's  singing 
yogis,  and  by  Saraha,  a  celebrated  Buddhist  teacher  who  lived  in  India  sometime  in 
the  seventh  or  eighth  century,  describe  with  brevity  and  lucidity  the  way  and  the 
goal  of  Vajrayana  Buddhism.  It  was  this  form  of  Buddhism,  also  known  as  Tan- 
trayana,  that  was  introduced  into  Tibet  from  India  in  the  seventh  century.  Although 
Vajrayana  is  also  practiced  in  Nepal,  Japan,  China,  and  Korea,  nowhere  has  it  flour- 
ished with  such  zeal  and  mystique  as  in  Tibet.  The  word  yana  means  path,  way,  or 
vehicle;  vajra  means  thunderbolt  (R4)  or  diamond;  and  tantra  is  a  blanket  term  for  a 
wide  body  of  religious  traditions,  both  Hindu  and  Buddhist,  that  includes  many 
esoteric  rituals  and  cults.  Vajra,  connoting  diamond,  was  chosen  as  the  name 
of  the  tantric  Buddhist  tradition  because  of  the  diamond's  indestructibility  as  well 
as  because  of  its  physical  ability  to  cut  through  all  substances.  Systematized  in 
India  around  the  fifth  century  A.D.,  Vajrayana  constitutes  the  last  major  stage  in  the 
development  of  Buddhism,  which  originated  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.  with 
Sakyamuni,  the  Enlightened  One  or  the  Buddha. 

Early  Buddhism  stressed  that  the  goal  of  each  individual  was  to  seek  free- 
dom from  the  chain  of  rebirth  and  thus  from  all  suffering  and  death.  The  word  used 
to  describe  this  goal  was  nirvana.  Although  there  were  many  different  philosophical 
schools,  the  religion  centered  around  the  institution  of  the  monastery,  with  its 
ordained  monks  and  a  lay  congregation  that  supported  the  monastery.  No  image 
was  used,  rituals  were  simple  and  minimal,  and  meditation  and  introspection  were 
encouraged.  Each  individual  sought  his  own  nirvana,  which,  however,  was  easier 
for  a  monk  to  achieve  than  for  a  layman.  Sometime  around  the  birth  of  Christ  there 
was  a  profound  doctrinal  change;  some  dissenters,  asserting  that  it  was  "selfish" 
for  an  individual  to  seek  his  own  nirvana,  created  the  revolutionary  concept  of  the 
bodhisattva  (the  being  of  enlightenment),  which  formed  the  basis  of  Buddhist 
"theism"  and  consequently  of  its  "pantheon."  The  function  of  the  bodhisattva  was  to 
postpone  his  own  final  leap  into  nirvana  and  "to  remain  in  the  Round  as  long  as  a 
single  blade  of  grass  shall  remain  undelivered  from  suffering.26  This  form  of  Bud- 
dhism came  to  be  known  as  Mahayana  (the  Great  Way),  or  Bodhisattvayana.  It  is 
necessary  to  discuss  Mahayana  briefly,  as  it  formed  the  basis  for  the  later  develop- 
ment of  Vajrayana. 

While  the  goal  of  Mahayana  remained  the  same,  the  method  of  attaining 
it  was  altered.  From  a  communal  religion  that  was  largely  moralistic,  intellectual, 
and  contemplative,  Buddhism  changed  through  Mahayana  into  an  individualistic, 
faith-oriented  system  in  which,  in  addition  to  meditative  practices,  devotion  to  a 
bodhisattva — and,  by  extension,  to  a  deity — was  regarded  as  an  equally  valid  way 
to  reach  nirvana.  The  goal  was  now  characterized  as  the  state  of  sunyata,  which  is 
translated  variously  as  void,  emptiness,  nonduality,  or  nothingness.  It  still  involved 


35 


freedom  from  the  chain  of  rebirth,  but  was  more  accessible  to  the  layman  because 
faith,  rather  than  intellect,  was  stressed.  Mahayana  broadened  the  base  of  Buddhism 
further  by  introducing  the  concept  of  dharani  (literally,  support),  which  involved 
the  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  charms  and  mantras  (syllable  incantations)  against  vari- 
ous misfortunes.  One  of  the  most  popular  and  early  dharanis  was  Mahamayuri , 
which  was  seen  as  both  a  prophylactic  against  and  a  cure  for  snakebite — as  common, 
but  far  deadlier,  for  the  traveler  in  those  days  than  a  flat  tire  on  the  highway  is 
today.  A  religion  that  had  been  cerebral,  rationalistic,  and  agnostic,  Buddhism 
became,  with  Mahayana,  emotional,  devotional,  and  to  some  extent,  theistic. 

Vajrayana  Buddhism  accepts  all  assumptions  of  Mahayana  but  expands 
and  elaborates  them  further,  adding  a  few  of  its  own.  The  goal  now  is  characterized 
as  bodhicitta  (the  mind  of  enlightenment),  but  the  concept  of  bodhisattva  is  given 
even  greater  emphasis.  Every  sentient  being  is  a  potential  Buddha,  but  he  or  she  is 
unaware  of  it  because  of  the  dense  fog  of  ignorance  that  clouds  the  mind.  This  fog  is 
said  to  be  discursive  thought,  which  discriminates  and  polarizes  all  concepts.  Once  it 
is  removed,  bodhicitta  will  emerge  like  a  clear  light.  This  state  of  reality  is  achieved 
by  combining  prajna  (knowledge,  wisdom,  or  insight)  with  upaya  (means  or  fitness 
of  action,  which  is  the  same  as  karuna,  or  compassion).  Thus,  both  literally  and 
figuratively,  Vajrayana  is  the  belief  in  the  twin  principles  of  insight  and  compassion 
and  in  their  coemergence  (sahaja),  which  leads  one  to  the  state  of  mahasukha  (great 
bliss),  nothingness,  or  Clear  Light. 

Going  one  step  further,  Vajrayana  asserts  that  a  person  can  become  a  com- 
plete Buddha  in  a  single  existence  by  following  the  direct  path.  In  a  brilliant  essay, 
Marco  Pallis  compares  the  passage  along  the  path  to  climbing  a  mountain.27  There 
are  those,  Pallis  writes,  who  follow  the  gradual  and  winding  way  with  a  modest 
incline;  others  take  the  steeper  and  much  more  arduous  shortcut.  The  easier  way  is 
for  the  ordinary  man,  who  performs  his  daily  rituals  routinely,  worships  his  family 
deity,  circumambulates  the  chbten  (Ri),  turns  the  invocation  wheel  as  he  mutters  his 
mantra,  and  adds  another  stone  to  the  pile  as  he  safely  negotiates  a  pass.  The  shorter 
and  more  direct  path  is  for  lamas,  mystics,  and  saints,  whose  concentration  on  the 
goal  is  so  unwavering  that  no  obstacle  can  deter  their  arrival.  Pallis  very  appropri- 
ately compares  the  Vajrayana  shortcut  to  the  Christian  symbol  of  the  "narrow  way" 
leading  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  The  bodhisattvas,  arhats,  mahasiddhas,  and 
other  eminent  religious  persons,  such  as  Padmasambhava  (S37),  Atisa,  Dampa 
Sangye  (S31),  and  Tsongkhapa,  are  examples  of  those  who  successfully  followed 
the  shortcut. 

A  glance  at  the  illustrations  in  this  catalogue  will  make  it  clear  that  images 
of  divinities  are  a  crucial  element  of  Tibetan  art.  Although  the  texts  frequently 
tell  us  that  "Of  the  different  gods  and  goddesses  generated  by  him  and  his  family, 
neither  the  gods  nor  goddesses  exist,"28  in  point  of  fact,  for  the  ordinary  believer 
they  do  exist  and  must  be  propitiated.  On  a  more  metaphysical  level,  the  divine 
images  are  simply  symbols  of  the  body  of  the  Buddha,  just  as  the  mantras  are  sym- 
bols of  his  speech  and  the  chbten  and  the  vajra  are  symbols  of  his  mind.  They  are  not 
themselves  real  but  help  to  define  reality,  and  are  dispensed  with  by  the  enlightened 
mind  and  by  the  true  yogi. 

Yoga  is  common  to  both  Hinduism  and  Buddhism  but  has  a  slightly 
different  connotation  in  the  two  religions.  Older  than  Buddha  Sakyamuni  himself, 
yoga  is  a  spiritual  system  emphasizing  rigorous  physical  and  mental  discipline  that  is 
practiced  in  order  to-attain  knowledge  of  the  st\i(atma)  and  to  achieve  union  (yoga) 
of  the  self  with  Universal  Consciousness.  Buddhism,  however,  stresses  that  the  idea 
of  the  self  itself  is  a  false  notion,  to  obliterate  which  yoga  is  necessary.  Just  as  the 

36 


Hindu  yogi  believes  his  body  to  be  a  microcosm  of  the  universe,  the  Buddhist 
regards  his  body  to  be  a  mandala,  a  microcosmic  diagram  of  the  macrocosm.  The 
word  mandala  means  that  which  contains  {la  being  container)  the  manda  or  the 
essence,  which  of  course  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  other  Vajrayana  idea  that 
every  individual  has  the  potentiality  of  Buddhahood  within  him.  The  body  is 
considered  to  have  three  vertical  channels  within  it,  the  central  being  the  vertebrae 
column,  called  the  meru-danda  in  Sanskrit.  The  mythical  Mount  Meru  is  the  axis 
mundi  in  Indian  cosmology,  and  danda  means  staff.  Hence,  by  calling  the  vertebrae 
the  meru- staff,  the  body  is  clearly  regarded  as  a  microcosm.  As  we  will  see  in  the 
next  section,  such  ideas  contributed  profoundly  to  the  formulation  of  Buddhist 
images. 

Buddhist  tantras  are  divided  into  four  categories:  kriya  (action),  carya  (per- 
formance and  praxis),  yoga,  and  anuttara  yoga  (that  which  is  beyond  yoga,  or  the 
highest  yoga).  Tsongkhapa  refers  to  these  as  the  four  doors  of  entry  to  the  Vajrayana 
and,  quoting  the  Vajrapanjara .  tells  us  who  should  follow  which  tantra.29  Thus,  the 
action  tantra  is  for  the  inferior;  performance  or  praxis  tantra  is  for  those  above  them; 
yoga  is  for  superior  persons;  and  the  highest  yoga  is  for  the  truly  enlightened.  Some 
tantras  use  the  more  graphic  and  picturesque  metaphor  of  the  sexual  act  to  describe 
the  four  states. 

The  four  aspects  of  laughing,  looking 
Holding  hands  and  the  two  embracing. 
Reside  as  the  four  tantras 
In  the  manner  of  insect 

Commenting  on  this  verse  from  the  Samputa  Tantra,  Tsongkhapa  wrote,  "The  sets  of 
tantras  are  also  called  tantras  of  looking  [Action],  laughing  [Performance],  holding 
hands  or  embracing  [Yoga],  and  union  of  the  two  [Highest  Yoga}."- 


'31 


It  is  at  the  first  two  stages  that  images  and  mandalas  are  needed  as  "sup- 
ports" for  the  practice  of  spiritual  discipline.  At  the  third  stage  all  external  acts  and 
symbols  are  suspended  altogether  and  the  adept  assimilates  and  realizes  the  truth 
through  internal  yoga  only.  Even  internal  yoga  is  not  necessary  in  the  final  stage  of 
the  pilgrim's  progress.  In  any  event,  what  is  clear  is  that  Vajrayana  is  a  very  prag- 
matic form  of  religion  in  which  everyone  has  an  opportunity  to  see  the  Clear  Light 
by  slowly  removing  the  fog  of  ignorance  in  four  distinct  stages.  It  is  also  during  the 
first  two  stages  that  one  needs  the  guru,  who  acts  as  guide  throughout  the  spiritual 
journey.  While  in  early  Buddhism  one  followed  the  path  alone,  in  Vajrayana  one 
cannot  do  so  without  a  guru. 

In  theory,  the  Tibetan  tradition  remained  extraordinarily  faithful  to 
the  religion  as  it  was  imported  from  India.  Indian  texts,  both  religious  and  non- 
religious,  were  assiduously  translated  and  copious  commentaries  were  compiled  and 
systematized  in  the  Tanjur  and  the  Kanjur.  A  glance  at  any  of  these  commentaries, 
such  as  those  by  Tsongkhapa  or  his  disciple  Khedubje  (1385— 1438),  will  demonstrate 
how  faithful  Tibetans  were  to  the  Indian  masters  and  commentators.  However,  it 
would  be  wrong  to  assume  that  they  did  not  add  to  or  modify  the  imported  tradi- 
tion according  to  their  own  perceptions  and  needs,  although  perhaps  they  did  less 
of  this  than  Buddhists  in  other  countries.  Among  Tibetan  Buddhism's  significant 
departures  from  Indian  traditions,  of  course,  was  the  overpowering  role  played  by 
the  monasteries  in  Tibetan  life.  As  we  have  also  noted,  the  concept  of  guru,  which 
originated  in  India  and  was  transplanted  into  Tibec,  became  influenced  by  the  sense  of 
hierarchy  that  is  fundamental  to  Tibetan  social  morphology,  and,  in  the  institution 
of  the  lama,  achieved  an  unprecedented  preeminence.  The  emphasis  on  lineage,  as 

37 


well  as  on  emanation  in  the  form  of  the  tulku,  is  likewise  characteristically  Tibetan, 
though  these  concepts  are  not  unknown  in  India. 

A  tulku  is  generally  regarded  as  a  "reincarnated  lama"  or  "a  living  Buddha." 
It  is  believed  that  when  an  enlightened  teacher  or  religious  personage  passes  away, 
he  is  reborn  in  another  body.  The  Dalai  Lama  is  perhaps  the  best-known  example 
of  a  tulku.  When  a  Dalai  Lama  dies,  a  special  search  is  conducted  to  find  his 
successor;  invariably,  he  is  a  young  boy  but  is  said  to  be  the  dead  Dalai  Lama's 
reincarnation.  Inasmuch  as  Buddhism  does  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  soul, 
there  is  an  inherent  contradiction  in  the  use  of  the  words  reincarnation  or  rebirth; 
that  is  why  the  expression  "emanation"  is  perhaps  more  suitable.32  In  any  event, 
because  of  the  particular  emphasis  given  to  the  concept  of  tulku.  especially  after 
the  sixteenth  century,  every  important  religious  figure  in  every  monastery  traced 
his  lineage  through  spiritual  forebears,  to  mahasiddhas,  and  ultimately  to  various 
divinities.  Thus,  the  Dalai  Lama  is  an  emanation  not  only  of  various  earlier  saints 
or  teachers  but  also  of  Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara. 

Very  little  is  known  of  the  religious  traditions  and  practices  of  pre-Bud- 
dhist  Tibet.  Some  have  survived  in  the  religion  known  as  Bon,  which  now  flourishes 
mostly  in  the  eastern  province  of  Kham  and  the  Dolpo  region  of  Nepal.  Bon  was 
systematized  only  after  Buddhism  became  an  established  religion  and  is  heavily 
colored  by  Buddhist  ideas.  Nevertheless,  one  can  sort  out  elements  in  Tibetan  Bud- 
dhism, both  in  practice  and  theory,  that  are  of  pre-Buddhist  origin.  Certainly  the 
very  elaborate  practices  of  the  Kagyupa  cult  of  Tara,  described  at  length  by  Beyer, 
has  many  ritualistic  features  that  are  unknown  in  India.33  And,  in  fact,  Indian  tra- 
dition claims  that  some  of  the  forms  and  rituals  of  Tara  were  introduced  from  Tibet. 
The  form  of  sonorous  chanting,  for  example,  and  the  use  of  a  certain  type  of  musi- 
cal instrument,  so  familiar  in  Tibetan  monasteries,  are  also  characteristically  Tibetan. 
The  distinctive  ritual  implement  known  as  the  phurpa  may  be  a  combination  of  the 
Indian  vajra  with  a  shaman's  peg.  There  are  many  other  aspects  of  the  Tibetan  ritual 
with  a  distinct  local  flavor  (see  Ritual  Objects).  If  nothing  else,  the  colorful  mon- 
astic habit,  including  the  variety  of  hats  that  distinguished  different  orders  and 
liturgical  functions,  is  clearly  of  local  origin.  Other  notable  differences  and  innova- 
tions are  apparent  in  the  iconography,  and  are  discussed  in  the  next  section. 


38 


i 


\  A' 


M 


w 


*r  ." 


K~0 


■ 


w 


UK 


a 


H 


*V 


w*8BESk* 


N< 


tE 


■'•• 


JlfsSia 


HH 


■.-•'■•...■:'; 


!  • , .   » 


Images  and  Symbols 


May  the  commands  of  the  guru,  the  vajra  speech 
Remain  in  your  heart  without  being  forgotten . 
May  the  blessings  of  the  yidams  and  dakinis 
Remain  in  the  root  of  your  life. 
May  the  support  of  the  dharmapalas  and  protectors 
Guard  you  inseparably . 

Milarepa34 


The  Tibetan  Buddhist  pantheon  is  infinitely  varied  and  complex.  In  addition 
to  the  myriad  deities  imported  from  India,  countless  other  local  creations  have 
swelled  the  pantheon  to  a  bewildering  mass  that  defies  any  attempt  at  classification. 
The  Vajrayana  deities  from  India  are  usually  divided  into  five  basic  families,  each 
headed  by  a  tathagata  (a  synonym  for  a  Buddha).  These  five  tathagatas — Amitabha, 
Akshobhya,  Ratnasambhava,  Amoghasiddhi,  and  Vairocana — symbolize  the  four  car- 
dinal directions  plus  the  center,  and  are  emanations  of  the  supreme  Buddha  essence. 
Most  Vajrayana  deities  belong  to  these  five  families,  a  fact  often  indicated  by  the  plac- 
ing of  the  titular  head  of  the  family  on  the  crown  or  headdress  of  a  lesser  divinity. 
Thus,  Amitabha  will  be  shown  on  the  head  of  Avalokitesvara  (S13),  thereby  demon- 
strating the  lineage.  Each  of  the  five  tathagatas  is  portrayed  exactly  like  Sakyamuni 
but  includes  his  own  distinguishing  emblems.  Both  historical  and  transcendental 
Buddhas  are  generally  represented  as  idealized,  but  essentially  human,  monks  with 
supranormal  characteristics,  such  as  a  cranial  bump,  elongated  earlobes,  or  an 
auspicious  urna  (dot)  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead.  The  deities  belonging  to  these 
families,  however,  have  multiple  limbs  and  heads  and  may  appear  either  as  male 
or  female,  and  benign  or  angry. 

Individual  deities  are  identified  in  this  catalogue's  entries,  but  it  must  be 
remembered  that  the  interrelationships  among  them  are  extremely  complex.  In  a  sense 
they  may  all  be  identified  with  one  another  and  share  each  others'  attributes  and  have 
the  same  functions,  since  they  are  all  part  of  the  Buddha  essence.  Firstly,  all  divinities 
and  Buddhas  symbolize  the  cosmic  principle  or  consciousness  and  the  addition  of 
multiple  limbs  to  their  human-form  images  signifies  their  universality.  The  heads  and 
arms  are  multiplied  not  because  the  deities  need  them  to  look  on  all  sides  or  destroy 
all  demons  at  once — they  are,  after  all,  omniscient  and  omnipotent — but  because 
such  multiplication  was  a  convenient  conceptual  formula  for  materializing  the  per- 
vasiveness of  the  deity.  This  was  an  ancient  tradition  in  India,  where  it  was  common 
to  both  Hinduism  and  Buddhism.35 

Yoga  is  the  second  principle  playing  an  important  role  in  both  the  Buddhist 
and  Hindu  iconographies.  It  is  preeminent  in  the  iconographic  tradition  as  well  as  in 
the  religious  traditions.  The  posture  of  meditation  which  is  the  most  common  attri- 
bute of  all  divinities,  monks,  arhats,  and  mahasiddhas  is  derived  from  yoga.  Many  of 
the  deities  with  matted  hair  are  modeled  after  yogis,  although  they  may  also  be  be- 
jeweled  and  diademed.  This  may  seem  contradictory,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that 
bodhisattvas  are  not  attached  to  the  phenomenal  world  and  that  ornaments  merely 
symbolize  their  universal  sovereignty,  which  is  spiritual,  not  mundane.  (Christianity 
is  similar  in  that  it,  too,  emphasizes  the  spiritual  kingship  of  Christ,  and  in  that  the 
Pope  is  often  referred  to  as  the  Prince  of  the  Church.)  In  tantric  Buddhism,  as 
Tsongkhapa  pointed  out,  the  deities  of  "the  vajra  element  are  explained  as  having 

41 


features  that  accord  with  kings  and  their  retinue,"36  features  that  are  necessary  for 
trainees  of  Yogatantra.  The  mudra,  or  gestures,  that  the  figures  make  with  their 
hands  also  derive  from  yogic  ritual,  as  well  as  from  the  dancer's  repertoire.  The  bulg- 
ing and  staring  eyes,  often  given  to  saints  and  monks  (S31,  S34),  symbolize  the  fervor 
or  energy  intrinsic  to  the  yogi. 

All  Buddhist  deities  are  symbols  either  of  insight  or  of  compassion  which 
together  lead  to  bodhicitta  and  are,  therefore,  like  the  proton  and  neutron  that  consti- 
tute an  atom.  Thus,  the  goddess  Tara,  as  a  manifestation  of  Prajnaparamita,  embodies 
prajna,  or  insight,  and  at  the  same  time  is  the  savior  who  protects  her  devotees  from 
all  natural  and  supernatural  perils.  Similarly,  Vajrabhairava  (P12,  S28)  —  the  terrify- 
ing emanation  of  Manjusri,  the  embodiment  of  insight — is  really  a  symbol  of  com- 
passion, no  matter  how  awesome  and  hair-raising  his  external  form.  Since  he  is  the 
protector  of  the  faithful,  how  can  he  not  be  compassionate?  It  must  be  emphasized 
that  although  these  terrifying  deities  of  Buddhism  may  appear  demonic,  they  are  not 
"demons"  in  the  Western  sense.  Nor  are  they  personifications  of  evil  or  demonic 
forces.  Rather,  their  fierce  forms  symbolize  the  violence  that  is  a  fundamental  reality 
of  the  cosmos  and  the  cosmic  process  in  the  universe  in  general,  and  of  the  human 
mind  in  particular.  The  purpose  of  all  gods  is  to  destroy  the  passions  of  the  mind  and 
to  eradicate  the  supreme  form  of  ignorance  inherent  in  the  concept  of  ego,  a  function 
that  the  angry  deities  perform,  too.  They  also  symbolize  the  universal  force  or  power 
conceived  as  the  cosmic  devourer  in  both  Hindu  and  Buddhist  mythology.  Science 
now  states  that  the  cosmos  was  born  in  violence;  perhaps  the  ancient  visionaries 
realized  this  universal  truth  when  they  envisioned  the  divine  principle  in  terms  of  a 
mysterium  tremendum. 

Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  Buddha  essence  is  nonpolar,  Buddhist 
iconographers  use  sexual  polarity  to  symbolize  the  twin  concepts  of  insight  and  com- 
passion. All  goddesses  are  symbols  of  insight  and  the  gods  represent  compassion.  The 
union  of  compassion  and  insight  symbolizes  the  nonpolarized  state  of  bodhicitta ,  or 
the  mind  of  enlightenment,  which  is  represented  visually  by  showing  two  deities 
engaged  in  sexual  union.  Tibetans  characterize  such  images  as  yab-yum,  which  literally 
means  father-mother;  in  Sanskrit  the  expression  is  yuganaddha  (pair-united).  This 
sexual  metaphor  is  also  used  to  denote  the  highest  stage  of  yoga  in  which  there  is  no 
polarity,  no  discrimination,  and  in  which  the  truth  is  indivisible  as  is  the  vajra  itself. 
It  may  be  added  parenthetically  that  while  such  images,  whether  statues  or  paintings, 
are  today  much  sought  after  by  collectors  and  boldly  displayed  in  museums,  in  Tibet 
they  were  always  meant  to  be  seen  only  by  the  initiated.  The  rites  associated  with 
these  images  were  also  arcane  and  not  for  public  consumption. 

Although  such  representations  are  described  in  Indian  Vajrayana  texts,  only 
a  few  examples  have  come  to  light  in  India.  In  Japan,  for  example,  very  explicit 
sexual  imagery  is  avoided;  and  in  Java,  few  images  representing  the  deities  in  actual 
physical  embrace  have  been  found.  In  Indian  images  the  female  is  generally  shown 
seated  on  the  lap  of  the  god  rather  than  in  an  embrace.  When  embracing  deities  were 
portrayed  in  India,  the  image  was  placed  inside  a  metal  lotus  which  could  be  opened 
or  closed  as  necessary,  or  perhaps  was  painted  on  fabric  which  could  be  kept  rolled  up. 
Significantly,  in  neither  India  nor  Nepal  have  stone  images  of  any  antiquity  been 
found  that  depict  embracing  deities.  Thus,  although  the  symbol  originated  in  India, 
it  appears  to  have  been  employed  more  frequently  and  with  greater  expressiveness  in 
the  art  and  ritual  of  Tibetan  Buddhism. 

As  needs  arose,  local  Tibetan  deities  were  often  adopted  into  the  Buddhist 
pantheon,  and  legitimatized  either  by  making  them  manifestations  of  existing  divini- 
ties or  by  incorporating  them  into  one  of  the  five  divine  lineages.  All  native  gods 

42 


and  spirits  already  inhabiting  the  local  mountains,  the  forests,  the  lakes  and  rivers, 
the  sky,  and  the  underworld  were  adopted  into  the  pantheon  and  made  protectors  of 
the  Buddhist  religion.  Thus,  while  Mahakala  was  imported  from  India,  many  of  his 
Tibetan  manifestations  are  completely  local  and  totally  unknown  in  India.  Similarly, 
his  consort  Lhamo  (P10),  although  conceptually  related  to  the  Hindu  goddess  Kali/ 
Camunda,  was  probably  a  powerful  indigenous  goddess.  Pehar  is  another  example 
of  a  native  (or  perhaps  a  Mongolian)  deity  who  was  admitted  into  the  Buddhist 
pantheon. 

Other  deities  were  intellectual  creations,  the  most  prominent  examples  be- 
ing Guhyasamaja,  Prajnaparamita,  Hevajra,  Kalacakra,  and  the  Dharani  goddesses. 
The  first  four  share  their  names  with  texts  that  are  of  fundamental  importance  to 
Vajrayana  Buddhism.  The  texts  are  themselves  sacred,  for  they  symbolize  the  "speech" 
of  the  Buddha  just  as  the  images  symbolize  the  "body."  Moreover,  the  seeds  of  such 
deification  are  contained  in  the  texts  themselves.  Thus,  although  the  Prajnaparamita 
is  essentially  a  philosophical  work,  the  abstract  concept  otprajna,  or  insight,  is 
frequently  characterized  in  the  opus  as  "the  mother  of  all  the  Buddhas."  Inevitably, 
therefore,  Prajnaparamita  became  a  goddess  and  the  Buddhist  magna  mater  with 
whom  all  other  goddesses,  whether  created  intellectually  or  adopted  locally,  were 
promptly  homologized.  Similarly,  a  dharani,  consisting  of  a  mantra  and  a  charm,  was 
originally  simply  recited;  but  here,  too,  the  iconic  propensity  of  the  Indians  and 
Tibetans  prevailed,  and  the  charm  became  a  deity. 

Among  the  most  popular  figures  represented  in  Tibetan  art  are  the  protec- 
tive deities.  How  important  the  concept  of  protection  was  is  made  clear  by  Tsong- 
khapa's  explanation  of  the  word  mantra: 

Minds  arising  dependent 
On  a  sense  and  an  object 
Are  said  to  be  man, 
Tra  means  protection.3^ 

Thus,  mantra  is  that  which  protects  the  mind,  and  the  basic  function  of  all  deities  in 
Tibet  is  to  provide  a  protection  from  demons  that  are  both  internal  and  external.  Even 
religion  itself  is  in  need  of  protection,  and  so  there  are  gods  (chbkyong)  who  protect  the 
religion,  while  there  are  others  (yidam)  who  protect  the  individual.  The  chbkyong 
(dharmapala  in  Sanskrit)  are  numerous,  but  eight  of  them  are  considered  the  most 
important,  including  Mahakala,  Lhamo,  and  Yama,  the  three  who  are  prominently 
represented  in  the  Museum's  collection.  Although  some  of  them,  especially  Mahakala, 
were  protectors  of  religion  in  India  as  well,  this  specific  group  of  eight  seems  to  be 
peculiarly  Tibetan,  as  is  evident  from  the  inclusion  of  Lhamo  and  Begtse,  who  are  not 
of  Indian  origin.  Mahakala  is  unquestionably  the  most  important  dharmapala;  every 
Tibetan  monastery,  no  matter  what  the  order,  has  a  shrine  devoted  to  this  deity. 
Indeed,  his  preeminence  may  also  be  gauged  by  the  fact  that  he  is  regarded  as  the 
protector  of  the  tent. 

The  religion  was  in  constant  need  of  protection,  which  is  why  the  great  tan- 
trie  master  Padmasambhava  was  imported  from  India  to  defeat  the  local  deities  and 
spirits.  Using  his  superior  magic,  he  changed  them  into  eternal  protectors  of  religion 
in  Tibet.  This  process  is  very  old  in  the  history  of  Buddhism,  and  there  is  even  a  well- 
known  story  of  how  the  Buddha  himself  converted  the  child-devouring  ogress  Hariti 
into  the  protectress  of  both  children  and  the  monastery.  Rinchen  Sangpo,  too,  had  to 
convert  the  four  Dzalamati  sisters,  who  were  water  sprites  (sman)  in  his  own  village, 
and  appoint  them  guardians  of  various  temples  before  he  could  build  his  own  shrine.3* 
Thus,  even  in  the  eleventh  century  the  old  native  spirits  and  divinities  were  retain- 
ing their  power  and  influence. 

41 


P5 


The  yidam  (ishtadevata  in  Sanskrit)  is  a  tutelary  deity  and  may  be  regarded  as 
a  kind  of  guardian  angel.  Each  individual,  family,  and  monastery  has  a  yidam.  For 
instance,  Atisa's  yidam  was  the  goddess  Tara,  who  constantly  appeared  to  him  in 
dreams  and  visions  and  gave  him  guidance.  It  was  Tara  who  persuaded  him  in  a  vision 
to  accept  the  invitation  to  visit  Tibet.  The  fierce  god  Vajrabhairava  (S28)  is  the  yidam 
of  the  Gelukpas,  and  Hevajra  serves  that  function  for  the  Sakyapas.  Yidams  are  divine 
guides  who  help  the  adept  to  find  the  way  and  also  to  reach  the  goal,  a  function  that 
is  performed  on  earth  by  the  aspirant's  mortal  guru  or  lama.  An  individual's  yidam  is 
usually  determined  by  his  lama  and  given  to  him  at  the  time  of  initiation.  For  the 
rest  of  his  life  the  individual  often  carries  an  image  of  his  yidam  in  agau  (a  portable 
shrine)  (R15)  or  in  a  thanka. 

Dakinis.  a  class  of  demigoddesses  who  play  an  important  role  in  Buddhist 
iconography  and  mythology,  are  the  female  versions  of  the  male  dakas.  In  Tibetan, 
the  word  daka  (dpa  bo)  means  hero  or  wise  man  and  dakini  is  the  female  counterpart.39 
The  Tibetan  expression  for  dakini  (mkh'a  'gro  ma)  literally  means  "sky-walking 
woman"  and  hence  the  common  belief  that  a  dakini  can  fly.  The  expression  is  also 
used,  however,  as  a  synonym  for  prajna;  therefore,  as  the  embodiment  of  wisdom, 
every  goddess  may  be  regarded  as  a  dakini.  Both  dakas  and  dakinis  occur  frequently  in 
Tibetan  literature,  though  the  latter  predominate.  In  the  lives  of  the  mahasiddhas, 
dakinis  play  a  very  important  role,  and  both  mortal  and  celestial  varieties  are  encoun- 
tered. They  usually  act  as  spiritual  guides  to  the  mahasiddhas  and  in  at  least  one 
thanka  in  the  collection  (P28)  a  dakini  plays  this  role.  There  is  also  a  "realm  of  the 
dakas"  where  all  the  mahasiddhas  go  at  the  end  of  their  lives,  but  nothing  is  known 
about  this  paradise.  The  expression  dakini  is  further  used  to  designate  the  female 
partner  in  the  tantric  initiation,  and  thus  she  can  be  both  human  and  superhuman. 

Perhaps  the  most  admired  and  discussed  symbol  of  Tibetan  religion  and  art 
is  the  mandala  (P5),  a  word  which,  like  guru  and  yoga,  has  become  part  of  the 
English  language.  Eminent  psychologists,  Carl  Jung  perhaps  most  conspicuously, 
have  written  extensively  on  the  subject,  as  have  such  illustrious  Tibetologists  as 
Giuseppe  Tucci.  However,  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  few  brief  comments  here,  as  the 
collection  contains  several  important  and  unusual  mandalas. 

A  mandala  serves  various  functions  and  has  several  meanings.  The  word  is 
derived,  as  we  have  already  mentioned,  from  manda,  which  means  essence,  to  which 
the  suffix  la,  meaning  container,  has  been  added.  Thus,  one  obvious  connotation  of 
mandala  is  that  it  is  a  container  of  essence,  and  in  that  sense  it  is  like  a  chbten.  also  a 
container  of  religious  essence  (dharmadhatu).  As  an  image,  a  mandala  may  symbolize 
both  the  mind  and  the  body  of  the  Buddha.  When  the  mandala  is  devoid  of  images 
and  is  filled  with  a  mantra,  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  third  characteristic 
of  the  Buddha — speech.  It  is,  therefore,  an  all-inclusive  symbol.  While  the  mandala 
is  primarily  a  support  for  meditation  in  Vajrayana  praxis,  it  is  also  considered  a  source 
for  more  mundane  benefits  as  well.  For  example,  in  Rinchen  Sangpo's  biography  we 
read  that  the  great  translator  had  seven  Amitayus  mandalas  painted  "in  order  to  avert 
an  illness  of  his  mother  and  to  prolong  her  years."40  This  act  extended  his  mother's  life 
by  eighteen  years. 

The  mandala  has  been  variously  characterized  as  a  cosmogram,  as  a  micro- 
cosmic  symbol  of  the  universe  and  of  the  collective  consciousness,  and  as  an  "inner 
forum"  for  the  psychic  drama  of  man's  reintegration  with  the  cosmos.  All  such  sym- 
bolic interpretations  are  valid;  the  mandala  remains  one  of  the  most  graphic  symbols 
ever  invented  to  denote  the  order  and  harmony  of  an  enlightened  mind.  Since  the 
terms  of  reference  for  all  concepts  and  symbols  are  essentially  those  of  the  world  man 
lives  in,  the  mandala  is  conceived  pictorially  as  a  palace.  As  a  Buddhist  text  states: 


44 


One  should  contemplate  as  below,  a  spot  of  earth  made  of  diamond;  across,  a 
diamond  enclosure;  above,  a  tent  (or  a  canopy);  in  the  middle,  a  dreadful  burning 
ground.  ...  In  the  midst  of  that,  one  sees  a  palace  with  a  single  courtyard  and 
made  entirely  of  jewels  —  with  four  corners,  four  gates,  decorated  with  four 
arches,  having  four  altars,  and  radiant  with  nets  and  so  on.  .  .  .4I 

The  text  further  states  that  "the  palace  is  knowledge  (jnana)"  as  well  as  "an  edifice  of 
consciousness."42 

The  burning  ground  or  the  flames  that  surround  the  perimeter  of  a  mandala 
represent  the  phenomenal  world,  or  samsara,  which  the  aspirant  leaves  as  he  enters  the 
palace  and  moves  toward  the  center  (the  axis  mundi,  the  top  of  the  mountain,  or  the 
goal)  where  the  reintegration  takes  place.  Once  again,  however,  such  external  sup- 
ports are  for  the  elementary  stage  of  praxis;  for  the  enlightened,  the  body  itself  is  the 
sublime  mandala  and  the  drama  of  integration  is  enacted  in  the  mind. 

Even  though  one  mandala  may  ultimately  look  different  from  another,  the 
basic  configuration  consists  of  various  combinations  of  the  square  and  the  circle.  Both 
peaceful  and  angry  deities  may  reside  in  a  mandala.  In  mandalas  of  angry  deities  the 
outer  circle,  which  symbolizes  the  phenomenal  world,  is  divided  into  eight  segments, 
each  of  which  represents  a  cemetery.  In  esoteric  Buddhist  cosmology  the  phenomenal 
world  is  symbolized  by  eight  cemeteries.  A  stock  iconographic  formula  was  used  to 
depict  these  cemeteries.  Invariably  each  consists  of  a  presiding  guardian  deity  and  his 
spouse,  a  mahasiddha,  corpses,  skeletons  and  severed  limbs,  scavenging  animals, 
trees,  and  a  stupa,  among  other  symbols.  It  may  further  be  pointed  out  that  these 
eight  cemeteries  also  surround  many  of  the  important  angry  Vajrayana  deities,  such  as 
Mahakala  (Pll),  Vajrabhairava  (P12),  and  others,  even  when  they  are  not  represented 
in  mandalas. 

Divinities  and  nature  spirits,  demons  and  mythological  creatures  are  not  the 
only  figures  populating  the  Tibetan  pantheon.  In  addition  to  all  such  creations  of  the 
mind,  the  iconography  is  further  enriched  by  the  inclusion  of  three  other  categories  of 
apotheosized  mortals:  the  arhats,  the  mahasiddhas,  and  the  lamas.  In  this  respect,  the 
Tibetan  Buddhist  pantheon  is  even  more  populous  than  those  of  India  and  Nepal. 

The  word  arhat  literally  means  worthy,  and  is  a  common  designation  in 
early  Buddhist  literature  for  all  venerable  persons,  as  well  as  being  applied  to  those 
who  have  attained  nirvana.  A  group  of  such  enlightened  beings  was  singled  out  and 
sent  back  to  earth  by  the  Buddha  to  tide  things  over,  so  to  speak,  until  the  appearance 
of  the  future  Buddha,  Maitreya.  Thus,  the  arhat  became  a  sort  of  bodhisattva  who 
helped  others  reach  their  goal,  and  those  chosen  to  be  arhats  were  sent  all  over  the 
world  to  show  the  way  to  the  less  fortunate.  In  the  beginning  there  were  very  likely 
only  four  arhats,  symbolizing  the  four  directions;  later  the  number  was  increased  to 
sixteen.43  This  happened  by  the  seventh  century,  when  the  Chinese  pilgrim  Xuanzang 
(Hsuan-tsang)  transported  the  concept  of  sixteen  arhats  from  India  to  China.  The  cult 
of  arhats,  however,  does  not  appear  to  have  been  popular  in  India.  Not  a  single  Indian 
portrayal  of  a  specific  arhat  has  yet  come  to  light;  for  that  matter,  the  cult  is  unknown 
in  Sri  Lanka  and  in  Buddhist  countries  of  Southeast  Asia.  It  was,  however,  extremely 
popular  in  both  Central  Asia  and  China  and  is  an  important  component  of  Buddhism 
in  Japan.  By  the  Song  period,  the  Chinese  had  developed  one  concept  of  eighteen 
arhats  (known  as  lohan  in  China  and  Japan)  and  another,  of  five  hundred,  as  well. 
Obviously  the  idea  of  these  mortal  teachers  appealed  strongly  to  the  pragmatic  and 
humanistic  Chinese. 


45 


Tibetan  literature  makes  reference  to  three  distinct  traditions  of  arhats:  the 
Indian,  Central  Asian,  and  Chinese.  However,  Tibetans  do  not  seem  to  have  been  in- 
fluenced by  the  idea  of  five  hundred  lohans;  generally  in  Tibetan  art,  groups  of  sixteen, 
seventeen,  or  eighteen  arhats  are  portrayed.  It  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  two  addi- 
tional members  (beyond  the  sixteen)  of  the  Tibetan  group  have  different  names  than 
the  Chinese,  though  the  other  sixteen  are  the  same.  According  to  Tucci,  of  the  two 
additions,  Hva  Shang  may  be  the  Chinese  monk  who  was  defeated  at  the  Samye 
debate  in  the  eighth  century.  (In  Chinese  hoshang  means  teacher. )  Later  he  was  repre- 
sented as  the  potbellied,  laughing  Buddha  of  Ming  China.  Regarding  the  eighteenth 
arhat,  who  is  called  Dharmatala  in  Tibetan,  Tucci  may  be  correct  in  asserting  that  he 
was  introduced  from  Central  Asia.  No  one,  however,  has  given  a  satisfactory  explana- 
tion of  why  the  number  became  eighteen.  In  fact,  numbers  sixteen  and  seventeen 
have  not  been  explained  cogently,  either. 

As  Tucci  has  suggested,  the  original  number  four  probably  symbolized  the 
four  directions;  and,  sixteen  being  a  multiple  of  four,  spatial  significance  may  be 
implied  as  well.  Space,  however,  is  usually  indicated  by  eight  or  by  ten,  with  the  addi- 
tion of  the  zenith  and  the  nadir.  It  would  seem  more  reasonable  therefore  to  assume 
that  the  number  sixteen  is  connected  with  the  idea  of  the  sixteen-spoked  wheel.  Since 
the  arhats  were  concerned  principally  with  preaching  rather  than  succouring,  they 
turned  the  Wheel  of  Law,  which  symbolizes  the  Buddha's  first  sermon.  The  number 
was  extended  by  one,  perhaps,  to  include  the  nave  which  symbolizes  the  center  of  the 
wheel  as  well  as  of  the  universe.  The  number  eighteen  may  represent  something  quite 
different.  It  may  signify  the  concept  of  the  eighteen  special  dharmas,  or  duties,  of  a 
Buddha  as  enumerated  in  the  Mahayana  Buddhist  text  Prajnaparamita-satasahasrika.44 
Moreover,  the  Pratimoksha  (The  Doctrine  of  Salvation)  is  divided  into  eighteen  schools 
and  it  is  fitting  therefore  that  the  arhats  who  are  temporarily  in  charge  of  salvation 
should  be  eighteen  in  number. 

No  matter  where  it  originated — and  China,  including  Central  Asia,  is  the 
most  likely  source  —  the  cult  of  the  arhats  was  popular  in  Tibet.  Shrines  dedicated  to 
arhats  exist  in  most  monasteries  and,  whatever  their  function  or  symbolism,  they  too 
came  to  be  worshiped  by  Tibetans  for  health,  wealth,  and  welfare  (P46). 

The  cult  of  the  mahasiddhas,  unlike  that  of  the  arhats,  appears  to  be  almost 
exclusively  Tibetan.  The  word  maha  signifies  greatness  and  siddha  denotes  a  perfected 
being.  In  its  broader  implication,  a  mahasiddha  is  a  perfected  being,  while  in  the  nar- 
rower sense,  he  or  she  is  the  possessor  of  certain  occult  powers.  Both  Hindu  and  Bud- 
dhist tantras  assert  that  by  practicing  certain  rites,  a  person  can  gain  control  (siddhi) 
over  forces  of  nature  as  well  as  acquire  special  abilities,  such  as  the  ability  to  fly  or  to 
generate  a  storm.  For  instance,  Virupa  (S34)  is  said  to  have  stopped  the  movement 
of  the  sun  when  he  was  refused  a  drink;  Milarepa,  though  not  one  of  the  Indian 
mahasiddhas,  used  to  bring  down  hailstorms  at  will.  In  addition  to  possessing  such 
supernatural  powers,  however,  a  mahasiddha  is  also  one  who  has  seen  the  Clear  Light. 

The  Tibetan  tradition  recognizes  a  group  of  eighty-five  mahasiddhas;  all  of 
them  were  Indians.  Many  of  them  were  historical  figures,  and  with  the  exception  of 
three,  all  were  male.  They  came  from  all  walks  of  life:  some  were  royalty,  others 
brahmins,  and  still  others  professionals.  Many  came  from  among  the  "untouchable" 
classes.  Many  of  these  mahasiddhas  are  also  claimed  by  certain  Saiva  sects  as  their 
saints.  The  mahasiddhas  were  unconventional  teachers,  always  yogis,  and  mostly 
homeless  wandering  mystics  who  dispensed  with  ordinary  social  norms  and  believed 
in  transmitting  their  messages  orally  and  often  in  songs  and  verses.  Some  did  not 
believe  in  any  form  of  religious  ritual,  while  others  wrote  learned  treatises.  Naropa, 
another  mahasiddha,  was  a  historical  person  who  lived  in  the  tenth  or  eleventh  cen- 

/ 

46 


tury  and  taught  Marpa,  the  teacher  of  Milarepa.  Although  Milarepa  is  not  considered 
a  mahasiddha,  his  life,  which  is  recorded  in  detail,  is  perhaps  the  best  example  of  who 
or  what  a  mahasiddha  was.  Another  personality,  also  excluded  from  the  list,  but  who 
would  qualify  as  a  mahasiddha,  was  Dampa  Sangye;  his  expressive  portrait  in  the  col- 
lection (S31)  is  one  of  the  finest  representations  of  these  perfected  beings. 

♦ 
We  must  finally  include  a  few  words  about  the  lineages  of  monks  or  lamas,  a 
subject  that  has  frequently  been  mentioned  in  these  pages.  The  collection  contains 
several  paintings  and  sculptures  portraying  lamas  of  various  Tibetan  orders  and 
lineages,  although  images  of  the  Sakyapas  predominate.  But  for  inscriptions,  it  is 
impossible  to  identify  them,  and  the  representations  generally  follow  stereotyped 
formulas.  The  Gelukpa  lamas  are  distinguished  generally  by  their  yellow  hats,  while 
the  Karmapas  wear  black  hats  (P25).  All  other  orders  wear  red  hats,  although  the 
shapes  vary  according  to  function.  Some  of  the  monks  carry  attributes  of  their  per- 
sonal yidams,  but  these  are  of  little  help  in  determining  their  identity.  It  should  be 
mentioned,  however,  that  monks  of  one  order  may  be  included  in  representations  of 
another,  even  though  they  are  not  recognized  as  belonging  to  the  lineage. 

Although  beginning  in  the  thirteenth  century  the  monasteries  carried  on  a 
prolonged  struggle  for  political  hegemony,  it  must  be  stressed  that  in  spiritual  mat- 
ters the  lamas  were  generally  tolerant.  The  various  orders  may  be  compared  to  various 
airplanes:  it  was  of  little  consequence  whether  one  traveled  in  a  Boeing  747  or  a  DC 
10,  as  long  as  one  reached  the  same  goal.  Obviously  there  were  instances  of  individual 
jealousies.  On  one  occasion,  for  example,  an  envious  geshe  (doctor  of  divinity)  tried  to 
poison  Milarepa.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  Chinese  emperor  Yongle  suggested  to 
Karmapa  Dezhin  Shegpa  (P25)  that  he  would  like  to  send  cavalry  into  Tibet  in  order 
to  subjugate  the  different  sects  under  the  Karmapa,  the  latter  gently  replied: 

One  sect  cannot  bring  order  to  the  lives  of  all  types  of  people.  It  is  not  beneficial  to 
think  of  converting  all  sects  into  one.  Each  individual  sect  is  especially  constituted 
so  as  to  accomplish  a  particular  aspect  of  good  activity.45 

Likewise  each  deity  and  each  lama  was  seen  as  an  aspect  of  the  ultimate  reality.  The 
artists'  task,  expressing  that  reality  in  various  forms  and  media,  is  the  subject  of  the 
following  section. 


47 


The  Patron  and  the  Artist 


You  would  think  that  the  painters  have  by  mine  wizardry  con- 
jured up  living  forces  and  driven  them  into  their  work,  and 
that  these  could  float  out  of  the  walls,  force  their  way  into  your 
soul  and  take  possession  of  it  by  a  magic  spell. 

Giuseppe  Tucci 


Several  of  the  paintings  and  bronzes  in  the  Museum's  collection  have 
inscriptions  {see  Appendix)  which  provide  information  of  some  art  historical  interest. 
Usually  the  dedicatory  inscription  occurs  at  the  bottom  of  a  thanka  or  along  the 
base  of  a  bronze.  Some  thankas  have  inscriptions  on  the  back,  generally  consisting 
of  the  mantras  of  the  deity  and/or  the  stock  Buddhist  formula,  written  in  a  stylized 
Indian  script,  that  begins  with  the  expression  ye  dharma  and  means: 

Of  all  the  things  springing  from  a  cause 

The  cause  has  been  shown  by  him  "Thus -came" 

And  their  cessation  too 

The  Great  Pilgrim  has  deciphered. 

Whatever  the  specific  purpose  for  having  an  image  made,  each  commission  had  three 
broad  aims:  the  image  is  a  support  or  aid  for  meditation;  the  act  accrues  merit  for 
the  donor;  and  the  act  brings  merit  generally  to  all  sentient  beings.  Thus,  a  sentence 
such  as  "By  its  merit  may  all  creatures  attain  Buddhahood"  is  frequently  included 
in  the  inscription,  which  emphasizes  that  every  donor  is  a  potential  bodhisattva. 

Statues  and  paintings  were  commissioned  for  a  number  of  purposes.  The 
great  twelfth-century  thanka  (PI)  was  made  to  celebrate  the  life-attainment  cere- 
mony and  therefore  is  a  commemorative  image,  although  it  may  have  been  used  in 
the  ceremony  itself.  In  dedicating  the  early  mandala  (P5),  the  donor  hoped  that,  by 
seeing  it  as  a  support,  the  lama  would  attain  fulfillment.  The  lineage  thanka  which 
has  Sonam  Tsemo  as  its  central  figure  (P18)  appears  to  have  been  consecrated  as  a 
simple  act  of  reverence,  while  another  (P20)  was  specifically  commissioned  so  that 
the  donor  and  his  relatives  might  be  "purged  of  the  two  sins."  The  beautiful  bronze 
portrayal  of  Dampa  Sangye  (S31)  was  dedicated  to  his  memory  by  his  devout  fol- 
lowers. Finally,  the  magnificent  hanging  (P45)  given  in  1940  to  the  Norbulinga 
monastery  was  not  created  for  any  specific  purpose  except,  simply,  to  spread  the 
doctrine  and  to  help  all  creatures  attain  enlightenment.  As  is  also  evident  from  some 
inscriptions,  artworks  were  commissioned  both  individually  and  collectively.  The 
statue  of  Dampa  Sangye  and  the  Norbulinga  hanging  are  examples  of  collective 
efforts;  in  the  latter  instance,  the  inscription  states  not  only  how  the  money  was 
collected  from  all  the  monks  in  the  monastery  but  also  how  much  the  object  cost. 

Thus,  a  variety  of  motives  impelled  donors  to  dedicate  images.  Some  of 
the  dedications  were  made  for  such  mundane  purposes  as  good  health  and  prosperity. 
For  instance,  even  though  the  fine  embroidered  thanka  (P46)  does  not  possess  an 
inscription,  the  presence  of  the  bats  at  the  top  and  the  yakshas  bearing  gems,  as  the 
catalogue  entry  makes  clear,  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  wishes  of  the  donor.  Images 
of  the  Buddha  of  Healing  (P8)  were  commissioned  for  obvious  reasons.  Similarly, 

49 


it  may  be  assumed  that  most  representations  of  Amitayus  must  have  been  con- 
secrated by  those  who  performed  the  ceremonies  of  long  life.  It  may  likewise  be 
assumed,  as  catalogue  entry  P39  explains,  that  the  Newars  in  Nepal,  when  perform- 
ing the  Bhimaratha  rite  of  longevity,  commissioned  the  thanka  of  Ushnishavijaya. 
Some  thankas  (P26,  P28)  probably  had  didactic  functions  and  were  perhaps  dis- 
played during  narrations  of  the  biographies  of  the  personages  portrayed. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  most  of  the  artworks  were  commissioned  by 
monks  or  their  relatives.  Only  one  thanka  in  the  collection  seems  certainly  associ- 
ated with  royalty  (P17);  the  ruler  of  Ladakh  may  have  dedicated  this  thanka  for  his 
personal  use  or  for  use  by  a  monastery.  Since  it  too  is  a  representation  of  Amitayus, 
it  was  very  likely  used  during  the  life-attainment  ceremony  performed  by  the  king. 
In  addition  to  the  members  of  nobility  who  supported  art  in  the  monasteries,  monks 
from  wealthy  families  frequently  used  their  own  resources  to  commission  images 
and  to  undertake  major  restorations  (P20).  Monks  were  also  intimately  associated 
with  works  of  art  in  other  ways,  including  being  artists  themselves.  They  both 
selected  the  subject  of  the  image,  and  often  also  organized  the  iconographic  pro- 
gram down  to  the  last  detail.  The  enormous  complexity  of  the  iconography  could 
only  have  been  culled  from  books  on  liturgy.  Moreover,  the  ability  to  both  read  and 
memorize  the  texts  would  have  been  beyond  the  capacity  of  an  ordinary  lay  artist. 

There  is  documentary  evidence  to  prove  the  extensive  involvement  of 
lamas  in  both  the  building  of  monasteries  and  in  the  execution  of  works  of  art.  The 
most  classic  instance  is  the  lama  Buton  rinpoche,  whose  portrait  is  in  the  collection 
(M4).  He  was  responsible  for  extensive  building  and  renovation  at  the  Shalu  mon- 
astery, as  well  as  for  working  out  the  entire  iconographic  program  of  the  murals 
and  images  in  some  of  its  chapels.  Indeed,  his  biography  states  that  in  addition  to 
Shalu,  he  was  responsible  for  outlining  the  plan  of  the  temple  and  determining  the 
iconographic  principles  for  the  great  kumbum  (a  choten  with  chapels)  at  Gyantse, 
although  it  was  built  after  his  death.46  He  once  constructed  a  mandala  that  measured 
thirty-six  cubits  (forearm  lengths).  The  length  of  the  forearm  of  the  donor  was 
often  the  basic  unit  for  the  measurement  of  an  image,  both  in  India  and  in  Tibet. 
Another  rare  biographical  thanka  in  the  collection  (P20)  not  only  shows  the  Sakyapa 
lama  Kunga  Tashi  repairing  the  monastery  and  consecrating  it,  but  it  depicts  him 
inspecting  a  bronze  he  had  commissioned.  The  final  way  in  which  monks  were 
associated  with  an  image  was  in  the  ceremony  of  consecration,  an  elaborate  reli- 
gious ritual  that  could  only  be  performed  by  those  who  were  ordained.  One  of  the 
Museum's  thankas  (P21)  was  consecrated  by  the  abbot  of  the  well-known  Ngor 
monastery,  and  even  though  such  facts  are  not  recorded  in  every  instance,  it  can  be 
assumed  that  most  images  were  consecrated  or  blessed  by  lamas.  Sometimes  a  lama's 
handprints  were  added  to  the  back  of  the  thanka  to  increase  its  potency. 

Although  anonymity  was  the  rule,  the  names  of  many  artists  have  sur- 
vived in  texts  (as  in  the  chronicles  of  the  Fifth  Dalai  Lama),  on  the  walls  of  monas- 
teries, and  on  some  individual  thankas  or  bronzes.  However,  it  was  rare  for  an  artist 
to  sign  a  work,  and  only  one  inscription  in  this  collection  contains  the  name  of  an 
artist.  The  inscription  on  this  fourteenth-century  mandala  (P5)  states  that  it  was 
painted  by  a  group  of  craftsmen  headed  by  Gyalpo  Palseng.  He  was  very  likely  a  lay 
artist  and  the  master  of  an  atelier,  and  although  the  painting  is  rendered  in  a  strong 
Nepali  style,  his  name  indicates  that  he  was  a  Tibetan.  One  must  also  assume  that 
Buton  had  to  have  been  an  accomplished  artist,  as  was  the  seventeenth-century  poly- 
math Taranath.  Another  well-known  monk  who  was  deeply  interested  in  art  was 
Situ  Panchen  (1700-1774),  whose  autobiography,  like  the  chronicles  of  the  Fifth 
Dalai  Lama  and  the  history  of  Sumpa  Khenpo  (1702— 1775),  contains  fascinating  art 
historical  information.  Tucci  has  discussed  many  of  the  references  to  artists  that 

50 


occur  in  various  Tibetan  texts;  therefore,  in  the  present  text  only  the  information 
contained  in  the  biographies  of  the  famous  Karmapas,  several  of  whom  were 
accomplished  artists,  is  discussed.47 

The  great  Karma  Pakshi  (1206-1283)  was  probably  an  artist  himself, 
although  his  biography  does  not  say  so  explicitly.  Once,  after  a  visit  with  the  Mongol 
emperor  Kublai  Khan,  he  returned  to  the  Tshurphu  monastery,  the  principal  seat  of 
the  Karmapas,  and  decided  to  create  a  large  statue  of  Sakyamuni.  Fifty-five  feet  tall, 
the  cast-brass  statue  contained  relics  of  Sakyamuni  and  his  disciples.  Upon  com- 
pletion, it  appeared  to  tilt  to  one  side.  "Seeing  this,  Karma  Pakshi  entered  into  medi- 
tation, tilting  his  body  in  the  same  way.  As  he  straightened  up,  the  statue  righted 
itself."48  This  statue  subsequently  fell  into  disrepair  and  was  restored  by  Karmapa 
Chodrag  Gyatsho  (1454-1506);  in  referring  to  the  event,  his  biographer  said  that  it 
was  "fashioned"  by  Karma  Pakshi.  Whether  or  not  Karma  Pakshi  himself  was  the 
sculptor,  the  story  is  important  as  it  reveals  the  technical  skill  of  Tibetan  crafts- 
men; a  fifty-five  foot  brass  statue  is  not  easy  to  cast.  Thus,  it  seems  curious  that 
when  Kublai  Khan  requested  some  artists  from  the  Sakyapas,  the  latter  recruited 
them  from  Nepal  rather  than  from  Tibet.  Of  course,  the  Sakyapas  appear  to  have 
always  patronized  Newari  artists. 

Karmapa  Rolpe  Dorje  (1343-1383)  had  a  disciple,  the  princess  of  Minyak, 
who  once  dreamed  of  an  enormous  thanka  of  Sakyamuni  which  was  eleven  arm 
spans  wide.  On  learning  of  this  dream  the  Karmapa  drew  the  plan  of  the  thanka  on 
the  ground  by  riding  his  horse  in  an  appropriate  pattern. 

Then  the  image  was  transferred  to  a  huge  piece  of  silk.  In  all  it  took  five  hun- 
dred people  thirteen  months  to  complete  the  thangka.  which  also  represented 
Manjusri  and  Maitreya  on  either  side  of  Sakyamuni.  On  completion  the  thangka 
was  blessed  by  Rolpe  Dorje.  During  the  ceremony  auspicious  events  occurred. 
Afterwards  Princess  Prenyodhari  gave  the  thangka  to  her  guru.49 

Virtually  the  entire  process  of  a  monk's  involvement  with  a  work  of  art  is  encapsulated 
in  this  story,  which,  of  course,  is  somewhat  embroidered  by  the  pious  biographer. 

One  artist  whose  greatness  is  certain  was  the  celebrated  Karmapa  Mikyo 
Dorje  (1507— 1554).  As  his  biography  states,  "The  eighth  Karmapa  also  ventured 
into  the  fields  of  poetry,  painting  and  sculpture,  where  he  met  with  considerable 
success."50  What  is  even  more  interesting  is  that  while  visiting  the  region  of  Mar 
Kham,  he  carved  a  self-portrait  out  of  stone,  not  a  popular  medium  for  sculpture  in 
Tibet.  In  any  event,  when  the  sculpture  was  ready,  so  the  story  goes,  the  Karmapa 
asked  the  statue,  "Are  you  a  good  likeness  of  me?"  "Yes,  I  am,"  replied  the  statue. 
This  statue  is  reputed  to  be  the  one  preserved  in  the  Rumtek  monastery  in  Sikkim. 
The  biography  further  states  that  Mikyo  Dorje  also  "inspired  the  Karma  gadri 
movement  in  art  through  his  work  in  this  field."51 

The  names  of  many  lay  artists  are  preserved  in  the  Tibetan  tradition  and 
the  presence  of  artists  from  India,  Nepal,  Central  Asia  (specifically  Khotan),  and 
China  in  the  tradition  is  frequent.  Generally,  as  noted,  the  artist  remained  anony- 
mous. Two  reasons  may  be  given  to  explain  why  most  Tibetan  artists,  like  their  coun- 
terparts in  India  or  in  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages,  did  not  sign  their  works.  First, 
every  act  of  creation  was  considered  to  be  divine;  the  artist  was  simply  serving  as  a 
mortal  instrument,  and  so  his  own  identity  was  inconsequential.52  Also,  attaching 
one's  name  to  a  work  was  considered  an  egotistical  act,  and  it  was  the  duty  of  the 
artist,  like  all  pious  Buddhists,  to  destroy  the  ego.  Thus,  except  for  the  Newari  art- 
ists who  worked  in  Tibet,  virtually  nothing  is  known  about  Tibetan  artists  or  their 

51 


social  background.  Whether  the  profession  was  hereditary,  which  it  may  well  have 
been,  is  also  not  known.  What  is  known,  from  the  chronicles  of  the  Fifth  Dalai 
Lama,  is  that  artists  were  organized  into  guilds;  so  the  inscription  on  the  mandala 
P5  may  imply  either  a  guild  or  a  workshop.  Since  artists  were  the  creators  of  objects 
that  illuminated  the  way  that  led  to  the  goal,  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  them 
mentioned,  and  also  praised,  in  a  number  of  Tibetan  chronicles. 

The  evidence  for  the  presence  of  Kashmiri  artists  in  Tibet,  especially  in 
the  eleventh  century  at  the  height  of  Rinchen  Sangpo's  career,  has  already  been  dis- 
cussed. Although  no  artists  are  known  who  came  to  Tibet  from  eastern  India,  it  is 
interesting  to  note  that  artists  from  Nalanda  may  have  visited  China.  Thus,  their 
presence  in  Tibet  is  very  probable.  There  is  much  evidence  indicating  that  Chinese 
artists  were  often  invited  to  work  in  Tibetan  monasteries.  The  eastern  provinces  of 
Tibet  have  always  been  readily  susceptible  to  Chinese  influence,  but  even  in  the  cen- 
tral region  the  presence  of  Chinese  artists  is  attested  to  by  artistic  evidence  as  well 
as  by  literary  tradition.  Apart  from  Buton  rinpoche,  who  brought  artists  from  China, 
the  Tshalpa  abbot  Gade  also  built  a  temple  with  the  help  of  Chinese  craftsmen.53 

Of  all  foreign  artists  working  in  Tibet,  the  most  sought  after  were  the 
Newars,  who  were  among  the  most  ancient  settlers  in  the  Kathmandu  Valley  in 
Nepal.  Newari  artists  were  especially  popular  with  the  Sakyapas  in  southern  Tibet, 
and  inscriptions  in  the  Ngor  monastery  relate  how  the  founder  imported  artists 
from  Nepal  to  paint  the  murals.54  Indeed,  the  fifteenth-century  Ngor  style  may  well 
be  regarded  as  simply  an  extension  of  the  Nepalese  tradition  of  painting.  A  class  of 
Newars,  resulting  from  intermarriage  between  Newars  and  Tibetans,  was  known  as 
the  Uray;  this  group  provided  many  of  the  artists  in  the  country,  especially  in  such 
metropolitan  centers  as  Lhasa,  Shigatse,  and  Gyantse.  The  Uray  Newar  was  "often 
honoured  and  courted  by  great  lamas  as  much  for  his  talents  as  a  craftsman  as  for 
his  sometimes  not  inconsiderable  wealth."55  The  observation  that  "the  influence  of 
Newar  painters  in  Tibet  from  the  mid-i6th  century  onwards  seems  to  have  been 
slight"  is,  however,  unacceptable,  as  is  evident  from  a  look  at  the  seventeenth- 
century  sketchbook  made  by  a  Newar  in  Lhasa  (fig.  i,  p.  61).  In  any  event,  the  Newars 
continued  to  contribute  to  Tibetan  metalwork  as  late  as  the  nineteenth  century.  This 
is  made  clear  from  the  following  enthusiastic  comments  by  Father  Hue,  a  visiting 
Christian  missionary: 

The  Peboims  [Newars]  are  the  only  workers  in  metals  in  Lha-sa.  .  .You  find, 
among  the  Peboims,  artists  very  distinguished  in  metallurgy.  They  manufacture 
all  sorts  of  vases  in  gold  and  silver  for  the  use  of  lamaseries  and  jewelry  of  every 
description  that  certainly  would  reflect  no  discredit  on  European  artists.  It  is 
they  who  construct  for  the  Buddhist  temples  those  fine  roofs  of  gilt  plates  which 
resist  all  the  inclemencies  of  the  seasons  and  always  retain  a  marvelous  freshness 
and  glitter.  They  are  so  skillful  at  this  class  of  work  that  they  are  sent  to  the  very 
interior  of  Tartary  to  decorate  the  great  lamaseries.56 

Although  knowledge  of  the  artists  themselves  is  limited,  it  is  known  that 
they  moved  about  a  good  deal.  For  instance,  Rinchen  Sangpo  was  responsible  for 
building  several  monasteries  and  temples  in  Guge,  Purang,  Ladakh,  and  Zanskar. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  his  Kashmiri  painters  went  with  him  from  one  place  to 
another,  for  the  murals  in  the  various  monasteries  reflect  the  same  Kashmiri  style. 
Similarly,  artists  in  the  retinue  of  Atisa  must  have  moved  with  him  from  western  to 
central  Tibet,  and  the  same  style,  though  with  local  variations,  is  clearly  percep- 
tible in  thankas  (P1-P3)  and  murals  in  an  extensive  area  of  Tibet.  The  style  is  also 
evident  at  Dunhuang  and  Kharakhoto,  in  murals  produced  at  a  time  when  these 

regions  of  Chinese  Turkestan  were  under  the  domination  of  the  Xixia  kingdom. 

/ 

52 


More  specifically,  fourteenth-century  artists  who  are  mentioned  on  the  walls  of  the 
Narthang  monastery  are  also  included  in  the  lists  of  those  responsible  for  the  Shalu 
and  Gyantse  murals.  A  comparison  of  the  murals  in  these  two  monuments  leaves 
no  doubt  that  Buton's  iconographic  scheme  is  not  the  only  element  they  have  in 
common;  their  styles  are  remarkably  similar  as  well. 

The  mobility  of  the  objects  themselves  must  also  be  kept  in  mind. 
Thankas,  bronzes,  tsha  tsba,  and  illuminated  manuscripts  are  all  easily  portable. 
Thus,  the  discovery  of  an  object  in  a  particular  monastery  need  not  indicate  that  it 
originated  there.  A  glance  at  the  pictures  of  monastic  altars  published  by  Tucci  will 
convince  the  most  determined  skeptic  of  this.57  Indian  bronzes  in  Tibetan  monas- 
teries even  include  Jain  figures,  while  Kashmiri-style  bronzes  and  palm  leaf  manu- 
scripts are  among  the  precious  possessions  of  most  ancient  Tibetan  monasteries. 
Rinchen  Sangpo  himself  commissioned  a  bronze  in  Kashmir  in  the  likeness  of  his 
father  and,  because  it  was  large,  had  to  buy  a  cart  to  convey  it  to  his  homeland.58 
Although  few  Chinese  paintings  have  actually  been  found  in  Tibet,  the  biography  of 
Dezhin  Shegpa,  whose  portrait  is  in  the  collection  (P25),  states  that  during  one  of 
his  visits  to  the  Chinese  capital,  where  the  Karmapa  performed  many  miracles: 

Emperor  Yung  Lo  decided  that  the  apparently  miraculous  events  which  he  wit- 
nessed due  to  his  devotion,  should  be  recorded  for  posterity.  He  commissioned 
talented  artists  to  represent  them  in  paintings  on  large  rolls  of  silk,  one  of  which 
was  kept  at  Tsurphu.59 

There  is  plenty  of  evidence,  as  has  been  pointed  out,  of  exchanges  of 
statues  and  paintings  between  Tibetan  monks  and  Chinese  emperors.  The  objects 
brought  back  to  Tibet  must  have  served  as  models  for  the  artists,  much  as  their 
own  creations  were  influential  in  synthesizing  a  recognizable  "Lamaist"  tradition  of 
art  in  China.  This  constant  exposure  to  new  styles  and  forms,  which  Tibetan  artists 
assimilated  with  remarkable  self-confidence  to  create  their  own  aesthetic,  was  one 
reason  why  the  Tibetan  artistic  tradition  remained  so  vital  for  so  long. 

The  image  created  by  the  artist  was  used  for  ritual  purposes  as  well  as 
for  yogic  contemplation,  but  the  artistic  process  itself  was  a  form  of  yoga  and  the 
artist,  by  extension,  was  a  yogi  himself.  This  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  so  many 
erudite  and  spiritually  inspired  lamas  were  so  deeply  interested  in  art.  It  was  also 
expected,  however,  that  the  lay  artist  would  be  a  man  of  character  and  spiritual 
inclination.  As  one  Buddhist  text  states: 

The  painter  must  be  a  good  man,  no  sluggard,  not  given  to  anger,  holy,  learned, 
who  is  a  master  of  his  senses,  pious,  and  benevolent,  free  from  avarice,  such 

should  be  his  character He  must  draw  in  a  secluded  place,  he  may  paint 

when  besides  him  another  Sadbaka  {adept}  is  present,  but  not  when  someone 
else,  a  lay  man  is  there.  The  painting  should  not  be  shown  to  a  stranger,  nor 
should  it  be  unrolled  before  one6° 

This  undoubtedly  describes  the  ideal.  But  as  the  inspired  works  of  art  in  this  cata- 
logue illustrate,  the  artistic  process  was  as  spiritual  an  experience  for  the  artist  as 
the  completed  image  was  for  the  donor  and  the  beholder. 


53 


Form  and  Fantasy 


In  the  space  of  the  dharmadhatit  of  my  mind 
Are  spread  myriads  of  stars  of  various  experiences  .  .  . 
In  the  realm  of  the  inanimate  world 
Appear  the  stars  of  animate  beings. 

Chokyi  Wangchuk61 


Tibetan  artists  worked  primarily  within  the  framework  of  the  Indian 
aesthetic  tradition,  but  the  influence  of  Chinese  aesthetics  was,  as  we  have  shown, 
not  inconsiderable.  It  is,  however,  most  difficult  to  determine  the  extent  of  the  Cen- 
tral Asian  or  Khotanese  influences  often  alluded  to  in  Tibetan  texts.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  one  cannot  really  speak  of  a  Central  Asian  aesthetic  per  se,  for 
that  area  was  the  setting  for  the  interplay  of  three  major  artistic  traditions:  Indian, 
Iranian,  and  Chinese.  By  the  time  the  earliest  works  in  this  catalogue  were  rendered, 
in  the  eleventh  century,  Central  Asian  influences  had  by  and  large  been  completely 
absorbed.  That  is  why,  except  for  iconographic  motifs,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to 
discern  stylistic  elements  in  these  works.  Only  one  painting  in  the  collection  (P14) 
probably  retains  memories  of  the  Central  Asian  tradition. 

The  artists  had  to  learn  the  very  precise  theories  of  proportion  which  were 
contained  in  iconographic  manuals,  translated  from  Sanskrit,  which  became  a  part 
of  the  Tibetan  canonical  literature.  Some  of  these  have  been  translated  and  studied. 
Although  the  size  of  the  image  may  have  been  determined  by  the  length  of  the 
donor's  forearm,  the  relationships  of  the  parts  of  a  figure  to  the  whole  were  governed 
by  elaborate  theories  of  proportion.  Such  theories  and  instructions  were  codified 
in  Indian  texts  known  as  silpasastra,  several  of  which  are  contained  in  the  Tanjur.62 
Proportions  were  of  fundamental  importance,  and  if  incorrect,  the  image  was 
regarded  as  both  an  aesthetic  and  a  spiritual  anomaly.  These  texts  contain  precise 
measurements  for  the  images  of  the  tathagatas  and  divinities  which  had  to  be  im- 
plicitly followed.  With  reference  to  the  image  of  a  tathagata,  one  such  text  states  that 
the  image  must  be  well-proportioned  like  the  banyan  tree  ( nyagrodbaparimandala) . 
"It  should  amount  to  108  digits  according  to  the  measurements  of  his  own  finger; 
in  no  case  is  the  digital  measurement  of  others  applicable  to  him."63 

The  comparison  with  the  banyan  tree  is  literal  in  that  its  branches  are 
well  proportioned,  but  the  tree  also  symbolizes  the  axis  mundi  in  Indian  cosmological 
tradition  and  hence  is  an  appropriate  simile.  Such  similes  are  always  drawn  from 
nature,  especially  plant  life.  In  this  sense,  the  essence  of  nature  was  being  transub- 
stantiated into  the  divine  image,  even  as  individual  similes  served  the  immediate 
purpose  of  providing  a  conceptual  schema  for  the  artist.  Thus,  in  the  following  pas- 
sage from  an  iconographic  manual  it  can  easily  be  seen  how  both  the  shape  and 
character  of  a  natural  object  form  a  model  for  the  artist.  In  instructing  the  artist 
how  to  paint  eyes,  the  manual  states: 

In  the  case  of  Yogis,  their  eyes,  bespeaking  of  equanimity,  should  be  made  to 
resemble  a  bow  made  of  bamboo.  In  the  case  of  women  and  lovers  should  be 
made  eyes  that  resemble  the  belly  of  a  fish.  ...  It  is  laid  down  that  to  express 
fright  and  crying,  eyes  resembling  the  petal  of  a  padma  (lotus)  should  be  used. 
The  eyes  of  those  troubled  by  anger  and  grief  should  be  painted  resembling  a 
cowrie  shell .  .  .64 

55 


i.  .J. 


Pio 


S27 


Needless  to  say,  some  of  these  instructions  must  have  been  difficult  for  a  Tibetan 
artist  to  follow,  for  he  was  neither  familiar  with  a  banyan  tree  nor  always  with  the 
lotus.  Indeed,  a  glance  at  the  paintings  will  demonstrate  how  conceptual  and  varied 
are  the  representations  of  the  lotus.  Nevertheless,  with  some  modifications  and 
adjustments,  the  shapes  of  the  eyes  do  follow  the  various  instructions. 

Apart  from  such  technical  treatises,  the  artist  worked  from  both  verbal 
and  visual  models.  Verbal  models  were  the  descriptive  invocations  of  a  deity,  known 
in  Sanskrit  as  a  dhyana  or  sadhana.  These  dhyanas  are  remarkably  precise  and 
detailed,  as  can  be  gleaned  from  the  following  example  invoking  a  particular  form 
ofMahakala(P10,  Pll,  S27): 

To  the  south  of  Bodhgaya  is  situated  the  great  cemetery  bSil  ba'i  tshal.  At  this 
supreme  place,  one  can  hear  the  mighty  voices  of  the  gsbin  rje.  the  magically 
powerful  howling  of  the  ma  mo,  the  splashing  of  the  sea  of  blood,  the  sputtering 
of  the  lamps  fed  with  human  fat,  there  is  visible  the  coiling  smoke  rising  from 
the  evil  burnt  offering,  there  sounds  the  thudding  of  the  male  WW  who  are 
dancing  a  drum  dance,  the  blaring  of  the  thigh  bone  trumpets,  the  roar  of  wild 
animals;  there  is  visible  the  quick  flaring  zip  of  the  great  scorching  lightnings,  is 
audible  the  fierce  rolling  of  thunder  and  the  crashing  of  great  yellow  meteors, 
the  horrible  laughter  of  the  multitude  of  bdud  and  yaksas  causes  the  earth-foun- 
dations to  quake.  At  such  a  supreme  place  resides  he,  who  has  one  face  and  two 
hands  and  possesses  a  terrifying  body.  His  mouth  is  open  and  he  clicks  his 
tongue.  His  three  eyes  blaze  like  the  fire  at  the  end  of  a  kalpa.  He  is  of  a  vio- 
lently desirous  nature,  his  body  radiates  and  his  limbs  are  strong.  He  roars  like  a 
dragon  the  horrible  syllable  hum.  The  colour  of  his  body  is  a  brilliant  sky-blue, 
like  the  hue  of  the  world-mountain  Sumeru.  In  his  right  hand  he  holds  the  chop- 
per with  which  he  cuts  out  the  hearts  of  enemies — and  he  drinks  blood  from  a 
skull-cup,  which  he  holds  with  his  left  hand.  The  trampling  of  his  feet  causes 
the  three  realms  to  quake  and  in  the  countless  worlds  he  reduces  all  kinds  of  evil 
powers  to  dust.65 

Parts  of  another  equally  expressive  and  bizarre  dhyana  evoking  the  goddess  Lhamo 
are  quoted  elsewhere  in  this  catalogue  (P34). 

These  two  examples  make  it  clear  that  the  verbal  models  were  not  only 
highly  imaginative  and  meticulously  detailed,  but  were  often  far  more  fantastic 
than  anything  the  artist  ever  produced.  Certainly  the  gruesome  description  of  the 
cemetery  in  the  above  dhyana  is  far  more  vivid  than  the  painted  versions  (Pll,  P21). 
Those  evocations  which  describe  specifically  Indian  deities  were  obviously  composed 
by  Indian  mystics  and  theologians,  whereas  those  which  describe  Tibetan  divinities 
were  no  doubt  the  creations  of  Tibetan  lamas  and  saints.  Nonetheless,  all  of  them 
followed  Indian  models.  Such  graphic  and  elaborate  evocations,  together  with 
instructions  given  in  the  iconographic  manuals,  formed  the  basic  conceptual  schema 
for  the  artist. 

Even  in  terms  of  colors  he  had  no  freedom  to  deviate  from  the  prescribed 
instructions  except  to  vary  the  shades  and  treatment  of  the  accessories,  such  as  the 
throne,  the  lotus,  the  ornaments,  or  the  garments.  A  quick  glance  at  the  paintings, 
however,  will  reveal  how  diversely  some  of  these  elements,  especially  the  lotus  seat 
and  the  attire,  are  depicted;  obviously  the  creative  urge  of  the  artist  found  expres- 
sion in  such  details.  Styles,  too,  differed  in  fundamental,  ostensible  ways,  notwith- 
standing the  rigid,  rigorous  stylistic  and  aesthetic  framework  within  which  the 
artist  had  to  work.  No  one  need  be  told,  for  example,  that  the  style  of  the  eleventh- 
century  manuscript  illumination  (Ml)  is  radically  different  from  that  of  the  Pala- 
Tibetan-style  thankas  (P1-P3);  or  that  the  Guge  thankas  of  the  fifteenth  century 


56 


(P6-P8)  have  very  little  in  common  with  the  contemporary  Ngor  style  (P10,  P12). 
These  profound  differences  are  not  merely  iconographic. 

What  all  these  thankas,  and  some  bronzes  as  well,  have  in  common,  apart 
from  iconographic  similarities  if  the  subject  is  the  same,  are  certain  basic  aesthetic 
principles  that  were  immutable.  Symmetry,  order,  and  harmony  are  essential  features 
of  all  the  paintings,  whether  the  subject  is  benign  or  terrifying.  The  emphasis  is 
always  on  the  human  figure,  whether  divine  or  mortal.  And  except  in  specifically 
"landscape"  paintings,  everything  else,  whether  trees  or  flowers,  thrones  or  cushions, 
animals  or  birds,  serves  a  purely  symbolic  function,  amplifying  the  greater  glory 
of  the  figures  themselves.  The  composition  is  rigidly  schematic,  following  basic 
geometrical  configurations  —  either  the  rectangle  or  the  circle  —  and  little  attempt 
is  made  within  the  picture  plane  to  break  up  this  pattern.  Within  a  given  com- 
position, the  center  stage  is  invariably  occupied  by  the  principal  personage,  while 
all  acolytes  and  attendants  are  greatly  reduced  in  size  to  further  emphasize  the 
majesty  and  enormity  of  the  central  figure.  Although  attempts  are  occasionally 
made  to  model  the  figures  by  perfunctory  shading  or  graduating  colors,  volume  is 
generally  suggested  by  contrasting  colors  in  bold  juxtapositions.  Chiaroscuro  does 
not  play  any  role;  the  entire  surface  of  the  thanka  is  uniformly  lighted,  and  no 
attempt  is  made  to  represent  the  third  dimension  or  depth.  Thus,  Andre  Grabar's 
expression  "geometric-chromatic,"  used  to  characterize  the  Byzantine  aesthetic,  is 
perfectly  appropriate  for  the  religious  paintings  of  Tibet,  and  for  those  of  Nepal, 
India,  and  other  Buddhist  countries  as  well.     Because  it  was  not  the  artist's  function 
or  intention  to  recreate  a  world  of  illusion,  but  to  delineate  a  picture  that  was  a 
symbol  of  Clear  Light,  chiaroscuro  and  perspective  had  no  particular  relevance.  The 
purity  of  both  line  and  color  was  a  desideratum;  hence,  the  drawing,  always  sure, 
articulate,  and  precise,  defines  the  form  with  certitude  and  verity  in  contrast  to  the 
flux  of  samsara.  The  colors,  generally  bright  and  dense  but  lucid,  are  evenly  applied 
so  that  the  entire  surface  is  both  suffused  and  saturated. 

Allowing  for  fundamental  differences  in  the  medium,  some  of  these  obser- 
vations are  true  of  sculpture  as  well.  Most  sculptures  were  brightly  painted,  and 
often  their  backs  were  left  unfinished  as  they  were  meant  to  be  seen  only  from  the 
front.  Hieratic  frontality  and  schematic  compositions  emphasizing  symmetry  and 
order  are  also  the  sine  qua  non  of  most  sculptural  representations,  except  in  some 
images  strongly  influenced  by  Chinese  aesthetics  (S36).  Generally,  in  their  postures 
and  gestures,  the  sculptured  figures  are  no  different  from  their  painted  counterparts. 

A  few  remarks  must  be  made  here  about  portraiture,  one  of  the  principal 
subjects  of  Tibetan  art.  Typically,  the  representations  of  arhats  and  mahasiddhas 
are  imaginary,  even  though  some  of  them  appear  to  have  very  individual  faces.  It  is 
possible  that  in  such  instances  the  artist  had  a  specific  model  in  mind  or  was  influ- 
enced subconsciously  by  a  striking  yogi  or  mystic  with  whom  he  was  familiar.  The 
norm,  however,  dictated  that  portraits  were  to  be  as  idealized  as  possible,  even  those 
of  such  historical  persons  as  the  lamas.  Here,  it  is  important  to  know  that  most 
portraits  were  done  posthumously,  and  that  the  artist  may  never  have  seen  his  model. 

The  principal  reason  idealized  portraiture  was  preferred  was  that  individ- 
ualization implied  egotism;  as  we  have  emphasized,  the  very  purpose  of  the  religion 
was  to  destroy  the  ego.  Moreover,  it  was  more  important  to  express  the  subject's 
spiritual  qualities  than  to  emphasize  his  physical  characteristics.  Nevertheless, 
on  occasion,  one  does  come  across  remarkably  realistic  portraits,  especially  in 
sculpture,  which  provide  some  idea  of  the  character  and  personality  of  the  person.  A 
good  example  of  such  a  portrait  in  the  collection  is  the  fine  bronze  depicting  the 
lama  Karma  Dudtsi  (S32). 


57 


Apart  from  some  architectural  embellishments  and  iconographic  forms  and 
symbols,  such  as  the  dragon,  the  phoenix,  the  mountain  and  water  motifs,  and  the 
animals  of  the  zodiac  (P32),  the  influence  of  the  Chinese  aesthetic  was  felt  primarily 
in  two  areas:  in  representations  of  arhats  and  in  the  use  of  landscape  elements. 
Tibetan  literature  recognizes  the  influence  of  both  the  Indian  and  the  Chinese  arhat 
traditions;  the  former  is  said  to  have  arrived  with  Atisa  and  the  latter  with  Lume, 
who  is  said  to  have  gone  to  China  around  the  tenth  century.67  Unfortunately,  no 
reproductions  of  arhats  in  India  or  in  Nepal  have  survived;  thus,  we  do  not  know 
what  Atisa's  tradition  was,  in  visual  terms,  in  those  countries.  But  in  both  Central 
Asia  and  China  the  cult  of  the  arhat  was  important  and  popular,  and  whether  or  not 
Lume  went  to  China,  the  artistic  evidence  certainly  indicates  that  the  Tibetans  were 
very  much  aware  of  the  major  Chinese  styles,  or  traditions,  of  arhat  representation. 
Most  monasteries  in  Tibet  have  shrines  dedicated  to  the  arhats,  as  did  those  in 
China,  and  like  the  Chinese,  the  Tibetans  preferred  depicting  their  arhats  in  clay 
images.  The  expressive  gilt-bronze  representation  of  Arhat  Kalika  (S36)  gives  a  fine 
idea  of  how  a  terracotta  image  made  in  a  predominantly  Chinese  style  would  look. 

Perhaps  the  most  profound  influence  exerted  by  Chinese  aesthetics  upon 
the  Tibetan  pictorial  tradition  was  the  instilling  of  an  interest  in  landscape  ele- 
ments. However,  the  Tibetans,  unlike  the  Chinese,  were  not  interested  in  landscape 
paintings  as  a  genre,  but  instead  used  landscape  motifs  for  illustrative  and  narrative 
purposes.  Less  concerned  with  landscapes  as  an  exercise  in  formalism,  Tibetans  were 
more  intrigued  by  the  evocative  powers  of  nature.  Although  they  developed  a  com- 
plex and  varied  tradition  of  fantastic  rather  than  realistic  landscapes,  nature  remained, 
by  and  large,  either  subordinate  to  the  human  figure  or  symbolically  echoed  the 
forms  and  thereby  enhanced  the  spiritual  qualities  of  the  central  personage  (P25, 
P27).  Tibetan  visual  imagery  invariably  reflects  literary  images  and  metaphors  and 
rarely  imitates  nature.  Perspective  and  other  optical  laws  of  nature  were  ignored  by 
the  artist,  and  no  effort  was  made  to  capture  the  subtle  nuances  of  light,  to  record 
the  changes  of  seasons,  or  to  portray  the  natural  environment  in  which  he  lived. 
Rather,  by  borrowing  motifs  and  forms  from  the  various  Chinese-style  pictures  which 
were  at  his  disposal,  and  by  modifying  and  embellishing  them  further  with  his 
own  flights  of  fancy  and  imagination,  he  created  a  uniformly  lighted  design  that  is 
as  distinct  from  the  Chinese  tradition  as  it  is  delightful  in  its  quaint  archaisms, 
bold  electicism,  and  visionary  qualities. 

Much  has  been  written  about  the  iconography  of  Tibetan  painting,  and 
some  attempts  have  been  made,  however  tentative,  to  classify  the  styles,  but  no  one 
has  seriously  studied  the  "landscape"  thankas  of  Tibet.  Preoccupied  with  the  literati 
tradition,  Chinese  scholars  tend  to  ignore  Buddhist  paintings  of  precisely  those  peri- 
ods, the  Yuan  and  the  Ming,  which  are  the  most  interesting  in  relation  to  the  his- 
tory of  Tibetan  painting.  This,  of  course,  makes  it  particularly  difficult  to  establish 
relationships  and  to  articulate  differences,  if  not  innovations.  Fascinating  as  the  sub- 
ject is,  it  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  catalogue  to  enter  into  an  extensive  discussion 
of  it.  Therefore,  only  a  few  comments  will  be  made,  in  order  to  help  the  reader 
appreciate  the  creative  impulse  of  the  Tibetan  artist,  and  to  offer  some  guidelines 
for  future  scholarship  in  the  field. 

Landscape  elements  are  used  mostly  in  portraits  of  arhats,  monks,  and 
mahasiddhas  for  biographical  and  narrative  paintings,  but  rarely  and  sparingly  in 
purely  iconic  thankas.  The  beautiful  image  of  the  goddess  Sarasvati  in  the  collection 
(P23)  is  an  exception  rather  than  the  rule.  It  is  also  evident  that  landscape  in 
Tibetan  paintings  derives  from  fantasy  rather  than  from  fact.  To  understand  this 
we  must  turn  to  the.  images  of  nature  in  Tibetan  literature. 


58 


Whenever  nature  is  described  in  Tibetan  poetry,  there  is  an  element  of 
fantasy  and  evocation  that  borders  on  the  supernatural.  Nevertheless,  the  Tibetan 
poet  is  always  aware  of  his  surroundings — mountains  and  lakes,  rivers  and  valleys, 
trees  and  flowers — even  though  his  descriptions  are  highly  fanciful,  at  times 
psychedelic,  and  often  charged  with  symbolism,  magic,  and  mystery.  Describing 
the  arrival  of  the  first  Tibetan  king,  an  unknown  poet  wrote: 

He  came  to  the  Holy  Mountain  Gyang-bo, 

And  the  great  messy  mountain  bowed  low.  bowed  low. 

The  trees  came  together,  came  together 

And  the  springs  rippled  with  their  blue  wai 

And  the  rocky  boulders  and  the  like  bid  him  honour. 

And  the  cranes  made  him  salutation 

Clearly  nature  plays  a  humble  role  before  the  mighty  king.  Natural  forms  in  such 
descriptions  are  always  used  as  metaphors:  "The  fair  Mount  Chimbu  is  like  a  lion, 
blue  as  turquoise";  "The  Red  Crag  is  like  a  lion  of  coral,  soaring  into  the  sky;"  and, 
as  Milarepa  wrote,  "This  place  where  I  dwell  alone  is  the  Red  Rock  Agate  Mansion 
Fortress  of  Garudas."69  Tibetans'  innate  fascination  with  the  color  blue,  whether 
lapis  lazuli  or  turquoise,  is  also  evident  in  their  poetry.  Not  only  are  mountains, 
lakes,  and  the  sky  compared  with  turquoise,  but  the  color  is  used  almost  ubiqui- 
tously as  a  simile.  Thus,  when  Milarepa  dreams  of  a  lion,  he  is  "fully  displaying  his 
thick  turquoise  mane";  and  when  Rinchenpal,  the  Kagyupa  saint,  hears  the  roll  of 
thunder  it  is  like  that  of  a  turquoise  dragon.70  Is  it  surprising,  then,  that  the  blue- 
green  mountains  of  Chinese  paintings  should  have  held  such  fascination  for  the 
Tibetans? 

The  literary  tradition  is  unequivocal  about  the  Chinese  style  of  arhat 
painting,  as  is  apparent  from  the  following  extract: 

Wishing  to  represent  them  after  the  Chinese  manner,  the  models  are  taken  from 
the  T'ang  period;  their  clothes  are  of  a  sombre  hue,  like  those  of  the  Chinese 
scholars;  they  wear  ample  silken  robes.  Their  main  symbols  are  those  of  their 
birth-stories,  the  others  may  vary:  for  instance  a  staff  made  of  a  bananastalk  or 
of  osier,  a  vase  for  perfume,  porcelain  cups,  etc.  They  sit  on  jewelled  thrones, 
surrounded  by  cliffs,  animals,  dragons,  people  of  noble  race,  dressed  in  silk, 
Chinese  scholars,  men  of  various  races  carrying  fans  and  different  objects  as 
offerings;  around  them  are  seen  pleasure-grounds,  fields  with  palaces  ornamented 
with  lattice-work  and  caves  surrounded  with  grass  and  trees.71 

This  conceptualization  is  also  evident  in  the  paintings,  even  though  there  are  nota- 
ble stylistic  differences.  For  example,  in  the  earliest  arhat  painting  in  the  collection 
(P3),  which  has  become  a  landmark  in  the  history  of  thankas,  conceptual  landscape 
elements  are  used  at  the  top,  the  bottom,  and  in  the  kneeling  figure's  garments  as 
vignettes.  They  are  subordinated  to  the  central  figure,  who  dominates  the  composi- 
tion. Similarly,  in  later  paintings  (P25-P27),  even  though  nature  is  given  greater 
prominence,  the  principal  personage  is  not  obscured.  These  are  not  natural  land- 
scapes but  are  fascinating  arrangements  of  shapes  and  colors  that  are  both  enchant- 
ing and  visually  exciting.  No  one  style  or  tradition  of  Chinese  landscape  painting 
predominates,  and  even  though  the  Tibetan  pictures  are  replete  with  archaisms, 
they  are  never  self-conscious  or  purely  imitative.  One  is  always  impressed  by  the 
artist's  resourcefulness. 

It  has  been  said  that  art  is  born  of  art  and  not  of  nature.  The  art  of  Tibet 
is  no  exception.  In  addition  to  verbal  models,  Tibetan  artists  used  various  visual 

59 


models  to  create  their  own  eclectic  mannerisms.  We  have  repeatedly  stressed  here 
that  Tibetan  monasteries  were  rich  repositories  of  Indian  images,  but  they  also  pos- 
sessed a  good  deal  of  art  from  Central  Asia  and  China.  In  the  Monks  and  Monarch s 
section  of  this  Introduction,  it  is  noted  that  Chinese  emperors  sent  images  as  gifts 
to  Tibetan  monasteries.  One  such  gift  was  a  scroll  the  Ming  emperor  Yongle  had 
painted,  recording  Karmapa  Dehzin  Shegpa's  visit  to  China.  In  1949  H.  E. 
Richardson  had  the  opportunity  to  examine  this  scroll  in  the  Tshurphu  monastery 
where  it  was  kept.  Such  objects  must  therefore  have  provided  artists  with  visual 
models  for  their  own  representations. 

Until  recently  very  little  was  known  of  the  artistic  process  itself,  but  now 
a  number  of  pattern  books  and  sketches  have  come  to  light  that  indicate  how  styles 
were  transmitted.  The  collection  contains  two  small  sketches  (P19  a,b)  representing 
mahasiddhas  which,  since  the  figures  are  drawn  on  both  sides,  must  have  formed  pat- 
terns for  larger  thankas.  A  comparison  of  these  drawings  with  a  pattern  book  dated 
1653  (fig.  1),  rendered  by  a  Newari  artist,  leaves  no  doubt  that  the  Tibetan  sketches 
were  executed  at  about  the  same  time.  Tibetan  inscriptions  on  the  mahasiddha 
drawings  also  make  it  clear  that  they  were  intended  for  use  by  a  Tibetan  artist.  The 
colophon  of  the  folding  pattern  book,  which  contains  designs  and  motifs  seen 
only  in  Tibetan  thankas  and  rarely  used  in  Nepal,  gives  the  interesting  information 
that  it  was  written  in  Lhasa  by  a  Newari  Buddhist  vajracarya  (priest).72  He  was 
very  likely  the  artist,  too,  and  obviously  made  the  sketches  to  take  back  to  Nepal 
so  he  could  paint  thankas  for  his  Tibetan  patrons.  A  similar  but  earlier  pattern  book, 
made  by  a  fifteenth-century  Newari  artist  named  Jivarama  on  a  visit  to  Gyantse, 
contains  an  enormous  number  of  iconographic  patterns  and  designs,  of  which  a 
section  containing  the  representations  of  the  arhats  is  reproduced  here  (fig.  2). 

Some  of  the  iconographic  implications  of  this  book  have  been  discussed 
elsewhere.73  The  style  in  which  these  sketches  are  rendered  is  the  same  as  that 
employed  in  the  chapels  of  the  kumbum  at  Gyantse,  a  monument  that  was  painted 
in  the  early  part  of  the  fifteenth  century  by  both  Newari  and  Chinese  artists.  One 
of  the  Newars  may  have  been  Jivarama,  who  put  together  the  pattern  book. 
Moreover,  the  section  reproduced  here  clearly  shows  how  the  artist  intended  to  use 
rocks  and  animals  for  the  arhat  paintings.  Sketchy  as  they  are,  these  landscape  ele- 
ments, which  have  often  been  regarded  as  later  inventions,  clearly  demonstrate  that 
they  were  already  familiar  to  Tibetan  and  Newari  painters  as  early  as  the  fifteenth 
century.  A  further  implication  of  these  sketchbooks  is  that  Newari  artists  not  only 
painted  in  their  own  style,  but  were  very  self-assured  in  painting  what  are  regarded 
as  purely  Tibetan-style  landscape  thankas.  While  this  demonstrates  how  complex 
the  artistic  milieu  in  Tibet  was,  it  also  indicates  how,  through  such  pattern  books, 
Tibetan  aesthetics  may  have  influenced  the  styles  in  Nepal. 

While  it  may  be  true  that  a  Tibetan  did  not  respond  to  a  work  of  art  in 
the  same  ways  people  do  today,  it  would  be  wrong  to  say  that  he  or  she  was  unre- 
sponsive to  the  beauty  of  the  object.  The  norms  by  which  he  or  she  judged  a  work 
of  art  were  different — no  distinction  was  made  between  beauty  and  truth.  Radical 
departure  from  the  norms  was  not  deemed  a  virtue,  nor  was  conformity  considered 
stifling  or  debilitating.  The  fact  that  the  Tibetan  atist  was  so  open  and  receptive  to 
various  styles  and  traditions  clearly  reflects  his  spirit  of  aesthetic  adventure  and  his 
innovative  impulse.  Art  was  not  an  end  in  itself,  as  the  following  statement,  drawn 
from  an  iconographic  manual,  makes  evident:  "When  one  has  painted  the  eyes  of 
the  Gods,  which  are  pleasing  with  the  lustre  of  their  colour  appearing  in  soft  tones, 
the  well  being  of  the  Kings  and  of  all  beings  shall  increase."74  Elsewhere  the  manual 
states  that  the  face  should  be  articulately  delineated  and  should  be  "beautifully  full 
and  endowed  with  brilliant  pleasing  marks."  Such  remarks  are  hardly  indicative  of 
the  absence  of  aesthetic  response. 

60 


Perhaps  the  most  graphic  example  of  the  excitement  generated  by  the 
creation  of  an  object  of  art  is  provided  by  the  following  eyewitness  account,  written 
in  1604,  of  the  casting  of  a  bronze  by  Newari  artists  in  the  presence  of  the  First 
Panchen  Lama: 

As  soon  as  the  alloy  of  molten  copper  and  bell-metal  {It)  was  poured,  crackling 
and  sputtering  noises  filled  our  ears.  Molten  copper  boiled  out  of  the  mouth  of 
the  mould,  completely  spattering  the  whole  workshop.  Because  it  seemed  that  it 
had  not  gone  into  the  mould  at  all,  the  Newars  (Bal-po)  scowled  blackly  and 
muttered  something  in  their  language  about  the  casting  being  a  failure.  The 
others  were  in  a  complete  quandary  what  to  do.  Everyone  fell  into  silence.  I  also 
was  mystified  as  to  what  had  happened,  but  I  called  out  urging  them:  'Break  the 
mould  and  see!'  Without  giving  it  time  to  cool  (by  itself)  they  chilled  it  by 
splashing  a  good  deal  of  cold  water  over  it.  When  they  cracked  the  mould,  a 
splendid  image  of  the  Jetsun  emerged.  All  were  in  a  state  of  awe  and  astonish- 
ment: becoming  mad  with  sheer  joy,  we  all  cried  out:  'A  la  la!'75 

A  Michaelangelo,  a  Bernini,  or  a  Rodin  would  have  empathized  with  the  unknown 
Newari  masters,  who,  like  artists  everywhere,  must  have  experienced  the  anguish 
and  the  ecstasy  that  are  present  in  every  creative  process. 


ST  & 


Fig.  1 

Vajracarya  Srimantadeva 

(Newari,  17th  century) 

Ascetic  in  Landscape  from  artist's  pattern  book 

Nepal  or  Tibet,  [653 

Ink  on  paper 

Each  folio:  3'ix^i  in.  (8.2  x  19.6  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.81.56 


Fig.  2 

Jivarama  (Newari,  15th  century) 

Representation  of  Arhats  from  artist's 

pattern  book 

Tibet,  1435 

Ink  on  paper 

Each  folio  (average):  ^Vx  x  9V2  in. 

(13  x  23.2  cm.) 

Mr.  Suresh  K.  Neotia  Collection,  Calcutta 


61 


Notes 


i.    Snellgrove  and  Richardson,  p.  24. 

2.  Stein,  1972,  from  which  the  passage  is 
quoted,  is  perhaps  the  most  brilliant 
general  introduction  to  Tibetan  civiliza- 
tion to  date.  It  may  be  supplemented  by 
Snellgrove  and  Richardson. 

3.  For  the  Chinese  interest  in  yak  tails,  see 
Schafer,  p.  74. 

4.  For  instance,  we  learn  from  a  Chinese 
source  (672  A.D.):  "The  (Tibetan)  king 
moves  about  each  spring  and  summer  at 
the  dictates  of  grass  and  water:  only  in 
autumn  and  winter  does  he  live  in  the 
fortified  city,  but  even  then,  he  pitches 
his  tent  and  does  not  live  beneath  a  roof." 
(Stein,  1972,  p.  118).  This  ancient  cus- 
tom continued  with  the  later  Tibetans  as 
well,  and  in  the  biography  of  the  Kar- 
mapas  (Thinley,  p.  86)  we  are  told:  "In 
contrast  to  his  own  personal  austerity 
Karmapa's  monastic  camp  was  richly 
endowed  and  beautifully  decorated.  The 
shrine  tent  had  a  golden  roof  and  was 
decorated  with  his  most  precious  relics, 
above  which  hung  thirteen  ornate 
umbrellas." 

5.  See  Eliade,  1964:  Hoffmann;  and  Stein, 
1972. 

6.  Stein,  1972,  p.  125. 

7.  Ibid. 

8.  Bell,  pp.  5-6. 

9.  Stein,  1972,  p.  70. 

10.  For  a  recent  discussion  of  the  subject,  see 
Pachow. 

1 1.  Stein,  1972,  p.  80. 

12.  Tucci,  1980,  p.  27. 

13.  Stein,  1972,  p.  155. 

14.  Ibid.,  p.  154. 

15.  Snellgrove  and  Richardson,  p.  132. 


16.  Chang  2,  pp.  572-73. 

17.  Snellgrove  and  Richardson,  p.  31. 

18.  Ibid.,  p.  64. 

19.  Ibid. 

20.  Ibid.,  p.  148. 

21.  See  Karmay,  1975,  for  an  extensive  dis- 
cussion of  Sino-Tibetan  relations  under 
the  Yuan  and  the  Ming  dynasties.  Much 
of  the  discussion  that  follows  is  based  on 
Karmay 's  book. 

22.  Karmay,  1975,  pp.  80—81. 

23.  For  a  general  discussion  of  the  topic,  see 
Macdonald  and  Stahl. 

24.  Conze,  p.  263. 

25.  Ibid.,  p.  154. 

26.  Palhs,  i960,  p.  186. 

27.  Ibid. ,  p.  19. 

28.  Wayman,  1977,  p.  11. 

29.  Tsong-ka-pa,  p.  151. 

30.  Ibid.,  p.  157. 

31.  Ibid. 

32.  See  Pallis,  i960,  pp.  160-76  for  further 
development  of  this  idea  and  for  more  on 
the  institution  of  the  Dalai  Lama.  Pallis 
very  correctly  questions  the  use  of  the 
words  "reincarnation"  or  "rebirth"  to  de- 
scribe the  concept  of  tulku.  as  found  in 
most  books.  See,  for  instance,  Zwalf, 

p.  65^  where  an  entire  section  is  entitled 
"Incarnation." 

33.  Beyer. 

34.  Trungpa,  p.  167. 

35.  See  Pal,  1982  A  for  an  extensive  discus- 
sion of  the  concept. 

/ 


62 


36.  Tsong-ka-pa,  p.  156.  The  idea  of  the 
Buddha  being  a  spiritual  king  is  very  old 
and,  according  to  the  manuals  in  icono- 
graphy, his  form  is  to  be  modeled  after 
that  of  the  Universal  King  (Cakravarti); 
see  Laufer's  translation  of  Citralakshana  as 
translated  by  Goswamy  and  Dahmen- 
Dallapiccola. 

37.  Tsong-ka-pa,  p.  106  and  pp.  47-48. 

38.  Snellgrove  and  Skorupski,  1980,  p.  93. 

39.  Robinson,  p.  394;  Trungpa,  p.  345.  The 
origin  of  the  word  daka  is  obscure  and  I 
don't  know  why  Robinson  opines  that  it 
probably  comes  from  a  Sanskrit  root 
meaning  "to  fly."  P.  C.  Bagchi  was  of  the 
opinion  that  the  word  daka.  meaning  a 
wise  man,  was  borrowed  by  Sanskrit 
from  the  Tibetan;  this  is  refuted  by 
Banerjea  (J.  N.  Banerjea,  Pauranic and 
Tantric  Religion.  Calcutta,  1966,  pp. 
127-29)  on  the  grounds  that  the  word 
dakini  occurs  in  the  Gangdhar  inscrip- 
tion of  423-24  A.D. 

40.  Snellgrove  and  Skorupski,  1980,  p.  91. 
He  also  had  seven  mandalas  painted  for 
the  benefit  of  his  father. 

41.  Wayman,  1973,  pp.  82-83. 

42.  Ibid.  For  an  interesting  interpretation  of 
the  mandala,  see  Ellingson-Waugh,  1974. 

43-  Tucci,  1949,  pp.  566ff. 

44-  Conze,  p.  145. 

45-  Thinley,  p.  74 
46.  Ruegg,  p.  18. 

47-  For  Situ  Panchen,  see  Macdonald  and 
Stahl,  pp.  32-33  and  references  cited 
therein.  For  an  extensive  discussion  about 
Tibetan  artists  in  general,  see  Tucci, 
J949.  pp-  27 iff.  The  following  infor- 
mation about  the  Karmapas  is  taken  from 
Thinley. 

48.  Thinley,  p.  52 


49.  Ibid.,  p.  67. 

50.  Ibid.,  p.  91. 

51.  Ibid.,  pp.  92,  131-32. 

52.  In  one  of  the  inscriptions  at  Alchi 
(Snellgrove  and  Skorupski,  1980,  p.  148) 
we  are  told:  "This  great  temple  and 
vihara  has  been  built  with  a  wealthy 
patron  supplying  the  means  and  skillful 
craftsmen  acting  as  agents." 

53.  Ruegg,  p.  17,  n.  14.  See  also  Tucci,  1949. 

54.  Tucci,  1949,  p.  157. 

55.  As  quoted  in  Macdonald  and  Stahl,  p. 
33.  This  book  also  discusses  the  role  of 
the  Newari  artists  in  Tibet  at  consider- 
able length. 

56.  As  quoted  in  Macdonald  and  Stahl,  p.  33. 

57.  Tucci,  1973,  figs.  157-64,  170-76. 

58.  Snellgrove  and  Skorupski,  1980,  p.  92. 

59.  Thinley,  p.  74. 

60.  Goswamy  and  Dahmen-Dallapiccola, 
p.  24,  n.  36. 

61 .  Trungpa,  p.  56. 

62.  These  works  are  discussed  in  Laufer.  Also 
Goswamy  and  Dahmen-Dallapiccola, 
pp.  9ff;  and  Tucci,  1949,  pp.  29iff. 

63.  Ibid.,  pp.  81-82. 

64.  Ibid.,  p.  84. 

65.  Nebesky-Wojkowitz,  p.  41. 

66.  Byzantine  Painting  (Geneva:  Rizzoli, 
1979),  p.  40. 

67.  Tucci,  1949,  p.  83. 

68.  Snellgrove  and  Richardson,  p.  24. 

69.  Trungpa,  p.  201. 


70.  Ibid.,  p.  244. 

71.  Tucci,  1949,  p.  562. 

72.  According  to  the  colophon,  the  pattern 
book  was  completed  in  the  Newari  year 
773  (1653  A.D.)  by  Vajracarya  Sriman- 
tadeva  in  Lhasa.  The  manuscript  bears 
the  accession  number  M.  8 1.56  and  will 
be  discussed  at  length  in  a  forthcoming 
article  and  in  the  catalogue  of  the 
Museum's  Nepali  collections  to  be  pub- 
lished in  1985. 

73.  Lowry,  1977. 

74.  Goswamy  and  Dahmen-Dallapiccola, 
p.  82. 

75.  As  quoted  by  Macdonald  and  Stahl,  p.  32. 


63 


Plate  i 

Perfection  of  Insight, 

an  illuminated  folio  from  a  Prajnaparamita  manuscript 

(Mi  c) 


65 


Plate  2 

Power  of  Faith, 

an  illuminated  folio  from  a  Prajnaparamita  manuscript 

(Mi  d) 


"n\3»> 


Plate  3 

Cover  of  a  Prajnaparamira  Manuscript 

(M2,  detail) 


67 


Plate  4 

Cover  of  a  Prajnaparamita  Manuscript 

(M3,  detail) 


68 


Plate  5 

Illuminated  Page  from  a  Dharani  Manuscript 

(M4  a,  detail) 


69 


Plate  6 

Page  from  an  Ashtasahasrika  Prajnaparamita  Manuscript 

(M6  b,  detail) 


70 


Plate  7 

Tathagata  Amitayus  and  Acolytes 

(Pi) 


7i 


Plate  8 

Tathagata  Ratnasambhava 

(P2) 


72 


Plate  9 

An  Abbot  and  His  Lineage 

(P3) 


73 


Plate  10 

An  Arhat  with  Attendants 

(P4) 


74 


Plate  ii 

Mandalas  of  Hevajra  and  Other  Deities 

(P5) 


}  0 


75 


Plate  12 

Amitbabha  in  His  Paradise 

(P7) 


76 


Plate  13 

The  Healing  Buddha  and  His  Celestial  Assembly 

(P8) 


77 


Plate  14 

Arhat  Kanakavatsa 

(P9) 


78 


Plate  15 

Mahakala  with  Companions 

(Pio) 


79 


Plate  16 

Mahakala  and  Companions 
(Pn) 


80 


Plate  17 

Vajrabhairava 

(P12) 


81 


Plate  18 

Sakyapa  Lineage 
(P13) 


Plate  19 

The  Life  of  Milarepa 

(P14,  detail) 


Plate  20 
Sakyapa  Monks 
(P15) 


84 


Plate  21 

Three  Mandalas 

(P16,  detail) 


Plate  22 

The  Buddha  of  Endless  Life  (Amitayus) 

(Pi7) 


86 


Plate  23 

Kunga  Tashi  and  Incidents  from  His  Life 

(P20,  detail) 


Plate  24 

Mahakala  and  Companions 

(P21) 


88 


Plate  25 

Sakyasri  and  the  Lotsawa  of  Tr  op  hit 

(P22) 


Plate  26 

The  Goddess  Sarasvati 

(P23) 


90 


Plate  27 

Sakyamuni  and  the  Eighteen  Arhats 

(P24) 


9i 


Plate  28 

Portrait  of  the  Fifth  Karmapa 

(P25) 


92 


Plate  29 

Buddha  Sakyamuni  and  Narrative  Scenes 

(P26) 


93 


Plate  30 

A  Mahasiddha  and  Talungpa  Lamas 

(P27) 


94 


Plate  31 

A  Biographical  Painting 

(P28) 


95 


Plate  32 

S)  mbolic  Offerings 

(P30) 





96 


Place  33 

Palcien  Remati  and  Her  Retinue 

(P34) 


97 


Plate  34 

Temple  Hanging 
(P44,  detail) 


98 


Plate  35 

Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara 

(S2) 


99 


Plate  36 

Ehieti-Headed  Aialokitesvara 

(S3) 


100 


Plate  37 

Bodhisattva  Manjusri 
(S9) 


101 


Plate  38 

Vajrapani  in  Yab-Yum 

(S23) 


102 


Plate  39 

An  Unusual  Form  of  Mahakala  (?) 

(S24) 


103 


Plate  40 

Goddess  Nairatmya 

(S25) 


104 


Plate  41 

Vajrabhairava  in  Yab-Yum 

(S28) 


105 


Plate  42 
Dampa  Sangye 
(S3 1) 


106 


Plate  43 

A  Mahasiddha 

(S33) 


107 


Plate  44 
Arhat  Kalika 
(S36) 


108 


Plate  45 

Ritual  Dagger  (Phurpa) 

(R-7) 


109 


Plate  46 
Sword 

(Rio) 


no 


Plate  47 
Conch  Shell 
(Rn) 


in 


Plate  48 

Pair  of  Batter  Lamps 

(R14) 


112 


Catalogue 


A  look  at  a  map  of  Tibet  makes  it  clear  that  the  southern  half  of  the 
country  is  its  most  densely  populated  region,  and  it  is  from  this  area  that  much  of 
Tibet's  art  comes.  For  purposes  of  attribution,  the  country  has  been  divided  here 
into  three  broad  regions,  as  is  commonly  done  in  works  on  Tibetan  geography  (see 
Wylie  1962).  These  are:  western  Tibet,  comprising  the  wide  region  known  as  Ngari 
Khorsum;  central  Tibet,  including  the  provinces  of  Tsang  and  U;  and  eastern  Tibet, 
consisting  of  Kham  and  Amdo.  Ladakh  and  Zanskar,  which  are  parts  of  India,  are 
here  regarded  as  two  separate  but  related  cultural  regions.  Subsequent  research  may 
help  in  fixing  more  precise  provenances.  Until  it  is  conducted,  however,  we  can 
only  attribute  artworks  to  the  broad  regions  defined  above. 

Except  where  otherwise  noted,  height  precedes  width  in  the  entries  on  the 
objects  in  this  catalogue.  For  most  of  the  sculptures,  height  is  the  only  dimension 
indicated.  Where  necessary,  the  following  letters  have  been  used  to  key  dimensions: 
h  (height);  u  (width);  and  /  (length). 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  the  thankas  included  in  this  volume  were 
painted  in  opaque  watercolors  on  cotton  supports.  Those  who  wish  to  learn  more 
about  the  materials  and  techniques  employed  in  thankas  or  illuminated  manuscripts 
may  read  Austen;  Roerich  1925;  Tucci  1949;  and  Anyetsang. 


113 


Painting 


Just  as  Sumeru  is  the  foremost  among  mountains, 

just  as  Ganga  is  the  foremost  among  rivers. 

just  as  the  Sun  is  the  foremost  among  the  heavenly  bodies, 

just  as  Garuda  is  the  king  of  the  birds, 

just  as  Indra  is  the  foremost  among  the  gods. 

so  is  Painting  the  foremost  among  skills. 

Citralakshana l 


Of  the  three  types  of  Tibetan  painting — thankas,  illustrations  for  manuscripts 
and  their  covers,  and  murals — only  the  first  two  are  included  in  the  Museum's 
collection.  A  thanka  (written  in  Tibetan  as  t'an  ka.  fan  sku.  or  sku  fan:  in  English 
as  tanka,  thanka,  or  thangka)  is  a  religious  painting  usually  on  cotton  {pat a  in 
Sanskrit)  that  can  be  rolled  up.  Of  rectangular  shape,  it  has  a  thin  border  of  red  and 
yellow  silk  strips  and  is  mounted  either  on  plain  blue  silk  or  on  Chinese  brocades 
which,  as  has  been  noted,  were  often  sent  by  Chinese  emperors  as  gifts  to  the  larger 
monasteries.  The  bottom  of  the  mount,  usually  wider  than  the  other  three  sides, 
may  have  a  smaller,  rectangular  patch  that  serves  as  a  "door"  through  which  one 
may  pass  into  the  consecrated  realm.  Often  the  thanka  is  provided  with  a  cover  of 
gossamer  silk  and  two  red  bands.  When  the  thanka  hangs  on  an  altar  the  cover  is 
gathered  up  to  the  top  and  acts  as  a  curtain  while  the  bands  hang  down  across  the 
surface  of  the  thanka.  Two  narrow  sticks  are  attached  to  the  top  and  the  bottom  so 
that  the  thanka  can  be  easily  rolled  up  for  storage  or  for  a  journey.  Unlike  the 
Chinese,  Tibetans  rarely,  if  ever,  painted  on  silk.  The  medium  was  either  cotton  or 
linen;  this  is  another  instance  of  Indian  influence.  It  must  be  mentioned,  however, 
that  no  prototype  of  the  thanka  in  India  has  survived,  though  similar  paintings  in 
Nepal  {paubha  in  the  Newari  language),  are  dated  as  early  as  the  Tibetan  examples. 
Although  there  are  no  murals  in  the  collection,  the  thankas  (as  well  as  the  early 
manuscript  illuminations)  provide  us  with  a  good  idea  of  what  the  wall  paintings 
in  Tibetan  monasteries  look  like,  for  in  terms  of  both  style  and  composition  they 
are  remarkably  alike. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  Tibetans  were  among  the  most 
indefatigable  translators  of  sacred  texts  the  world  has  ever  known.  The  books  them- 
selves are  regarded  as  sacred,  for  just  as  the  image  symbolizes  the  body  of  the 
Buddha,  the  book  represents  his  speech.  Reading  the  sacred  books,  whether  or  not 
the  contents  are  understood,  is  an  essential  part  of  a  monk's  daily  routine.  Unlike 
Indian  and  Nepali  manuscripts  of  the  early  period  (tenth-twelfth  century),  which 
were  written  on  birch  bark  or  palm  leaves,  Tibetan  books  were  all  written  on  local, 
handmade  paper,  which  was  introduced  from  China.  However,  the  shape  of  the 
books  followed  the  Indian  format  of  birch  bark  or  palm  leaf  manuscripts,  even 
though,  because  of  the  greater  flexibility  of  paper,  the  Tibetan  pages  are  of  a  con- 
siderably larger  size.  Also,  as  in  Indian  manuscripts,  the  illuminations  are  placed 
either  in  the  center  (Ml)  or  at  the  ends  of  a  page  (M4),  and  the  wooden  covers  are 
carved  on  the  outside  and  painted  on  the  inside.  Both  on  the  page  and  the  cover  the 
representations  are  usually  of  divine  figures,  which  may  or  may  not  relate  to  the 
text.  As  was  the  case  in  India,  these  images  were  not  simply  illustrative;  rather,  it 
was  believed  that  they  would  protect  the  manuscripts  from  harm.  And  since  the 
images  are  symbolic  of  the  body  of  the  Buddha,  their  presence  further  increased  the 
potency  of  the  text. 

114 


The  group  of  manuscript  illuminations  and  covers  in  the  Museum  probably 
forms  the  world's  richest  collection  besides  those  found  in  some  Tibetan  monas- 
teries. Although  there  are  examples  of  manuscript  illuminations  in  other  collections, 
the  dozen  pages  of  the  Prajnaparamita  manuscript  (Ml)  are  not  only  the  oldest  but 
also  the  only  surviving  examples  of  western  Tibetan  paintings  outside  of  those  in 
the  monasteries  themselves.  They  reveal  a  direct  stylistic  kinship  with  the  tenth-to- 
eleventh-century  murals  at  such  sites  as  Toling,  Tabo,  Mannang,  Sumda,  and  Alchi2 
in  western  Tibet.  Strikingly  similar  to  the  murals  in  the  Dukhang  and  the  Sumtsek 
temples  at  Alchi,  which  were  built  in  the  mid-eleventh  century,^  the  Prajnaparamita 
paintings  (with  the  exception  of  three  illustrations)  reflect  the  same  brilliance  and 
lustrous  coloring,  and  the  same  attraction  for  elegant,  sumptuously  clad,  swaying 
figures  with  pinched  waists  and  full  bosoms,  that  are  hallmarks  of  the  Kashmiri 
figurative  tradition.  Indeed,  along  with  the  western  Tibetan  murals,  these  manu- 
script illuminations  are  as  important  for  the  early  history  of  Kashmiri  painting  as 
they  are  for  the  early  history  of  Tibetan  painting.  They  also  demonstrate  that  the 
Kashmiri  artistic  tradition  was  already  strong  in  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries  in 
western  Tibet,  when  Rinchen  Sangpo  returned  from  Kashmir  with  thirty-two  artists. 
Unfortunately,  but  for  one  or  two  manuscript  covers  found  at  Gilgit,  no  examples 
of  Kashmiri  painting  are  known  to  have  survived.  However,  because  of  the  close 
relationship  between  sculptures  preserved  in  western  Tibetan  monasteries  and  those 
that  remain  in  situ  in  Kashmir,  we  can  easily  surmise  that  a  similar  kinship  existed 
with  paintings.  Thus,  undoubtedly,  the  Tibetan  tradition  is  correct  when  it  states 
that  one  of  the  stylistic  sources  for  Tibetan  art  was  Kashmir.4  Be  that  as  it  may, 
the  style  in  which  the  early  Prajnaparamita  illuminations  were  done  may  appropri- 
ately be  designated  as  the  Tibeto-Kashmiri  style. 

We  are  more  fortunate  in  documenting  influences  from  eastern  India,  for 
both  Nepali  and  Tibetan  monasteries  have  preserved  a  vast  quantity  of  manuscripts 
that  were  written  and  illustrated  in  various  monasteries  of  Bihar  and  Bengal.  Dur- 
ing the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries  much  of  eastern  India,  including  Bihar  and 
Bengal,  was  ruled  by  the  Pala  dynasty.  Many  of  the  Pala  monarchs  were  generous 
patrons  of  Buddhism  and  strongly  supported  the  major  monasteries  in  the  region. 
The  style  of  art  that  flourished  at  the  time  in  Bihar  and  Bengal  is  generally  referred 
to  as  the  Pala  style. 

According  to  Tibetan  tradition,  the  Pala  school  of  art  strongly  influenced 
the  art  of  Tibet.5  Unfortunately,  we  know  little  about  the  physical  presence  of  art- 
ists from  eastern  India  in  Tibet,  but  it  is  likely  that  some  traveled  in  the  retinue  of 
Atisa  and  other  Indian  monks  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries.  Apart  from  the 
surviving  illuminated  manuscripts,  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  vigorous  Pala 
style  of  painting  is  provided,  unexpectedly,  from  a  Chinese  source.  A  Chinese  text 
informs  us  that  a  technique  of  coloring  had  been  developed  at  Nalanda,  one  of  the 
principal  centers  of  Buddhist  art  during  the  Pala  period,  which  was  unknown  in 
China.6  In  any  case,  a  recognizable  style  of  painting  developed  in  Tibet  in  the 
eleventh  century  that  may  justly  be  called  the  Pala-Tibetan  style. 

There  were  two  distinct  versions  of  the  Pala-Tibetan  style  which  appear  to 
have  been  connected  chiefly  with  the  Kadampa  monasteries  between  the  eleventh 
and  the  fourteenth  century.  One  style  developed  in  the  central  region  and  the 
other  in  western  Tibet.  Vestiges  of  the  style  may  be  seen  in  the  murals  of  such  early 
Kadampa  monasteries  as  Nethang  (where  Atisa  died),  Nesar,  Dranang,  and  Iwang — 
the  latter  being  the  most  important.  The  few  pictures  of  the  Iwang  murals  pub- 
lished by  Tucci  leave  no  doubt  that  their  style  is  extremely  close  to  that  of  the  two 
thankas  (PI,  P2)  reflecting  the  Pala-Tibetan  manner.7  With  regard  to  the  Iwang 
temple  Tucci  writes:  "The  Iwang  temple,  hidden  in  a  dale  left  of  the  mountain  road 


115 


midway  between  Samada  and  Kangmar  on  the  map,  was  the  oldest  of  all.  In  the 
small  cell,  standing  Bodhisattva  images  surround  the  Buddha  in  the  middle."8  This 
is  the  basic  subject  matter  of  both  of  the  Museum's  thankas  just  referred  to,  as  it  is 
of  most  other  examples  in  this  style  from  early  Kadampa  monasteries.  The  cult  of 
the  Eight  Bodhisattvas  appears  to  have  been  especially  popular  with  the  Kadampas 
and  must  once  have  been  more  familiar  in  Nalanda  than  the  present  evidence 
indicates.9 

The  larger  of  the  two  paintings  in  the  collection  (PI)  is  by  far  the  more  art 
historically  interesting,  because  of  its  inscription,  although  the  smaller  (P2)  is  much 
better  preserved  and  is  perhaps  the  more  beautiful.  The  inscription  on  PI  states  that 
the  painting  was  dedicated  in  Ba-yul,  which  is  in  E-yul  and  was  a  relatively  obscure 
retreat  for  monks.  On  the  other  hand,  both  Phan-yul  and  Bya-yul  were  actively 
associated  with  the  Kadampa  orders;  one  wonders  if  Ba  is  an  orthographical  error 
for  Phan  or  Bya. 

In  any  event,  this  Pala-Tibetan  style,  with  its  distinctive  coloring  (which 
was  noted  by  the  Chinese),  its  slim,  willowy  figures  wearing  peculiar  jewelry  and 
pointed  diadems,  and  its  strong  emphasis  on  linearism,  was  very  likely  developed  in 
those  central  Tibetan  monasteries  which  were  associated  with  the  Kadampas.  Dur- 
ing the  period  of  Tibet's  close  relationship  with  the  Xixia  kingdom,  the  style 
traveled  as  far  into  China  as  Kharakhoto,10  which  was  destroyed  by  the  Mongols  in 
1227.  Shortly  thereafter,  however,  artists  from  central  Tibet  must  again  have  been 
employed  to  paint  various  caves  at  Dunhuang,  which  they  rendered  in  the  Pala- 
Tibetan  style.11 

The  western  Tibetan  version  of  the  same  style,  more  cursive  and  freely 
drawn  and  revealing  neither  the  sophisticated  coloring  nor  the  elegance  of  the  cen- 
tral Tibetan  manner,  may  be  seen  in  one  painting  in  the  collection  (P3).  Other 
thankas  in  this  style  were  recovered  from  the  Mount  Kailasa  region;  and  one  of  the 
temples  at  Alchi  in  Ladakh  is  painted  entirely  in  this  manner.12  Although  not  so 
refined  as  the  Pala-Tibetan  style,  the  western  Tibetan  idiom  has  a  rustic  vigor  and 
expressiveness  that  make  it  seem  closer  to  the  Kharakhoto  thankas  than  to  the  cen- 
tral Tibetan  mode.  I  have  written  elsewhere  that  the  Alchi  murals  in  this  style  may 
have  been  rendered  for  the  Drigungpas,  a  subsect  of  the  Kagyupas,  around  the  year 
1215.13  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Heather  Karmay  has  suggested  that  the 
same  order  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  the  Kharakhoto  thankas.14  Further 
evidence  for  ascribing  the  Museum's  thanka  to  western  Tibet  is  the  costume  of  the 
figures  at  the  bottom. 

The  remaining  thankas  from  western  Tibet  reflect  three  manners  which, 
though  distinct,  share  certain  stylistic  features.  Of  these,  the  Guge  style  is  well- 
known  (P6-P8);15  the  style  in  which  the  Milarepa  (P14)  was  painted  is  difficult  to 
localize;  and  the  thanka  representing  Amitayus  (P17)  must  now  be  considered  to 
be  a  fine  example  of  the  manner  that  flourished  in  sixteenth-  and  seventeenth- 
century  Ladakh. 

The  three  Guge  thankas  are  clearly  recognizable  examples  of  that  style. 
Guge  was  the  kingdom  in  western  Tibet  to  which  King  Yeshe  O  belonged.  As 
noted,  at  least  two  major  styles  of  painting  can  be  discerned  as  having  appeared  in 
that  region  between  the  tenth  and  the  fourteenth  century:  the  Tibeto-Kashmiri 
style  and  the  Pala-Tibetan  style.  By  the  fifteenth  century,  however,  when  the  three 
paradise  thankas  in  the  collection  (P6-P8)  were  painted,  a  notably  different  style, 
which  we  now  distinguish  as  Guge,  was  prevalent. 


116 


Perhaps  the  most  striking  difference  between  the  early  Tibeto- Kashmiri 
style  (Ml)  and  these  three  thankas  in  the  Guge  style  is  in  the  application  of  colors. 
The  colors  are  subdued  and  of  muted  tonality,  no  longer  ravishingly  lustrous  and 
vibrant,  more  like  Nepali  paintings  of  the  time.  No  attempt  has  been  made  to 
model  the  figures  by  graduating  the  colors,  and  the  pigments  are  derived  in  a  differ- 
ent manner  and  from  different  sources.  The  figures  show  a  continuation  of  the  ear- 
lier type  in  the  rendering  of  the  principal  personages,  who  have  round,  bloated  faces 
vaguely  reminiscent  of  the  Kashmiri-style  physiognomies.  The  intrusion  of  a  new 
form  that  bears  a  direct  resemblance  to  figures  in  the  narrative  panels  of  fourteenth- 
and  fifteenth-century  Nepali  paintings  is  also  evident.  However,  in  the  figures  of 
the  principal  bodhisattvas  flanking  the  seated  Buddhas  in  the  Guge-style  thankas, 
we  encounter  a  mannered  elegance  and  a  preoccupation  with  scarves  and  accessories 
that  one  observes  in  the  early  fifteenth-century  kumbum  at  Gyantse.16  The  lotuses  on 
which  the  Buddhas  sit  with  their  stylized  and  curly  petals  are  quite  different  from 
Kashmiri-style  lotuses  of  the  artichoke  variety,  and  again  are  more  common  in  the 
Gyantse  murals  and  in  the  fifteenth-century  sketchbook  of  the  Newari  painter 
Jivarama.17  In  general,  the  crowded  compositions,  the  architectural  details,  some  of 
the  figurative  types,  and  the  coloring  (with  its  preponderance  of  red)  make  this 
fifteenth-century  Guge  style  a  fascinating  amalgam  of  the  earlier  Tibeto-Kashmiri 
manner  and  the  Sakyapa  style  of  central  Tibet,  especially  of  Gyantse.  What  must  be 
emphasized  is  that  there  are  no  perceptible  traces  of  any  Central  Asian  features  in 
this  style,  although  one  painting  in  the  collection,  which  will  be  discussed  pres- 
ently, may  show  vestiges  of  the  Central  Asian  tradition. 

Perhaps  the  most  fascinating,  and  stylistically  enigmatic,  western  Tibetan 
thanka  in  the  collection  is  the  one  depicting  Milarepa  and  scenes  from  his  spiritual 
experiences  (Pl4).  Its  kinship  with  the  fifteenth-century  Guge  thankas  is  evident 
from  the  similar  treatment  of  the  throne  and  the  lotus  on  which  the  saint  sits,  while 
some  of  the  demons  attacking  him  have  the  same  expressiveness  as  the  yakshas 
(gnomes)  and  lions  supporting  Bhaishajyaguru's  throne  (P8).  The  surface  is 
crowded,  but,  in  contrast  to  the  sprawling  composition  of  the  two  paradises  (P6, 
P7),  this  thankas  various  scenes  are  depicted  in  separate  mini-compositions  around 
its  central  figure  in  a  manner  much  loved  by  the  Nepalis,  but  also  occurring  in  ear- 
lier Central  Asian  paintings.18  The  coloring  is  quite  different  from  that  used  in  the 
Guge  thankas,  revealing  both  a  richer  palette  and  brighter  tonalities;  this  feature  is 
also  reminiscent  of  Central  Asian  works.  The  most  curious  features  of  this  thanka 
are  its  landscape  elements,  which  include  variegated  colors  and  snowy  peaks  that  are 
quite  unlike  the  mountains  in  Sifio-Tibetan-style  paintings  or  in  contemporary 
Nepali  paubhas.  This  indicates  a  strong  influence  of  the  Central  Asian  painting  style, 
in  which  mountainous  landscapes  are  represented  as  a  series  of  undulating  and  alter- 
nating peaks  and  valleys.  A  similar  conceptualization  is  also  apparent  in  an  arhat 
thanka  in  the  collection  (P9).  These  landscape  elements  may  have  been  extrapolated 
from  earlier  Central  Asian-style  paintings  that  were  available  to  Tibetan  artists.19  It 
may  be  further  noted  that  the  group  of  figures  standing  immediately  above  the  tent 
below  Milarepa's  throne  includes  several  that  are  clearly  derived  from  Central  Asian 
pictures,  as  does  the  group  of  attacking  demons  in  the  upper-right  corner.  How- 
ever, the  variegated  colors  of  the  rocks  are  dictated  by  the  Tibetans'  own  inclination 
to  describe  mountains  in  terms  of  diversely  colored  gems.  Milarepa's  poetry  also 
uses  this  imagery,  and  the  unknown  master  responsible  for  this  beautiful  thanka 
may  have  been  inspired  by  the  rich  metaphors  in  the  saint's  poems. 

An  important  thanka  in  the  collection  (P17),  previously  considered  to  be 
of  the  Guge  school,  was  very  likely  commissioned  by  the  Ladakhi  royal  family  in 
the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth  century.  The  style  of  this  painting  can  be  definitely 


117 


related  to  the  murals  which  have  survived  in  the  palace  temples  at  Basgo,  the 
Ladakhi  capital.  Although  derived  from  the  fifteenth-century  Guge  style,  many 
features  of  this  thanka  reflect  departures  that  are  very  likely  the  result  of  central 
Tibetan  influences.  What  is  perhaps  of  greater  interest  is  the  fact  that  the  painting 
contains  portraits  of  some  members  of  the  ruling  family.  Idealized  portraits  also 
appear  in  other  paintings  (M7,  P14),  and  these  representations  are  of  great  importance 
for  the  study  of  costumes,  especially  in  western  Tibet. 

One  of  the  strengths  of  the  Museum's  collection  lies  in  the  several  magnifi- 
cent paintings  it  contains  that  were  commissioned  by  the  Sakyapa  monasteries 
of  south-central  Tibet,  primarily  in  the  province  of  Tsang,  the  traditional  enclave 
of  this  powerful  order.  As  noted  in  the  General  Introduction,  the  Sakyapas  rose  to 
power  in  the  thirteenth  century  due  to  their  close  association  with  the  Yuan  dynasty 
in  China.  Much  of  the  wealth  that  consequently  filled  the  coffers  of  the  Sakyapa 
monasteries  was  expended  in  religious  benefactions  and  artistic  commissions. 
Between  the  thirteenth  and  the  seventeeth  century,  Sakyapa  monasteries,  such  as 
those  at  Shalu,  Ngor,  and  Gyantse,  became  active  centers  of  artistic  productivity. 

Some  Sakyapa  prelates  appear  to  have  been  especially  fond  of  foreign  art- 
ists and  patronized  both  the  Chinese  and  the  Newars  of  Nepal.  Newari  artists  were 
particularly  associated  with  the  Ngor  monastery,  whose  founder  imported  artists 
from  the  Kathmandu  Valley  in  1422  to  decorate  his  temple.  They  also  worked 
alongside  their  Chinese  colleagues  in  the  Shalu  monastery  in  the  fourteenth  century 
and  later  in  the  kumbum  (its  principal  temple)  of  Gyantse.  One  thanka  in  the  collec- 
tion may  have  been  painted  in  Gyantse  (Pll),  while  several  others  were  very  likely 
executed  in  the  Ngor  monastery.  The  early  Hevajra  mandala  (P5)  could  have  been 
painted  in  the  Narthang  monastery  toward  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century;  it  is 
one  of  the  earliest  extant  Tibetan  mandalas.  Unusual  among  the  fifteenth-century 
Sakyapa  thankas,  the  impressive  lineage  painting  (P13)  may  have  been  rendered  in 
the  Ngor  monastery  or  in  Thubten  Namgyal,  the  monastery  founded  in  1478  by 
one  of  the  principal  personages  in  the  thanka.  Its  style,  however,  differs  little  from 
that  of  the  Ngor  and  Gyantse  murals.  All  these  thankas  reflect  strong  influences  of 
the  contemporary  Nepali  style,  especially  in  their  emphasis  on  red,  which  is  intense 
and  has  a  slightly  maroon  tinge;  in  their  careful  draftsmanship,  with  every  detail 
drawn  very  carefully  and  patiently;  in  their  penchant  for  fine  scrollwork  which  could 
compete  with  the  most  delicate  lacework;  and  in  their  figurative  forms  that  combine 
the  Tibetan  love  for  expressiveness  and  power  with  the  Nepali  predilection  for  gen- 
tle contours  and  subtle  features. 

♦ 

The  extent  of  Chinese  influence  on  Tibetan  paintings  has  yet  to  be  resolved. 
Considering  the  Tibetans'  lengthy  occupation  of  Central  Asia  during  the  period  of 
the  Yarlung  dynasty,  we  can  assume  that  Chinese  paintings  of  the  Tang  period  were 
known  in  Tibet,  but  none  has  surfaced.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  clear  evidence 
of  the  presence  of  Tibetan  artists  in  Central  Asia  as  early  as  the  ninth  century.20 
Eastern  Tibet  was  always  susceptible  to  Chinese  influence,  but  in  the  central 
region  of  the  country  the  impact  is  less  obviously  discernible. 

What  does  seem  clear  is  that  the  Chinese  aesthetic  did  have  a  profound 
effect  on  the  Tibetan  artistic  tradition,  especially  in  the  representations  of  the  arhats 
and  in  landscapes  in  general.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  one  of  the  traditions 
of  painting  the  arhats  was  brought  from  China  in  the  tenth  century  by  the  monk 
Lume.  As  has  also  been  noted,  vigorous  exchange  of  works  of  art  went  on  between 
the  Tibetan  monks  and  the  Chinese  emperors  of  both  the  Yuan  and  the  Ming 
dynasties.  During  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries,  Tibetan  religious  estab- 
lishments at  Shalu  and  Gyantse  invited  Chinese  painters  to  paint  murals.  Thus,  the 

118 


P4 


Tibetans  were  very  likely  aware  of  several  Chinese  styles  from  which  they  borrowed 
whatever  elements  they  admired  to  create  their  own  distinctive  manners.  This  is 
evident  in  a  remarkable  representation  of  an  arhat  (P4),  which  remains  one  of  the 
earliest  thankas  reflecting  Chinese  influences. 

No  Chinese  painting  of  the  arhats  is  so  densely  packed  with  figures  and 
vegetation  as  this  thanka  is.  Clearly,  we  are  witnessing  in  this  work  the  sort  of 
horror  vacuii  that  only  a  Tibetan  artist  would  inherit  from  the  Indo-Nepali  tradition. 
There  are  no  open  spaces  here,  and  natural  forms,  although  sensitively  rendered, 
remain  subordinate  to  the  human  or  divine  figures.  But  perhaps  the  most  significant 
difference  may  be  seen  in  the  expression  given  to  the  arhat  s  eyes  and  to  those  of  the 
kneeling  foreigner.  The  eyes  are  particularly  intense,  and  in  the  case  of  the  devotee, 
they  seem  to  jump  out  of  their  sockets.  This  characteristic  is  frequently  employed  in 
Tibetan  art  (S3 2,  S3 5)  to  express  the  luminous,  inner  effulgence  of  a  great  yogi  who 
has  achieved  his  goal.  (In  Southern  Song  China  the  cult  of  the  arhats  was  particu- 
larly popular  with  the  Chan  Buddhists;  the  arhats  are  often  portrayed  there  as  con- 
templative figures  whose  faces  reflect  their  inner  calm.) 

The  artist  responsible  for  this  beautiful  thanka  was  a  great  eclectic  who 
was  familiar  with  the  various  Chinese  styles  of  arhat  painting  prevalent  in  the  Song 
and  early  Yuan  periods  but  who  was  not  a  slavish  imitator.  He  followed  none  of  the 
styles  explicitly,  but  extrapolated  elements  from  several  to  create  his  own  distinctive 
manner.  It  also  seems  evident  that  the  artist  was  a  Tibetan  rather  than  a  Chinese. 


Like  tigers  who  cannot  do  without  human  blood  once  they  have  tasted  it, 
Tibetans  became  totally  engrossed  with  the  pictorial  possibilities  of  landscapes  once 
they  discovered  their  charm  and  potential  —  especially  after  the  thirteenth  century. 
Mahasiddhas  and  lamas,  as  well  as  arhats,  were  placed  in  evocative  landscapes  that 
borrowed  elements  from  the  Chinese  styles,  but  the  Tibetans  used  them  in  more 
imaginative  and  colorful  ways.  Less  concerned  with  their  surroundings,  the  Tibetans 
did  not  explore  the  relationship  between  light  and  shadow,  as  the  Chinese  did; 
nor  were  they  interested  in  depicting  the  changing  seasons  or  in  communicating 
with  nature.  But  they  did  use  some  of  the  Chinese  motifs  and  forms:  the  blue-green 
rocks  of  Yuan  and  early  Ming  paintings;  cascading  streams  and  gentle  waterfalls; 
limpid  pools  with  lotuses  and  ducks;  vast  blue  skies  with  floating,  stylized  clouds; 
lively  and  natural  animals  and  birds;  and  flowering  as  well  as  gnarled  trees.  They 
combined  all  these  elements  in  endless  varieties,  sometimes  with  extraordinary 
visual  effects.  This  newly  founded  pictorial  vocabulary  was  used  over  a  wide  area, 
from  Gyantse  in  central  Tibet  to  Kham  in  the  east.  Styles  differed  from  one  region 
to  another,  however,  depending  on  the  skill  and  aesthetic  sensibility  of  the  artist. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  isolate  specific  Chinese  motifs  and  pictorial  devices 
in  Tibetan  landscape  thankas,  yet  the  overall  expression  is  essentially  Tibetan. 
Because  Tibetan  artists  were  constantly  exposed  to  so  many  different  traditions, 
often  at  the  same  time  —  in  the  Shalu  and  Gyantse  monasteries,  for  instance,  artists 
from  Nepal  and  China  worked  alongside  their  Tibetan  colleagues  —  they  had,  of 
necessity,  to  be  great  synthesizers.  How  well  they  succeeded  in  creating  their  own 
distinctive  style  may  be  seen  by  considering  a  particularly  colorful  thanka  of  about 
1500  in  the  collection  (P15).  Though  elements  of  the  Nepali  tradition  are  visible 
here,  along  with  several  Chinese-derived  details  (such  as  the  robe  folds  and  pink 
flesh),  the  fact  of  overriding  importance  is  that  the  style — in  its  figurative  forms, 
in  the  boldness  of  its  dense,  glowing  colors,  and  in  its  overall  aesthetic  vision  —  is 
decisively  Tibetan.  The  organization  of  the  composition,  with  the  monks  placed  in 
golden-arched  niches,  is  remarkably  like  similar  arrangements  of  fifteenth-century 
portrait  sculptures  in  the  monastery  of  Ladong.21 


119 


Because  it  is  located  in  the  east,  the  province  of  Kham  has  always  been  in 
close  touch  with  Sichuan,  Yunnan,  and  the  northwestern  provinces  of  China.  Al- 
though knowledge  of  the  early  artistic  traditions  of  Kham  is  almost  nonexistent, 
one  style  of  Tibetan  painting  that  probably  originated  in  that  region  is  called, 
in  Tibetan,  Karma-gadri.  Most  known  examples  of  this  style  (P26,  P28)  belong  to 
the  seventeenth  century  or  later  and,  as  already  suggested,  the  style  was  inspired,  if 
not  invented,  by  the  famous  Karmapa  Mikyo  Dorje.  The  style  is  very  likely  called 
Karma-gadri  because  of  its  association  with  the  Karmapas,  who  have  always  exerted 
strong  influence  in  eastern  Tibet. 

The  models  for  this  style,  however,  are  probably  Chinese  paintings  of  a 
much  earlier  period.  The  emphasis  in  Karma-gadri  paintings  on  open  spaces  with 
small  figures  grouped  together  in  clusters,  as  well  as  these  works'  sparse  use  of  land- 
scape elements,  also  reduced  in  scale,  makes  them  seem  to  echo  the  arhat  paintings 
of  such  Yuan  masters  as  Zhao  Mengfu  (Chao  Meng-fu)  (1254— 1322),  Lu  Xinchong 
(Lu  Hsin-ch'ung)  (thirteenth  century),  and  others.  Indeed,  a  set  of  arhat  paintings, 
two  examples  of  which  are  now  in  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,  may  well 
have  served  as  the  distant  forebears  of  the  Karma-gadri  style.22  Paintings  such  as  the 
thirteenth-century  arhats  at  Boston  may  have  inspired  the  "open"  landscape  style 
in  Tibet,  especially  the  grouping  of  figures  in  receding  planes  surrounded  by  empty 
spaces,  as  if  to  emphasize  the  emptiness  of  both  samsara  and  nirvana. 

How  complex  the  study  of  Tibet's  pictorial  tradition  is  can  best  be  illus- 
trated by  the  two  sections  of  two  pattern  books  illustrated  as  figures  1  and  2  and 
briefly  discussed  in  the  General  Introduction.  Figure  2  shows  arhats  seated  in 
rudimentary  landscapes.  The  Newari  colophon  informs  us  that  it  was  rendered  by 
the  Newari  painter  Jivarama  in  Tibet  (probably  at  Gyantse)  in  1435.  Jivarama  was 
apparently  aided  by  a  Tibetan  colleague.23  The  book  is  filled  with  drawings  and  pat- 
terns that  are  employed  only  in  Tibetan  paintings  and  relate  closely  to  fifteenth- 
century  murals  in  the  kumbum  of  Gyantse.  Not  only  does  this  pattern  book  throw 
light  upon  the  antiquity  of  arhat  paintings  in  Tibet,  but  it  raises  the  possibility  that 
some  Tibetan  paintings  may  actually  have  been  painted  by  Newari  artists  in  Nepal 
rather  than  in  Tibet.  Why  else  would  a  Newari  artist  prepare  a  pattern  book  in 
Tibet  and  bring  it  back  with  him  to  Nepal? 

The  other  pattern  book  (fig.  1)  is  even  more  fascinating.  It  was  sketched 
by  Vajracarya  Srimantadeva  in  Lhasa  in  1653.  The  section  illustrated  here  is  a 
graphic  composition  reflecting  a  style  of  arhat  thanka  that  was  extremely  popular  in 
Tibet  and  that  is  generally  considered  to  have  originated  in  the  eighteenth  century. 
The  places  associated  with  the  style  are  the  great  monasteries  of  Tashilumpo  and 
Narthang.  And  yet,  we  encounter  in  this  book  the  style  well  formulated  in  Lhasa  in 
the  mid-seventeenth  century.  Moreover,  once  again  a  Newari  artist,  who  was  also  a 
vajracarya  or  priest,  took  the  book  back  home  with  him,  no  doubt  to  have  it  serve 
as  an  aid  in  the  painting  of  thankas  for  the  Tibetan  market.  Indeed,  if  the  document 
did  not  contain  Newari  writing,  few  scholars  would  have  hesitated  to  suggest  a  Ti- 
betan provenance  for  it,  based  purely  on  style.  In  this  connection,  it  may  be  pointed 
out  that  the  collection  contains  two  rare  sketches  of  mahasiddhas  (P19  a,b)  that  are 
stylistically  related  to  these  1653  drawings.  The  inscriptions  on  them,  however,  are 
in  Tibetan.  The  facts  that  they  are  sketched  on  both  sides  and  are  small  clearly  indi- 
cate that  they  were  meant  to  serve  as  models.  But  were  they  done  by  a  Tibetan  or  a 
Newari  artist? 

One  can  draw  another  conclusion  from  the  existence  of  such  pattern  books 
—  that  they  exerted  some  influence  on  the  Nepali  painting  tradition,  playing  a  role, 
at  least,  in  the  introduction  of  landscape  elements.  Certainly  by  the  seventeenth 


120 


century,  Tashilumpo  had  become  an  important  center  of  pilgrimage  for  Buddhist 
Newars.  At  least  one  painting  in  the  collection  (P39)  was  produced  at  Tashilumpo 
for  a  Newari  patron  and  brought  back  to  Nepal.  There  are  many  other  examples, 
several  of  which  are  inscribed,  of  similar  paintings  created  specifically  for  Newari 
merchants  visiting  Tashilumpo  both  for  business  and  pilgrimage.24  Finally,  Tibetan 
art  may  also  be  said  to  have  exerted  some  influence  on  Chinese  Buddhist  art  after 
the  thirteenth  century.  However  fascinating  such  topics  are,  they  are  beyond  the 
scope  of  this  catalogue. 

♦ 
The  Museum's  collection  of  Tibetan  paintings  is  one  of  the  most  compre- 
hensive outside  Tibet.  Most  major  styles  and  expressions,  from  the  eleventh  through 
the  nineteenth  century,  are  represented  by  outstanding  examples  that  are  fascinating 
both  for  their  iconographic  complexity  and  for  their  aesthetic  characteristics. 
Between  the  eleventh  and  the  thirteenth  century,  the  strongest  influences  were 
exerted  by  the  Indian  schools  of  Kashmir  and  Bihar.  The  influence  of  Nepal  was 
pervasive  throughout  the  period,  especially  in  southern  and  central  Tibet,  where  the 
monasteries  frequently  employed  professional  artists  from  that  country.  While  no 
early  painting  in  the  collection  reflects  either  Chinese  or  Central  Asian  influences,  at 
least  one  thanka  (P3)  clearly  shows  that  Chinese  pictorial  elements  were  introduced 
by  the  fourteenth  century;  another  (P14)  may  echo  a  few  Central  Asian  elements. 
The  influence  of  the  Chinese  aesthetic  is  evident  in  specific  features  of  landscape 
thankas,  but  the  landscapes  of  fantasy  created  by  the  Tibetans  generally  reflect  the 
richness  of  their  own  imaginations.  Whether  Tibetans  borrowed  from  India,  Nepal, 
or  China,  they  were  always  creative  enough  to  adapt  the  foreign  elements  to  suit 
their  own  aesthetic  and  religious  needs. 

No  matter  what  the  style,  rich  and  varied  color  is  the  most  striking  fea- 
ture of  Tibetan  painting.  This  penchant  for  color  also  affects  many  other  areas  of  the 
country's  artistic  expression.  Even  though  the  external  walls  of  Tibetan  buildings 
are  austere  and  colorless,  the  gilded  and  brilliant  tiled  roofs,  the  interior  pillars  and 
walls,  the  richly  woven  carpets  and  brightly  painted  furniture — as  well  as  the  than- 
kas and  hangings  —  all  reflect  this  innate  affinity.  From  the  earliest  times,  the  tents 
of  the  wealthy  have  been  embellished  with  bright  and  cheerful  designs.  Their  per- 
sonal ornaments  and  ritual  articles  have  always  displayed  the  Tibetans'  inordinate 
fondness  for  rich  and  densely  colored  stones — turquoise,  carnelians,  rubies,  and 
agates  —  rather  than  diamonds.  This  liking  for  bright  surfaces  is  evident  in  both 
their  sculpture  and  their  paintings,  in  which  the  presentation  of  forms  often  seems 
to  be  an  excuse  for  displaying  bold  and  vivacious  colors.  Here,  Tibetans  seem  to 
be  closer  to  the  Indian  aesthetic,  in  which  color  usually  overwhelms  both  drafts- 
manship and  composition,  than  to  the  Chinese  concern  with  clarity  of  line  and 
subtle  brushwork.  As  we  shall  see,  even  when  the  Tibetans  borrowed  landscape 
elements  from  the  Chinese  tradition,  they  suffused  their  visionary  landscapes  with 
brilliant  hues. 


12 1 


Notes 


i .    A  slightly  rearranged  version  of  the  pas- 
sage may  be  found  in  Goswamy  and 
Dahmen-Dallapiccola,  p.  9. 

2.  See  discussion  in  Mi  and  references  cited 
therein. 

3.  See  Snellgrove  and  Skorupski,  1977,  for  a 
discussion  and  illustrations  of  the  Alchi 
murals.  Also,  Pal,  1982  B. 

4.  "In  Kashmir,  later,  spread  a  school  of 
painting  and  sculpture  of  a  certain 
Hasuraja,  which  is  known  as  the  school 
of  'Kashmir.'"  From  the  dPag  bsatn  Ijon 
bzang  by  the  lama  Lumpa  Khenpo 
(1702-1775);  Goswamy  and  Dahmen- 
Dallapiccola,  p.  114. 

5.  Ibid.  These  artists  apparently  lived  dur- 
ing the  reigns  of  the  Pala  kings  Devapala 
and  Dharmapala  in  the  ninth  century.  It 
is  interesting  that  the  passage  referring 
to  Pala  kings  precedes  that  relating  to 
Kashmir  quoted  in  the  previous  note.  In 
that  statement,  by  inserting  the  expres- 
sion "later"  Sumpa  Khenpo  seems  to  im- 
ply that  the  Kashmiri  style  was  invented 
later  than  the  Pala  style. 

6.  See  Giles,  p.  1  ^5. 

7.  Tucci,  1973.  fig.  124;  Tucci,  1956,  plate 
facing  p.  [58  for  a  mural  from  Dranang, 
which  seems  to  be  an  admixture  of  the 


Kashmiri  and  the  Pala  styles;  Tucci, 
1949,  1,  fig.  78;  and  Liu  I-se,  figs.  17, 
19,  2}.  All  three  paintings  are  said  to  be 
in  the  Ladong  (its  name  in  Chinese) 
monastery.  Liu  I-se  dates  fig.  17  to  1039 
and  the  others  to  the  twelfth  century. 
The  first  date  is  unlikely,  as  it  would 
make  it  a  work  rendered  prior  to  the  ar- 
rival of  Atisa  in  central  Tibet  in  1044. 
However,  a  twelfth-century  dating  is 
consistent  with  the  date  suggested  for  the 
Museum's  thanka.  See  also  Hatt;  and 
Karmay,  1975,  for  further  discussion 
about  the  style. 

8.  Tucci,  1956,  p.  36. 

9.  For  the  many  references  to  the  represen- 
tations of  the  Ashtabodhisattva-mandala 
in  Tibet,  see  Tucci,  1956.  For  the  famil- 
iarity of  this  cult  in  Nalanda,  see  Pal, 
[972-73. 

10.    For  the  Kharakhoto  thankas.  see  d'Olden- 
burg;  Karmay,  19-  5;  and  Dieux  et  demons , 

where  several  thankas  are  reproduced. 

1  1  .    Pel  hot,  pis.  (  (  (  XLVII— CCCLI. 

12.  Olschak  and  Wangyal,  pp.  50-51; 
Snellgrove  and  Skorupski,  [977,  figs. 
56-64. 

13.  Pal,  1982  B. 


14.  Karmay,  19^5,  pp.  41—42. 

15.  For  a  discussion  of  the  Guge  style,  see 
Huntington,  1972. 

16.  Karmay,  1975,  figs.  51,  55,  57;  and 
Tucci,  1932-41,  vol.  iv.,  pts.  1-3,  Tbt 
Gyaiitse  Temples . 

17.  Lowry,  1977,  pp.  107-09. 

18.  Hambis,  fig.  146. 

19.  Ibid.,  figs.  116,  134;  and  pp.  185-87. 

20.  Karmay,  1975,  pp.  7~M- 

21.  Liu  I-se,  figs.  67—71.  It  is  not  entirely 
clear  whether  the  name  of  the  monastery, 
as  given  in  this  Chinese  publication,  is 
Ladong  or  Lithang.  The  former  seems 
more  probable. 

22.  Pal  and  Tseng,  figs.  24  a,  b. 

23.  For  a  detailed  discussion,  see  Lowry, 
1977- 

24.  Pal,  1978,  pp.  153-55. 


122 


Mi  a 


Prajnaparamita  with  Devotees 


^^Yp  i^^^yp^y5^ 


Mi 


Twelve  III  urn  mated  Folios  from  a 

Praj naparamita  Manuscript 

Western  Tibet  or  Ladakh, 

i  ith— 17th  century 

Ink,  watercolors,  and  gold  on  paper 

Each  page:  7V1  x  2&V%  in.  (19  x  66.3  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Purchased  with  Funds  from  the  Jane  and 

Justin  Dart  Foundation 

M.  81. 90. 6-17 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  pp.  273—74  and 
pis.  C,  D;  Pal.  1969  A,  pp.  113,  156; 
Huntington,  1972,  p.  113;  Dieux  et 

demons,  pp.  15,  74. 

These  twelve  richly  illuminated  manuscript  pages  were 
recovered  from  Toling  by  Tucci,  who  found  them  "in  ruins  of 
upper  Toling,  among  a  heap  of  canonical  works,  indiscrimi- 
nately flung  into  a  store-room."  Toling  was  an  important  cul- 
tural center  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Guge,  and  its  temple 
was  founded  by  the  pious  Yeshe  O  and  Rinchen  Sangpo  in  the 
tenth  century. 

The  text  on  all  twelve  pages  belongs  to  the  most  cele- 
brated Mahayana  Buddhist  work,  known  as  the  Ashtasahasrika 
Prajnaparamita.  Attributed  to  the  famous  Indian  philosopher 
Nagarjuna  {see  M4  a),  the  Prajnaparamita  is  a  lucid  exposition  of 


the  basic  philosophy  of  Mahayana  Buddhism.  Therefore,  it  was 
frequently  copied  by  pious  Buddhists.  These  twelve  folios  are 
among  the  earliest  from  Tibet  that  have  survived.  With  the  pos- 
sible exception  of  one  page  (/),  they  all  appear  to  have  belonged 
to  the  same  manuscript,  for  the  style  of  writing  is  identical. 

Some  of  the  figures,  which  are  identified  by  inscriptions 
{see  Appendix),  are  deified  representations  of  abstract  philosoph- 
ical concepts  discussed  in  the  text.  For  example,  the  inscription 
below  /;  reads  stong  pa  nyid  stongpa  nyid.  Translated  into 
Sanskrit,  this  means  sunyata  sunyata  —  in  English,  "nothingness 
of  nothingness."  This  is  one  of  the  eighteen  categories  of 
sunyata,  a  concept  of  fundamental  importance  to  Mahayana  Bud- 
dhism. Two  more  of  these  categories  are  represented  among  the 
pictures:  on  folio/  it  is  asamskrita  sunyata.  or  "unpurified  noth- 
ingness"; and  on  folio  h  it  is  paramartba  sunyata,  or  "absolute 
nothingness."  Insight  {c)  and  charity  {e)  are  two  of  the  twelve 
perfections  expounded  in  the  Prajnaparamita  text;  it  was  not 
uncommon  to  represent  these  as  goddesses.  The  label  below  e 
identifies  the  ferocious  figure  as  dad  pa "1  stobs.  which  is  Tibetan 
for  the  Sanskrit  sraddha  bala  (literally,  power  of  faith).  No  deity 
of  this  name  is  known,  but  bala.  or  power,  is  an  important  con- 
cept in  Mahayana  Buddhism.  The  Prajnaparamita  enumerates 
five  such  powers  of  a  bodhisattva.  They  are:  faith,  vigor,  mind- 
fulness, concentration,  and  wisdom. 

Thus,  unlike  the  Indo-Nepali  tradition  of  Prajnaparamita 
illuminations,  the  pictures  in  this  Tibetan  manuscript  relate 
directly  to  the  text.  Moreover,  they  introduce  us  to  images  of 
abstract  ideas  that  are  not  common  in  Buddhist  iconography. 


i23 


Mi  a    Prajnaparamita  with  Devotees 
nth  century 

4/h  x  ioV.  in.  (12.4  x  27.3  cm.) 
M. 81. 90. 6 

b     Nothingness  of  Nothingness 
nth  century 
3  x  3  in.  (7.6  x  7.6  cm.) 
M. 81. 90. 7 


Perfection  of  Insight 

nth  century 

3y/,6  x  3  in.  (9.1  x  7.6  cm.) 

M.  81. 90. 8 

See  plate  1 

Power  of  Faith 

nth  century 

3'/2  x  3 Vfe  in.  (8.9  x  7.7  cm.) 

M.  81. 90. 9 

5W  plate  2 


e     Perfection  of  Charity 
nth  century 

3%  x  3'/,6  in.  (9.5  x  7.8  cm.) 
M.  81. 90. 10 

f     Unpurified  Nothingness 
nth  century 

3Vk  x  ^  in.  (9.2  x  7.6  cm.) 
M. 81. 90. 11 


detail 


1  1\: 


In  "^M^^^y^fYii    11 


124 


g     Buddha  Vairocana 
nth  century 

37/a  x  3,/2  in.  (9.8  x  8.9  cm.) 
M.  81. 90. 13 

h     Absolute  Nothingness 
nth  century 

35/fc  x  3  in.  (9.2  x  7.6  cm.) 
M.  81. 90. 14 


i      Buddha  Ratnasambhava 
nth  century 

35/s  x  3  in.  (9.2  x  7.6  cm.) 
M. 81. 90. 16 

j      A  Buddha  in  a  Shrine 
nth-i3th  century  (?) 
4  x  3I/8  in.  (10. 1  x  8  cm.) 
M. 81. 90. 12 


k     A  Bodhisattva  in  a  Shrine 
13th- 14th  century  (?) 
2y/,6  x  27/,6  in.  (6.5  x  6.2  in.) 
M. 81. 90. 15 

1     A  Goddess 

i6th-i7th  century  (?) 

4'/s  x  3'/8  in.  (10.5  x  8  cm.) 

M.  81. 90. 17 


T&JF&NXP&R 

^'WW  1  §pfH 

Rot  ^vSSW  ^ 

^llvli^ 

#3|          "  ill,    1  R 

^>< 

'#i 

rBH^^e^lH> 

1       4-7S1* x          B 

a.           •  ™ ••               ■*) 

«        X 


t~vVT\  \\  l1 


'||'wgf^3^«.T{Y|      I 


125 


Nine  of  the  twelve  illuminations  (a-i)  reflect  a  homoge- 
nous style  and,  if  not  made  by  the  same  hand,  are  very  likely 
the  products  of  the  same  school  and  period.  They  are  charac- 
terized by  bright  colors,  including  a  rich  blue  and  a  deep 
magenta  red;  gold  is  used  as  the  background  for  several  of  the 
aureoles.  The  figures  are  finely  drawn  and  the  artist  has  made  a 
conscious  attempt  at  suggesting  volume  by  strongly  shading 
areas  of  the  exposed  bodies.  Except  for  Vairocana,  the  figures  are 
richly  ornamented  and  attired  with  sumptuously  printed  gar- 
ments and  swirling,  brightly  colored  scarves  that  considerably 
enhance  their  liveliness.  Tall  and  slender  and  with  pinched 
waistlines,  most  of  the  figures  are  shown  frontally,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  c,  whose  body  is  elegantly  turned  toward  a  goose 
with  which  she  appears  to  be  playing.  Especially  spirited  is  the 
figure  of  the  angry  male  deity  {ci)  who  strides  to  the  left,  hold- 
ing a  handsome  elephant-goad  in  his  right  hand.  The  details  in 
these  nine  paintings  are  rendered  with  such  great  care  that  every 
design  is  precisely  articulated. 

The  most  elaborate  of  the  compositions  is  that  portraying 
Prajnaparamita  (a).  Unlike  the  other  figures  on  this  folio,  whose 
torsos  are  bare,  she  wears  a  blouse.  Moreover,  while  the  others 
have  only  two  arms  each,  she  is  given  six.  Two  of  the  hands 
form  the  gesture  of  preaching,  one  is  stretched  in  the  gesture  of 
munificence,  and  the  other  three  hold  a  thunderbolt,  a  manu- 
script, and  a  blue  lotus.  Of  great  interest  here  are  the  figures  of 
the  monk  and  the  kneeling  devotees.  All  four  hold  flowers  in 
their  hands  in  a  manner  similar  to  Chinese  donor  figures  in  Cen- 
tral Asian  paintings.  In  front  of  the  goddess  and  between  the 
devotees  are  a  black  plate  of  offerings  (frontal  position)  and  six 
tripods  supporting  bowls  with  heaps  of  grain,  flowers,  a  candle, 
and  two  conch  shells.  The  devotee  next  to  the  monk  is  dressed 
in  the  typical  costume  worn  by  western  Tibetans.  Similarly 
dressed  figures  are  encountered  in  murals  at  Alchi  in  Ladakh,  as 
well  as  at  Tabo.  Indeed,  the  murals  of  Tabo  {see  Karmay  1977) 
also  contain  figures  attired,  like  the  two  devotees  on  the  right, 
in  coats  with  wide  lapels  and  large  sombrerolike  hats;  the  two 
figures  here  have  taken  off  their  hats,  evidently  as  a  sign  of 
respect  for  the  deity. 

When  he  first  wrote  about  these  manuscript  pages,  Tucci 
(1949)  emphasized  their  importance  in  the  history  of  Kashmiri 
painting,  and  correctly  suggested  that  they  are  closely  related  to 
murals  in  Toling,  Tabo,  Mannang,  Alchi,  and  other  sites  in 
the  western  Himalayas.  He  also  rightly  attributed  them  to  the 
period  in  the  eleventh  century  when  Buddhism  regained 
supremacy  under  the  enlightened  patronage  of  the  kings  of  Guge. 
Huntington  argues  that  stylistically  the  illuminations  are 
closely  related  to  the  Tabo  murals  and  assigns  them  to  the  late 
tenth  century. 

Two  of  the  remaining  illustrations  (/'  and  k)  are  not  so 
sumptuous  or  accomplished  as  the  early  group  of  nine,  but  are 
still  stylistically  related  to  them.  In  both,  architectural  elements 
predominate  the  figures.  Both  illustrations  also  display  an  archi- 
tectural style  employing  wood,  though  the  designs  of  each  are 
different.  The  shrine  in  /  containing  the  Buddha  image,  with 
its  tiered  stages  and  pent  roofs,  seems  to  suggest  a  Himalayan 
wooden  temple,  whereas  the  shrine  in  k  has  no  projecting  eaves 
and  suggests  structures  encountered  in  some  Pala  miniatures 
from  Bihar.  The  figures,  on  the  other  hand,  are  of  the  same 
basic  style  as  the  group  of  nine,  though  the  outline  in  k  is 
thicker  than  in  the  others.  An  attempt  has  been  made  to  convey 
a  rudimentary  sense  of  plasticity  by  using  light  shading,  but  the 
drawing  is  less  accomplished  and  quite  perfunctory.  The  colors 


in  k  are  similar  to  those  in  the  group  of  nine,  but  the  red  in  j 
is  less  intense.  While  it  is  difficult  to  be  certain  of  their  date, 
it  seems  possible  that  these  two  pictures  are  the  work  of  artists 
who  were  experimenting  with  various  styles  and  who  were  not 
quite  so  accomplished  as  the  person  responsible  for  the  others. 

The  last  picture  (/),  portraying  a  goddess  holding  a  pot, 
is  painted  in  an  altogether  different  manner  and  is  of  rather  in- 
ferior quality;  neither  in  its  proportions  nor  in  its  coloration  and 
drawing  does  it  bear  any  resemblance  to  the  other  illuminations. 
While  I  am  suggesting  a  much  later  date  for  this  illustration,  it 
must  be  pointed  out  that  the  workmanship  is  of  poor  quality 
regardless  of  when  it  was  produced.  Seemingly,  an  indifferent 
artist  came  across  a  blank  space  while  going  through  the  manu- 
script and  decided  to  fill  it  with  a  figure. 


M2 

Cover  of  a  Prajnaparamita  Manuscript 

Central  or  western  Tibet,  15th  century 

Carved  and  painted  wood 

qYa  x  27  in.  (24.8  x  68.6  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 82. 42. 5 

See  plate  ^  (detail) 


This  and  the  following  cover  (M3)  very  likely  form  a  pair 
that  once  belonged  to  the  same  manuscript;  not  only  are  they  of 
identical  size,  but  the  paintings  are  rendered  in  the  same  style. 
The  outside  of  this  cover  is  carved  with  a  lotus  design,  and  the 
central  section  is  painted  with  large  letters  in  gold  on  a  red 
ground.  On  the  inside  is  an  elaborate  composition  showing  vari- 
ous deities,  monks,  and  donors.  The  colors  on  this  cover  are 
better  preserved  than  those  on  the  other  one;  they  are  brighter 
and  appear  fresher. 

In  the  center  of  the  composition  is  an  elaborate  Nepali 
shrine  with  the  enthroned  figure  of  an  orange  Manjusri.  His 
hands  make  the  gesture  of  preaching  while  holding  two  lotus 
stalks.  He  is  flanked  by  two  goddesses,  one  orange  and  one 
white,  each  also  holding  lotuses.  Both  sides  of  Manjusri's  head 
are  flanked  by  a  manuscript  on  a  stand  and  a  stupa.  The  two 
inner  panels  on  either  side  of  the  shrine  have  two  rows  of  figures. 
In  the  lower  row  six  goddesses  stand  on  four  lotuses.  Of  the  four 
figures  in  the  upper  row,  the  two  seated  on  inner  lotuses  are  a 
bodhisattva  and  a  monk;  the  outer  two  figures  wear  similar  cos- 
tumes— though  only  one  has  a  turban  on  his  head — and  are 
probably  lay  personages.  The  decorative  scheme  of  the  two  outer 
panels  is  identical,  with  iconographic  variations  introduced  in 
the  lower  tier  only.  In  the  upper  section  of  each  panel  are  four 
dancing  goddesses  and  five  celestial  beings  who  fly  in  their  styl- 
ized cloud  chariots  to  take  offerings  to  Manjusri.  In  the  bottom 
row  the  deities  Mahakala,  Lhamo,  and  Vaisravana  are  on  the  left 
and  a  worshiper  with  offerings  is  on  the  right.  The  offerings 
include  a  lamp,  a  chbten.  a  vase,  and  tormas. 

The  style  of  both  covers  suggests  that  they  were  painted 
by  a  Nepali  artist.  The  designs  of  the  central  shrines  in  both 
covers  and  the  peculiar  shapes  of  the  clouds  carrying  the  celes- 
tials, as  well  as  the  row  of  pillared  niches  with  crowning  foliage 
and  stupas  in  M3,  are  characteristic  of  early  Nepali  paintings 


126 


M2  

Cover  of  a  Prajnaparamita  Manuscript  (above) 
Set  place  3  (detail) 


1M3 

Cover  of  a  Prajnaparamita  Manuscript  (below) 
See  plate  4  (detail) 


I*.     '. 


'*  -u 


..■...'-■     ■•;.. 


r>^^*fe^;s^tojfe 


»** 


.  .HIM 

i£a 

sw 

(Pal  1978,  figs.  60,  70,  79).  The  penchant  for  various  shades  of 
red — the  primary  color  used  in  these  crowded  compositions  — 
adds  to  the  conviction  that  the  artist  was  Nepali.  Greens,  grays, 
and  purples  have  been  sparingly  employed,  while  blue  is  the 
background  color. 


M3 


Cover  of  a  Prajnaparamita  Manuscript 

Central  or  western  Tibet,  15th  century 

Carved  and  painted  wood 

9V4  x  27  in.  (24.8  x  68.6  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 71. 1.48 

See  plate  4  (detail) 


On  the  outside  of  this  cover  a  richly  carved  lotus  which 
follows  the  rectangular  shape  of  the  object  encloses  a  wide  band 
of  deeply  carved  Devanagari  letters  in  the  stylized  script  known 
as  Lantsa.  The  letters,  some  of  which  are  broken,  form  the  con- 
ventional Buddhist  expression  beginning  ye  dharnia. 

The  inside  of  the  cover  is  filled  with  painted  images  of 
bodhisattvas,  various  deities,  and  monks.  In  the  center,  the  en- 
throned image  of  the  goddess  Prajnaparamita,  who  holds  a  book 
with  her  upper  left  hand,  makes  it  clear  that  the  manuscript 
must  have  been  a  Prajnaparamita  text.  The  goddess'  upper  right 
hand  holds  the  vajra  (thunderbolt),  thereby  emphasizing  her 
relevance  to  Vajrayana  Buddhism.  She  is  flanked  by  two  shrines, 
containing  images  of  the  Buddha  Sakyamuni  on  her  right  and 
Amitayus  on  her  left.  Both  are  accompanied  by  various  other 


127 


M4 

Two  Illuminated  Pages  from  a  Dharani  Manuscript 
See  plate  5  (M4  a,  detail) 


r^5   *V 


det 


ail 


deities.  Little  vignettes  of  other  deities  surround  Prajnaparamita, 
while  flying  angels  offer  wreaths  from  stylized  cloud  cartouches 
above  the  shrines  and  the  throne  of  the  central  goddess.  At  the 
top,  on  either  side  of  the  throne,  are  two  seated  Sakyapa  monks 
wearing  red  hats;  thus  we  can  be  certain  that  the  manuscript 
was  written  for  a  Sakyapa  monastery.  On  each  side  of  this  central 
panel  of  shrines  are  three  rows  of  monks  and  deities.  The  deities 
in  the  uppermost  row  sit  frontally,  but  the  others  are  oriented 
toward  the  three  central  shrines  and  are  represented  in  adoring 
attitudes.  Each  figure  is  seated  in  a  niche  framed  with  lotus 
pillars  capped  with  little  white  stupas.  In  the  bottom  row  all 
the  figures,  except  the  two  goddesses  at  the  far  ends,  are  monks. 

M4 

Two  Illuminated  Pages  from  a  Dharani 

Manuscript 

Central  Tibet  (Shalu  monastery?),  early 

15th  century 

Opaque  watercolors  on  paper 

6x25  in.  (15.2  x  63.5  cm.) 

Each  illustration  approx.  3  x  2V2  in. 

(7.6  x  6.4  cm.) 

Purchased  with  Funds  from  The  Lewis 


detail 

and  Erma  Zalk  Foundation 

M.  81. 9. 1,2 

See  plate  5  (M4  a,  detail) 

Because  there  is  no  colophon,  the  exact  title  of  this  text 
is  difficult  to  determine.  However,  the  page  numbered  two 
begins  with  invocations  to  various  deities,  such  as  Narasimha, 
Mahesvara,  Ananda,  and  Mahakala,  thereby  indicating  that  it  is 
part  of  a  dharani  (charms)  manuscript.  The  recto  of  each  page 
contains  an  illustration  at  both  ends,  while  the  verso  has  only 
text. 

The  seated  monks  on  the  first  page  (M4  a)  are  identified 
by  inscriptions  as  Nagarjuna  (on  the  left)  and  Buton  rinpoche 
(on  the  right)  {see  Appendix).  Nagarjuna  is  distinguished  by  the 
multiple-serpent  hood  that  forms  a  canopy  above  his  head;  apart 
from  this  feature,  he  is  portrayed  as  an  idealized  monk  engaged 
in  teaching.  A  great  Indian  philosopher,  he  is  said  to  have 
lived  in  the  first— second  century  A.D.  and  to  have  founded  the 
Madhyamika  school  of  Buddhist  philosophy.  So  far  no  portrait 
of  him  has  been  found  in  India,  but  in  both  Nepal  and  Tibet, 
Nagarjuna  was  frequently  represented  as  a  monk  protected  by 
the  snake-hood  canopy.  This  iconographic  feature  was  very 


128 


detail 

likely  inspired  by  the  word  naga,  meaning  snake,  which  forms 
part  of  his  name. 

An  eminent  polymath,  Buton  (1290-1364)  is  one  of  the 
most  celebrated  figures  in  the  history  of  Tibetan  Buddhism.  The 
founder  of  the  Shalupa  school  (although  the  Shalu  monastery 
was  established  by  the  Sakyapas  in  the  eleventh  century),  his 
greatest  achievement  was  the  organization  of  the  Tanjur  and  the 
Kanjur  compendia  of  all  sacred  Tibetan  texts.  Although  this 
portrait  was  probably  rendered  within  a  few  decades  of  his  death, 
it  is,  nevertheless,  decidedly  idealized.  But  for  the  inscription 
one  would  be  hard  pressed  to  recognize  him. 

The  two  deities  in  the  other  folio  (M4  b)  are  shown  in 
yab-yum.  The  seated  figures,  Guhyasamaja  and  his  prajna,  each 
has  six  arms  and  three  heads.  Their  complexions  are  two  differ- 
ent shades  of  blue;  he  is  dark  and  she  is  light.  His  principal 
hands  are  crossed  in  the  vajrahumkara  gesture  and  they  hold  the 
bell  and  the  thunderbolt.  As  his  name  suggests,  Guhyasamaja  is 
the  deification  of  the  Guhyasamajatantra,  one  of  the  oldest  and 
most  fundamental  texts  of  Vajrayana  Buddhism.  The  other  paint- 
ing depicts  one  of  the  terrifying  emanations  of  the  Bodhisattva 
Manjusri,  known  as  Raktayamari,  or  the  red  enemy  of  Yama, 


detail 

the  Hindu  god  of  death.  Both  he  and  his  prajna  are  therefore 
painted  red.  They  engage  in  sexual  union  as  they  stand  militantly 
on  a  flattened  buffalo.  A  dead  human  lies  between  the  feet 
of  the  couple.  Both  deities  are  naked,  terrifying  in  appearance, 
and  wear  diadems  and  garlands  of  skulls.  Raktayamari  bran- 
dishes the  cot's  leg  and  holds  a  skullcap,  which  is  also  one  of  his 
partner's  attributes. 

The  style  of  these  illuminations  closely  corresponds  to 
that  found  in  Nepali  paintings  of  the  fifteenth  century.  We 
know  that  Nepali  artists  were  very  active  at  that  time  in  several 
Tibetan  monasteries,  such  as  those  at  Gyantse,  Shalu,  and 
Ngor.  The  inclusion  of  the  figure  of  Buton  indicates  that  the 
manuscript  was  very  likely  written  and  illustrated  in  the  Shalu 
monastery.  Because  of  the  pictures'  small  size,  the  artist  was  less 
constrained  by  stringent  demands  of  iconometry  than  would  be 
necessary  with  thankas;  hence,  the  drawing  is  freer  and  more 
spontaneous.  The  coloring,  too,  follows  the  Nepali  tradition  of 
using  maroon  red  as  the  principal  hue,  with  deep  blue  as  the 
background  color.  The  lotus  on  which  the  two  teachers  sit  has 
an  upper  row  of  blue  petals  and  a  lower  row  of  red  ones,  an 
unusual  combination  that  may  reflect  an  idiosyncrasy  of  this 
particular  artist. 


129 


M5 

Manuscript  Cover 


■A     |t|^|#||i||^f||  BmMfy 


- 


<&££     j 


outside 


inside 


M5 


Manuscript  Cover 

Central  Tibet,  15th  century 

Gilded  and  painted  wood 

8'/8  x  25 V2  in.  (20.6  x  64.8  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mrs.  Beverly  Coburn 

M. 78.101. 1 


The  outside  of  this  cover  is  decorated  more  elaborately 
than  the  inside.  Eighteen  deeply  carved  Buddhas  are  seated  on 
lotuses  in  two  rows  across  the  outside  surface.  The  narrow  bor- 
ders on  either  side  of  the  two  rows  of  Buddhas  are  decorated 
with  half  a  floral  motif  and  heavily  gilded.  The  spaces  between 
the  Buddhas  are  painted  with  geometrical  designs  in  red,  black, 
and  gold.  Three  carved  and  gilded  flowers — a  lotus  and  two 
rosettes  —  are  on  the  left  end  of  the  cover,  the  edge  of  which  in- 
cludes a  meandering  lotus  stem. 

The  painted  designs  on  the  inside  of  the  cover  are  con- 
siderably effaced.  A  wide  border  of  lotus  petals  outlined  in  black 
on  a  faint  green  ground  frames  a  rectangular  panel  with  n/irrow 
red  borders.  Similar  red  borders  enclose  a  diamond  in  the  center 


and  the  triangle  at  each  end  of  the  panel.  Within  the  diamond 
is  a  double  vajra  (visvavajra)  motif  surrounded  by  stylized 
flames.  The  same  motif,  sliced  in  half,  adorns  the  triangular 
sections. 

Except  for  their  hand  gestures,  the  Buddhas  on  the  out- 
side of  the  cover  are  identical.  Seven  gestures  are  common  to  the 
eighteen  Buddhas.  If  the  second  cover,  which  is  missing,  con- 
tained seventeen  more  images  of  the  Buddha,  the  group  would 
represent  the  Thirty-five  Buddhas  of  Confession.  The  cult  of  the 
Thirty-five  Buddhas  of  Confession  is  also  known  in  China  and 
Japan,  and  Tsongkhapa  himself  wrote  a  treatise  about  them. 
Perhaps  the  covers  contained  a  manuscript  of  this  text.  What- 
ever the  exact  identification  of  the  Buddhas,  the  quality  of  the 
carving  is  better  than  that  of  the  painting.  Nevertheless,  the  de- 
signs on  the  inside  are  drawn  with  a  free  hand  and  appear  lively 
and  spontaneous. 

M6 

Two  Pages  from  an  Ashtasahasrika 
Prajnaparamita  Manuscript 
Central  Tibet,  15th  century 
Ink,  color,  and  gold  on  paper 


130 


M6 

Two  Pages  from  an  Ashtasahasrika 
Prajnaparamita  Manuscript 
See  plate  6  (detail) 


^il^^^^W 


Kffi*K&iSi 


^/ 


w**> 


\i\  \i> 


a)  Page:  25  x  8  in.  (63.5  x  20.3  cm.) 
111.  on  left:  47/s  x  3  in.  (12.5  x  7.6  cm.) 
111.  on  right:  41/2  x  3 l/s  (11. 5  x  8  cm.) 
Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.  Pal 
M.82.60 

b)  Page:  22I/4  x  jYa  in.  (56.5  x  19.6  cm.) 
111.  on  left:  4V2  x  3  in.  (11. 4  x  7.6  cm.) 
111.  on  right:  27/s  x  13  in.  (7.3  x 

33  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ramesh  Kapoor 

M.82.61 

See  plate  6  (detail) 


Both  pages  are  frayed  along  the  edges,  b  being  more 
damaged  than  a,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  belong  to- 
gether. The  lettering  is  larger  and  bolder  on  a,  the  title  page  of 
the  manuscript.  In  addition,  the  page  contains  the  expression 
Bod  skad  du,  which  was  probably  followed  on  the  next  page  by 
bsgyur  bcug;  both  phrases  together  mean  "translated  into  Ti- 
betan." Unlike  a,  b  has  writing  on  both  sides.  The  illumina- 
tions are  painted  on  separate  pieces  of  paper;  they  are  sewn  to  a 
and  glued  to  page  b.  The  long  panel  of  donors  has  been  pasted 
over  the  writing  on  page  b.  Except  for  the  reverse  of  b,  which  is 


buff  colored,  both  pages  are  made  of  black  paper.  Pale  yellow 
and  gold  letters,  with  red  accents  on  the  title  page,  are  em- 
ployed on  the  black  pages,  while  black  ink  has  been  used  on  the 
buff  page. 


{a)   In  the  illumination  on  the  left,  red-robed  Sakyamuni  is 

seated  on  a  mauve  lotus  placed  upon  a  lion  throne.  The  two 
lions  flank  a  carpet  marked  with  a  thunderbolt,  which,  to- 
gether with  the  gesture  of  Sakyamuni's  right  hand,  indicate 
that  the  image  symbolizes  the  moment  of  enlightenment  at 
Vajrasana.  In  the  other  illumination  an  Indian  monk,  also 
wearing  a  red  robe,  is  seen  adoring  Sakyamuni.  The  exact 
identification  of  this  figure  is  uncertain,  but  he  may  repre- 
sent Nagarjuna  (even  though  he  has  no  snake-hood  canopy) 
to  whom  the  Prajnaparamita  was  miraculously  revealed 
(see  M4  a). 

(b)    The  illumination  on  the  left  depicts  a  crowned  bodhisattva 
with  a  yellow  complexion.  His  left  hand  rests  on  his  lap, 
and  the  right  hand  forms  the  gesture  of  teaching.  His 
throne  was  decorated  with  two  geese,  only  one  of  which  re- 
mains. The  bodhisattva  is  very  likely  Manjusri.  The  other 
illumination  depicts  a  monk  wearing  a  red  hat,  a  yellow 


131 


robe,  and  red  garments,  who  is  engaged  in  conversation 
with  a  turbaned  figure,  who  is  followed  by  seven  turbaned 
male  figures  and  one  turbanless  female.  All  the  men  wear 
the  same  white  turban  with  red  swirls,  and  though  they  are 
in  other  ways  similarly  dressed,  the  colors  of  their  garments 
differ  from  one  to  the  other.  The  second  figure  holds  a 
flower,  but  all  the  others  display  the  gesture  of  adoration. 
These  figures  obviously  represent  the  donor  and  members  of 
his  family.  Between  them  and  the  monk  are  various  ritual 
implements  which  are  graphically  represented. 

Without  inscriptions  the  exact  identification  of  these 
donor  figures  cannot  be  determined.  It  is  likely,  however,  that 
they  represent  royalty;  kings  and  princes  in  western  Tibet  are 
consistently  portrayed  wearing  turbans,  although  the  turbans 
here  are  more  stylized  than  and  are  in  other  ways  quite  different 
from  those  worn  by  other  monarchs  (see  P17).  It  is  possible  that 
this  turban  was  copied  from  ones  in  older  paintings,  a  conclusion 
suggested  by  the  monk's  peculiar  hat.  Similar  hats  are  worn  by 
monks  in  the  Alchi  murals,  which  cannot  be  dated  later  than  the 
thirteenth  century  (Pal  1982  B).  Seemingly,  then,  this  panel 
is  a  copy  of  an  early  composition,  one  which  may  go  back  to  the 
eleventh  century.  In  that  case  the  group  may  represent  the 
famous  translator  Richen  Sangpo  with  King  Yeshe  O  and  mem- 
bers of  his  family.  Responsible  for  translating  Ashtasahasrika 
Prajnaparamita,  Rinchen  Sangpo  is  seen  here  in  conversation 
with  the  pious  monarch  of  Guge. 

These  illuminations  were  probably  executed  in  the 
fifteenth  century,  and  are  predominantly  Nepali  in  style.  The 
divine  figures  closely  resemble  the  paintings  in  M2  and  M3,  but 
the  donor  figures  were  probably  modeled  on  an  earlier  repre- 
sentation from  a  western  Tibetan  monastery.  The  drawing  here 
is  less  careful  and  the  colors  of  red,  blue,  green,  yellow,  black, 
and  white  have  been  more  perfunctorily  applied  than  is  usual  in 
early  illuminations. 


form  the  teaching  gesture,  the  arms  are  spread  out  and  raised  to 
shoulder  level.  Because  of  their  halos,  it  is  clear  that  all  four  are 
apotheosized  monks  engaged  in  teaching.  It  is  unusual  to  find 
Tibetan  monks  wearing  yellow  robes,  for  they  generally  wear 
red;  however,  monks  in  many  of  the  monasteries  in  Zanskar 
wear  yellow  robes  (Francke,  pp.  23—24),  and  so  it  is  possible 
that  this  cover  was  painted  for  a  monastery  in  that  region. 

The  remaining  figure,  in  the  fifth  panel  on  the  right, 
though  dressed  exactly  like  the  monks,  appears  to  be  a  less 
exalted  figure — he  lacks  a  nimbus.  He  looks  at  the  four  monks 
as  he  sits,  his  hands  forming  the  gesture  of  adoration,  and  evi- 
dently he  is  the  solitary  listener.  However,  the  canopy  above  his 
head  and  the  black  disc  or  shield  near  his  right  shoulder  may 
mean  he  is  a  royal  personage. 

Because  they  have  no  headdresses,  it  is  difficult  to  deter- 
mine the  monks'  sectarian  affiliations,  but  they  very  likely  be- 
long to  the  Sakyapa  order.  Although  seated  frontally,  their  heads 
are  shown  in  three-quarter  profile.  The  cover's  muted  colors  do 
not  obscure  these  figures'  stylistic  relationship  to  the  monks  in  a 
central  Tibetan  thanka  in  the  collection  (P15).  The  faces  of  the 
monks  in  both  works  seem  to  have  been  drawn  in  a  similar  fash- 
ion, but  the  execution  on  the  cover  is  more  carefree.  Noteworthy 
in  both  the  cover  and  the  thanka  representations  is  the  enormous 
size  of  the  hands.  The  principal  colors  employed  are  blue,  red, 
purple,  green,  and  yellow,  with  the  last  predominating. 


M7 

Manuscript  Cover 

Zanskar  (?),  16th  century 

Carved  and  painted  wood 

4%  x  14V8  in.  (11. 7  x  37.1  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.  75-45 

The  outside  of  the  cover  is  richly  carved  with  a  sinuous 
floral  and  vegetable  design;  its  central  panel  is  surrounded  by  a 
row  of  beads  and  a  border  of  broad,  meandering  plant  motifs. 
The  panel  is  further  decorated  with  exuberant  vegetable  motifs 
that  enclose  a  rearing  griffin  in  the  center.  One  end  of  the  cover 
contains  a  simplified  version  of  the  border  motif,  while  the 
other  has  a  carving  of  the  four  auspicious  symbols:  a  lotus,  a 
knot,  a  pot,  and  an  animal  head  (?). 

On  the  inside,  framed  by  a  border  of  geometric  designs, 
are  five  figures.  All  five  wear  purple  undergarments — two  with 
short  sleeves — and  yellow  robes.  Four  of  them  look  to  the  left 
and  are  distinguished  by  blue  cushions  behind  their  backs,  red 
aureoles,  and  halos  behind  their  heads.  The  hands  of  two  of  the 
figures  form  the  gesture  of  turning  the  Wheel  of  Law;  one  dis- 
plays the  preaching  gesture  with  his  right  hand,  while  the  left 
hand  rests  on  his  lap.  The  arms  of  the  second  figure  from  the 
left  are  disposed  in  a  most  unusual  fashion:  although  both  hands 


132 


M7 

Manuscript  Cover 


i33 


Pi 


Tathagata  Ami  t ay  us  and  Acolytes 
Central  Tibet  (Kadampa  monastery), 
late  12th  century 
102  x  69  in.  (259.1  x  175.3  cm-) 
The  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 
Collection 
L.69.24.281 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  pp.  108-09;  Pal, 
1969  A,  pp.  36,  131;  A  Decade  of  Collect- 
ing, pp.  35,  153;  Dieux  et  demons,  p.  74; 
Hatt,  fig.  10,  pp.  199-200. 

There  are  several  inscriptions  on  this  painting  which  are 
in  differing  stages  of  preservation.  The  principal  dedicatory 
inscription  (see  Appendix)  occurs  on  the  tiny  lotus  petals  imme- 
diately below  the  large  lotus  bearing  the  imposing  central  figure. 
It  states  that  the  thanka  was  consecrated  at  a  place  in  Ba-yul 
by  Lama  Chokyi  Gyaltsen  on  the  occasion  of  his  life-attainment 
ceremony.  Neither  the  name  of  the  monastery  nor  its  locality 
can  be  definitely  identified.  However,  Richardson  suggests  that 
Ba-yul  may  be  the  mountainous  region  not  very  far  from  E-yul, 
south  of  the  river  Sangpo  and  west  of  Tsa-ri.  This  would  make 
Ba-yul  part  of  Tsang  in  south-central  Tibet. 

From  the  size  and  quality  of  the  painting,  one  can  assume 
that  Chokyi  Gyaltsen  was  an  important  personage.  The  Blue 
Annals  (Roerich  1979,  p.  276)  mentions  a  Chokyi  Gyaltsen 
who  lived  from  1121  until  11 89.  Apparently,  he  founded  two 
monasteries,  but  again  neither  is  named  in  the  inscription.  Also, 
the  places  connected  with  his  religious  life  are  in  'Phan-yul 
(northeast  of  Lhasa),  and  one  wonders  if  Ba  is  an  orthographical 
error  for  'Phan.  However,  the  place  of  Chokyi  Gyaltsen's  birth 
— Grayal — Richardson  tells  us,  is  not  very  far  from  where 
he  tentatively  locates  Ba-yul.  Thus,  it  is  not  improbable  that 
the  lama  mentioned  in  the  dedicatory  inscription  is  the  same 
teacher  named  in  The  Blue  Annals. 


But  for  his  complexion,  the  central  figure  could  be 
identified  as  Amitayus.  He  is  not  fundamentally  different  from 
Amitabha,  the  lord  of  the  Western  Paradise,  the  only  significant 
iconographic  distinction  between  the  two  being  that  Amitayus 
additionally  holds  the  vase  of  immortality.  Further  evidence  that 
the  figure  may  indeed  represent  Amitayus  is  seen  in  the  fact  that 
Chokyi  Gyaltsen  dedicated  this  thanka  while  performing  the 
life-attainment  ceremony;  Amitayus  is  the  tathagata  of  endless 
life.  However,  if  the  complexion  of  the  figure  was  originally 
green,  this  image  may  instead  represent  a  Buddha  of  healing. 
Amitabha  or  Amitayus  is  generally  portrayed  with  a  red  or 
golden  complexion,  and  an  error  in  coloration  would  have  been 
unlikely  in  the  twelfth  century. 

On  each  side  of  the  tathagata's  head  are  four  bodhisattvas 
and  a  Buddha  or  an  apotheosized  monk;  the  latter  identification 
seems  the  more  probable  since  the  Tibetan  names  for  the  two 
figures  are  not  names  of  Buddhas.  One  of  the  figures  is  identi- 
fied as  'Ga  ba;  if  this  is  a  mistake  for  Ka  ba,  he  may  be  the 
lama  who  was  a  contemporary  of  Atisa  and  was  responsible  for 
dividing  the  ashes  after  the  Indian  master's  cremation  (Roerich 
1979,  p.  262).  Of  the  five  figures  at  the  bottom,  the  three 
placid  bodhisattvas  are  Avalokitesvara,  Manjusri,  and  Vajrapani. 
The  angry  figure  on  the  left  with  a  horse's  head,  curiously 
covered  with  a  red  hat,  is  Hayagriva.  The  blue  figure  on  the 
right  is  identified  as  Mi  gya  ba,  who  is  none  other  than  Acala, 
another  protector  of  Vajrayana  Buddhism. 

The  dedicatory  inscription  remarks  on  the  size  of  the 
thanka  indicate  that  even  at  the  time  of  its  creation  its  propor- 
tions were  regarded  as  unusual.  Certainly  it  is  the  largest 
Tibetan  thanka  outside  Tibet,  and,  if  our  suggested  date  is  cor- 
rect, it  is  also  one  of  the  earliest.  Its  imposing  size  is  matched 
by  its  excellent  craftsmanship,  and  even  if  the  colors  are  not 
well  preserved  after  almost  eight  centuries,  the  flawless  com- 
position and  the  sure  draftsmanship  leave  no  doubt  that  Chokyi 
Gyaltsen  employed  a  master  for  his  pious  dedication. 


If  this  identification  is  acceptable,  we  then  have  a  fairly 
certain  date  for  the  thanka.  Since  Chokyi  Gyaltsen  apparently 
died  in  1189,  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  assume  that  he 
performed  the  life-attainment  ceremony,  for  which  the  thanka 
was  commissioned,  shortly  before  his  death.  A  late-twelfth-cen- 
tury date  is  not  inconsistent  with  dates  of  other  examples  of  this 
style  of  painting,  which  probably  originated  with  the  Kadampas 
in  the  eleventh  century.  Paintings  in  this  style  have  been  found 
as  far  east  as  Kharakhoto  in  China,  and  these  were  executed 
before  the  Mongol  invasion  in  1227.  Several  monastic  establish- 
ments in  central  Tibet,  primarily  Iwang,  contain  murals  ren- 
dered in  this  style  (see  pp.  115  —  16). 

The  major  portion  of  this  enormous  painting  is  com- 
posed of  a  crowned  and  bejeweled  figure  with  a  green  complex- 
ion. He  is  seated  in  paryankasana  on  a  lotus,  and  his  hands, 
placed  on  his  lap,  support  a  flowering  vase.  Two  bodhisattvas 
stand  on  either  side,  like  swaying  stalks,  on  lotuses  connected  to 
the  large,  central  lotus.  The  white  figure  carrying  a  white  lotus 
is  Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara;  the  brown  figure  holds  a  gray- 
green  flower  which  cannot  be  identified  with  certainty.  It  ap- 
pears that  some  of  the  colors  on  this  painting  are  not  in  their 
original  state;  neither  the  brown  nor  the  green  coloring  of  the 
central  figure  follows  canonical  prescriptions.  The  brown  was 
very  likely  originally  yellow  (see  P2);  hence,  the  figure  is  Mait- 
reya,  the  future  Buddha. 


P2 


Tathagata  Ratnasambhava 

Central  Tibet  (Kadampa  monastery), 

13th  century 

361/4  x  267/h  in.  (92.1  x  68.3  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.78.9.2 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  II,  p.  331  and 

pi.  E;  B.  Rowland,  The  Evolution  of  the 

Buddha  Image  (New  York:  Asia  House, 

1963),  cover  and  pp.  68,  134;  Pal,  1966, 

pp.  108,  no;  Pal.  1972—73,  p.  71  and 

fig.  4;  Snellgrove,  1978,  p.  342,  fig.  266. 

See  plate  8 

In  this  painting  the  yellow-complexioned  central  figure  is 
the  tathagata  Ratnasambhava.  One  of  the  five  transcendental 
Buddhas  of  the  Vajrayana  pantheon,  his  name  literally  means 
"jewel-born."  Seated  in  paryankasana  on  a  multicolored  lotus,  he 
is  bedecked  with  jewelry  and  tiaras.  His  right  hand  is  stretched 
in  the  gesture  of  charity  and  the  left  rests  on  his  lap.  His  sym- 
bol, the  horse,  is  represented  twice  on  the  pedestal  of  his  throne; 


i34 


Pi 


P2 


Tathagata  Ami  t ay  us  and  Acolytes 
See  plate  7 


Tathagata  Ratnasambhava 
See  plate  8 


%0"  *.o 

fig. 

lift 

h      vr          "v" /Yl 

m 

far 

M 

ww              iV           li'i' 

•i 

part  of  a  mantle  or  carpet,  decorated  with  four  birds,  overhangs 
the  pedestal.  The  birds  may  symbolize  the  south,  which  is 
the  direction  of  Ratnasambhava,  and  may  have  been  borrowed 
from  Chinese  cosmology.  Altogether,  eight  bodhisattvas  sur- 
round Ratnasambhava.  The  white  bodhisattva  on  his  left  holding 
a  white  lotus  may  be  identified  with  Avalokitesvara.  The  yellow 
bodhisattva  on  the  other  side  appears  to  hold  a  stupa  in  his 
right  hand;  if  so,  he  can  be  identified  as  Maitreya.  Canopies 
formed  of  clusters  of  stylized  leaves  are  behind  the  nimbus 
of  the  principal  figure  and  the  four  seated  bodhisattvas  on  top. 
Multicolored  lotus  petals  form  a  border  for  the  entire  painting 
and  enclose  the  nimbus  of  Ratnasambhava  as  well. 

It  would  appear  that  the  thanka  represents  a  mandala  of 
the  Eight  Bodhisattvas.  The  cult  of  the  Mandala  of  the  Eight 
Bodhisattvas  originated  in  India  during  the  early  days  of 
Mahayana  Buddhism  and  was  particularly  popular  in  Central 
Asia  and  Tibet.  One  of  the  earliest  texts  to  describe  the  rituals 
and  iconography  of  this  cult  is  the  Ashtamandalakasutra,  trans- 
lated into  Chinese  by  Amoghavajra.  The  Eight  Bodhisattvas, 
representing  the  eight  directions,  were  worshiped  in  a  mandala 
largely  for  mundane  favors  and  for  protection  from  disease, 
famine,  and  war.  Apart  from  thankas,  the  mandalas  of  the  Eight 
Bodhisattvas  are  found  painted  on  walls  in  several  Tibetan 


monasteries,  such  as  Iwang,  Samding,  Dolma,  and  Lakhang 
(Tucci  1956,  pp.  64,  70,  117),  thus  attesting  to  the  cult's  wide 
popularity.  The  only  Indian  region  where  the  cult  was  strong, 
however,  was  Bihar,  during  the  Pala  period  (Pal  1972—7^).  As 
is  suggested  in  the  introduction  to  this  section,  the  style  of  this 
painting,  as  well  as  of  the  murals  at  Iwang,  is  directly  derived 
from  the  Pala  style. 

But  for  minor  differences  in  the  physiognomies  of  the 
figures  and  the  designs  of  the  ornaments,  this  thanka  is  closely 
related  to  PI.  Although  the  figurative  style  in  both  thankas 
derives  ultimately  from  the  Pala  style,  the  exaggerated  sway  as 
well  as  the  slim  and  effete  proportions  of  the  standing  figures  in 
both  paintings  are  quite  different  from  those  encountered  in 
Pala  manuscript  illuminations.  Also,  the  tonality  of  the  colors 
of  these  two  paintings  differs  considerably  from  both  Pala  and 
Nepali  paintings.  The  warm,  mellow  tones  are  neither  as  in- 
tense and  deep  as  in  Nepali  paintings  nor  as  bright  and  vibrant 
as  in  Pala  miniatures.  Unique  features  of  this  thanka  are  the 
mica  flakes  which  sparkle  on  its  surface  and  its  excellent  state  of 
preservation.  To  my  knowledge,  no  other  Tibetan  painting 
shows  such  a  generous  use  of  mica  flakes. 


i35 


P3 


An  Abbot  and  His  Lineage 

Western  Tibet,  14th  century  or  earlier 

17%  x  15  Vh  in.  (45.1  x  38.4  cm.) 

Purchased  with  Funds  from  the  Julian  C. 

Wright  Bequest 

M. 80. 188 

See  plate  9 

The  center  of  this  painting  is  occupied  by  the  figure  of  an 
abbot  engaged  in  teaching  while  seated  on  an  elaborate  lotus 
throne.  His  pleasant,  smiling  face  indicates  his  serenity.  His  ad- 
vanced age  is  reflected  by  a  beard,  a  goatee  below  the  lower  lip, 
and  a  moustache — each  of  which  has  a  mixture  of  black  and 
white  hair.  The  hair  on  his  head  is  cropped  down  almost  to  the 
scalp.  Both  his  palms  and  the  soles  of  his  feet  are  colored  a 
bright  red,  as  is  customary  with  divine  images;  in  life,  however, 
these  men  were  probably  not  painted.  His  apotheosis  is  further 
emphasized  by  the  white  nimbus  behind  his  head. 

Almost  identical  figures  (without  the  facial  outgrowth 
and  with  black  instead  of  white  hair)  who  represent  other 
members  of  the  lineage  are  depicted  in  a  row  on  each  side  of  the 
thanka.  One  of  these  figures  wears  a  black  inner  garment,  but 
all  the  others  are  clad,  in  contrast  to  the  sumptuously  clothed 
older  abbot,  in  a  simple  combination  of  orange,  red,  and  yellow 
robes.  Like  him,  they  make  the  gesture  of  teaching  and  have 
white  halos.  In  the  upper  corners  of  the  central  rectangle  are 
two  other  teachers,  one  of  whom  has  a  white  complexion  and 
wears  only  a  yellow  robe  and  a  yellow  pundit's  hat;  the  other, 
with  a  crown  of  luxurious  black  hair,  wears  white  garments.  Of 
the  three  teachers  included  in  the  top  border  row,  two  wear  yel- 
low pundit's  hats.  Most  of  the  religious  personages,  including 
the  central  figure,  may  represent  Indian  monks,  as  they  are 
dressed  in  the  red  robes  more  typical  of  that  group.  The  princi- 
pal figure  may  in  fact  depict  the  celebrated  eighth-century 
teacher  Santarakshita,  who  is  venerated  by  the  Kagyupas. 

The  remaining  figures  in  the  upper  register  are  Vajrayana 
deities,  Vajradhara  and  Vajrasattva  being  the  first  two  on  the 
left.  Along  the  bottom,  from  left  to  right,  are  two  orange-robed 
teachers,  a  black  figure  of  Jambhala  (a  wrathful  guardian  deity), 
ritual  implements  and  offerings,  two  worshiping  monks,  and 
the  three  males  and  three  females  of  the  donor's  family.  All  of 
them  hold  flowers  and  sit  in  identical  postures  that  are  quite 
different  from  those  of  the  teachers.  Of  the  donors,  the  first  four 
figures  are  the  same  size,  while  the  last  couple  is  slightly  smaller 
and  therefore  less  important. 

A  half-dozen  thankas  in  this  particular  style  are  known 
to  exist,  and  this  example  forms  a  pair  with  one  in  a  private  col- 
lection (Pal  1975,  pp.  47,  78).  Because  the  central  figures  in 
that  thanka  are  Vajrasattva  and  his  spouse,  it  was  very  likely  the 
frontispiece  for  a  set  of  thankas  portraying  important  teachers  of 
a  particular  order,  the  exact  affiliation  of  which  is  not  easy  to 
determine.  The  other  paintings  in  this  style,  though  not  belong- 
ing to  the  same  set,  have  been  assigned  to  the  Sakyapa  order. 
Although  it  is  tempting  to  attribute  the  Museum's  thanka  to 
the  Sakyapas,  especially  because  of  the  white-robed  abbot 
(Sakyapa  abbots  who  are  permitted  to  marry  generally  wear 
white  robes  to  distinguish  them  from  celibate  monks;  see  P18), 
it  may  have  belonged  to  a  Kagyupa  monastery.  Vajradhara,  who 
leads  the  figures  along  the  top  row,  is  the  tutelary  deity  of  the 


Kagyupa  order.  (The  Sakyapas'  tutelary  deity  is  Manjusri.) 

Of  the  other  paintings  in  this  style,  two  have  been  as- 
signed to  southern  Tibet  (Lauf  1969,  p.  68,  pis.  xm,  xiv),  but 
no  reasons  are  given  for  the  attribution.  Four  others  were  recov- 
ered from  "a  sunken  cave-monastery  in  the  valley  of  the  Sib-chu 
river,  to  the  west  of  the  holy  Mt.  Kailasa"  (Olschak-Wangyal, 
pp.  50—52),  which  would  make  their  provenance  western  Tibet. 
While  the  discovery  of  a  particular  thanka  in  a  given  monastery 
is  no  indication  that  it  was  painted  locally,  a  western  Tibetan 
provenance  seems  likely.  As  noted  in  the  introduction  to  this 
section,  in  the  early  part  of  the  thirteenth  century  the  Drigungpas, 
a  sub-sect  of  the  Kagyupas,  established  themselves  in  western 
Tibet,  especially  around  the  Mt.  Kailasa  region.  The  iconography 
of  the  Museum's  thanka  also  seems  to  indicate  its  association 
with  a  Kagyupa  monastery.  The  dress  of  the  donors  generally 
conforms  to  western  Tibetan  fashions  as  seen  in  murals  in  Tabo 
and  other  sites. 

The  thanka  is  a  fine  example  of  what  may  be  defined  as 
the  western  Tibetan  version  of  the  Pala-Tibetan  style.  Although 
not  so  suave  as  the  central  Tibetan  version  of  the  style  seen  in 
PI  and  P2,  the  style  of  this  thanka  is  closely  related  to  the  thir- 
teenth-century murals  in  the  Alchi  monastery  in  Ladakh  as  well 
as  to  the  Kharakhoto  paintings  rendered  before  1227.  Thus,  a 
fourteenth-century  date  is  cautiously  suggested  for  this  thanka; 
it  may  well  be  somewhat  earlier.  The  divine  figures  in  the 
uppermost  row  are  stylistically  similar  to  early  Nepali  and  Pala 
manuscript  illustrations  of  the  twelfth  century. 


P4 

An  Arhat  with  Attendants 

Central  Tibet,  14th  century 

25 V2  x  2i'/4  in.  (64.8  x  54  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 77.19. 9 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  p.  114;  M.  W. 

Meister,  "The  Arts  of  India  and  Nepal," 

Oriental  Art,  n.s.  xiv,  2  (1968),  pp.  104, 

109;  Pal,  1969  A,  frontispiece  and  p.  132; 

Pal,  1969  B,  p.  48;  A  Decade  of  Collecting. 

pp.  36,  153;  Dieux  et  demons .  pp.  112,  116. 

See  plate  10 

The  busy  composition  of  this  thanka  is  dominated  by  the 
stern  and  splendidly  robed  figure  of  an  arhat.  Seated  on  a  carpet 
enriched  with  animated  bird-of-paradise,  the  arhat's  legs  are 
crossed,  his  feet  emerge  from  his  robe,  and  his  sandals  lie  in 
front.  His  balding  head  is  set  off  by  a  blue  nimbus,  and  he  has 
bushy  eyebrows,  a  substantial  beard,  and  a  hairy  chest.  He 
wears  large  circular  earrings,  undergarments,  and  a  sumptuous 
red  robe  with  a  wide  gold  border.  His  right  hand  holds  a  staff, 
which  seems  to  consist  of  several  thin  lengths  of  bamboo  held 
together  by  strings;  the  left  hand  makes  the  gesture  of  teaching. 
On  either  side  stand  two  monks.  The  one  on  his  right  wears 
orange,  blue,  and  red  robes  and  has  no  halo;  the  other  wears 
orange  and  purple  robes  and  is  nimbused.  The  plump  monk  on 
the  arhat's  right  looks  down  at  the  figure  kneeling  before  the 
arhat;  the  other  offers  a  manuscript. 


/ 


136 


P3 

An  Abbot  and  His  Lineage 
See  plate  9 


P4 

An  Arhat  with  Attendants 
See  plate  10 


Two  other  monks  sit  surrounded  by  clouds  at  the  two 
upper  corners  of  the  thanka.  The  one  in  the  left-hand  corner, 
attired  in  red-blue  robes,  sits  on  a  dais  with  his  feet  resting  on  a 
purple  lotus;  an  attendant  holds  a  parasol  above  his  head.  The 
other,  dressed  in  more  somber  robes,  sits  in  the  yogic  posture 
on  a  carpet  and  holds  a  bottle  with  his  right  hand,  while  the 
left  displays  the  teaching  gesture.  He  is  attended  by  two  figures: 
it  is  not  clear  what  the  one  on  the  right  holds,  but  plainly, 
the  one  on  the  left  is  tenderly  petting  a  small  animal.  Both  are 
smiling  and  seem  to  be  happy. 

The  kneeling  devotee  at  the  bottom  of  the  thanka  has 
bushy  eyebrows,  a  curling  moustache,  and  a  red  beard.  His 
physiognomy  is  quite  different  from  that  of  the  others  and  his 
head  and  neck  are  wrapped  in  a  shawl  of  red,  blue,  and  yellow 
stripes.  Wearing  a  long  blue  coat,  richly  embroidred  with  graz- 
ing deer,  birds  of  paradise,  and  flowers,  he  offers  the  arhat  a 
bowl  filled  with  blue  and  yellow  rocks,  which  symbolize  pre- 
cious stones.  Beside  him  rise  stalks  of  plants  and  stylized  rock 
formations. 

Plants  are  also  added  on  both  sides  of  the  central  figure's 
nimbus.  On  his  right  is  a  prominent  white  peony  and  on  his 
left,  the  rather  distinct,  broad  leaves  of  the  banana  palm.  Im- 
mediately above  the  arhat 's  head  is  a  charming  rocky  landscape 
populated  by  several  figures  dressed  in  red  or  yellow  robes  and 
by  grazing  deer.  The  trunk  of  a  tree  rises  abruptly  from  behind 
the  rocks  and  bends,  impossibly,  at  a  right  angle  to  avoid  the 
border  of  the  thanka.  More  deer  are  seen  grazing  below  the  cen- 
tral figure,  and  butterflies  hover  around  the  heads  of  the  two 
standing  personages.  The  thanka's  red  border  is  filled  with  tiny 
golden  images  of  the  Buddha,  each  wearing  the  red  garment 
and  holding  the  monk's  bowl. 

An  exact  identification  of  the  central  figure  is  difficult, 
but  it  seems  unquestionable  that  he  is  an  arhat.  It  has  been  sug- 
gested (Pal  1969  A,  p.  132;  Dieux  et  demons,  p.  112)  that  the 
representation  is  of  Vajriputra,  but  this  seems  in  no  way  certain. 
The  iconography  differs  significantly  from  the  standardized  rep- 


resentations of  that  particular  arhat  in  the  Tibetan,  or  for  that 
matter  the  Chinese,  tradition.  The  early  arhat  paintings,  how- 
ever, both  in  Central  Asia  and  China,  did  not  adhere  to  any 
specific  iconographic  tradition.  Indeed,  the  representation  could 
well  be  of  the  arhat  Kanakavatsa,  following  the  early  Chinese 
tradition.  For  instance,  in  an  arhat  series  probably  painted  in 
the  Song  period,  following  a  famous  series  by  the  earlier  Chan 
master  Guan  Xiu  (Kuan-hsiu,  832-912),  Kanakavatsa  grasps  his 
straight  bamboo  staff  with  both  hands  while  his  "indexes  are 
stretched  forward"  (de  Visser,  p.  113).  In  another  eleventh-cen- 
tury description  of  an  arhat  series  by  an  unknown  Song  master 
we  find  the  following  iconography  of  Kanakavatsa:  "Kanakavatsa 
is  worshiped  by  the  King  of  Kashmir  who  sits  on  the  right  hand 
side.  The  arhat  makes  a  mudra.  Before  him  a  Vaidurya  flower 
bowl  is  placed.  A  kw'un-lun  slave  offers  him  a  sutra  box"  (de 
Visser,  p.  124).  It  is  evident  that  these  two  descriptions  together 
could  have  served  as  the  model  for  the  arhat  in  this  thanka. 
Kanakavatsa  appears  to  have  had  a  different  iconography  in  Tang 
and  Song  paintings  than  the  more  familiar  attributes  of  later  rep- 
resentations (P9).  The  kneeling  figure  in  this  thanka,  wearing 
the  rich,  figured  silk  and  offering  the  lapis  lazuli  flower,  may  be 
the  "barbarian"  king  of  Kashmir  who  is  said  to  have  visited 
Kanakavatsa,  whereas  the  sutra-bearing  slave  has  here  become 
an  apotheosized  monk.  Indeed,  a  sutra  is  placed  before  the  arhat 
in  the  first  Song-period  description  as  well.  Yet  a  third  descrip- 
tion of  the  arhats  in  praise  of  an  embroidered  image  written  in 
1115  informs  us  that  Kanakavatsa  holds  a  special  staff  known 
as  a  khakhara  and  that  a  barbarian  king  kneels  before  him 
(de  Visser,  p.  125). 

Identifying  the  figures  in  the  two  upper  corners  is  even 
more  difficult  than  determining  the  identity  of  the  arhat.  It  is 
possible,  though,  that  because  of  their  normal  features  they 
may  represent  deified  monks  rather  than  arhats. 

The  broader  stylistic  aspects  of  this  thanka  and  its  impor- 
tance in  the  history  of  Tibetan  painting  have  been  discussed  in 
this  section's  introduction.  It  is  a  unique  painting,  as  is  the 


137 


Milarepa  (Pl4),  and,  so  far,  no  other  thanka  in  this  particular 
style  has  been  discovered.  Nor  is  the  style  seen  here  reflected  in 
any  known  murals  or  sculptures  of  arhats  in  Tibetan  monas- 
teries. In  Dieux  et  demons  (p.  112),  it  is  suggested  that  the 
thanka  is  a  fifteenth-century  copy  of  a  Chinese  original  of  the 
Yuan  dynasty  (1280-1368).  The  catalogue  further  states  that 
the  composition  resembles  paintings  of  arhats  executed  in  China 
in  the  fifteenth  century  which  copied  earlier  models.  Unfortu- 
nately, however,  no  such  examples  are  cited.  In  view  of  the 
strong  relation  between  the  Sakyapas  and  the  Yuan  emperors, 
there  seems  no  reason  why  this  thanka  could  not  be  an  original 
executed  during  the  Yuan  period. 

Several  elements  in  this  thanka  can  be  traced  back 
directly  to  late  Southern  Song  (1127  — 1279)  or  Yuan  paintings. 
The  rather  bloated  faces  are  unlike  typical  Tibetan  faces  and 
seem  closer  to  those  prominent  in  late  Song  and  Yuan-period 
art  (cf.  Wai-kam  Ho,  et.  al.,  p.  65;  Lee  and  Ho,  nos.  3—5, 
194,  207).  The  arhats  beard,  as  well  as  the  manner  in  which  the 
outline  is  drawn,  have  close  parallels  in  Yuan  art  (Lee  and  Ho, 
nos.  198,  209).  The  forms  of  the  peony  and  the  banana  palms 
around  the  arhat's  nimbus  seem  to  derive  directly  from  Chinese 
paintings  of  the  late  thirteenth  century  (cf.  Wai-kam  Ho,  et.  al., 
pp.  65,  93—94,  113).  Another  detail  that  indicates  a  fourteenth- 
century  date  is  the  little  bottle  held  by  the  figure  in  the  upper 
left-hand  corner  of  the  thanka.  Its  muted  color,  faint,  delicate 
design,  and  fluted  neck  relate  it  to  Chingpai  ware  of  the  Yuan 
dynasty  rather  than  to  the  later  Ming  porcelain.  A  date  earlier 
than  the  fifteenth  century  is  also  suggested  by  the  peculiar 
shape  of  the  lotus  petals  below  the  feet  of  the  deified  monk  in 
the  opposite  corner.  This  particular  type  of  lotus  is  often  seen  in 
western  Tibetan  art  and  stems  ultimately  from  Kashmiri  bronzes. 
Specific  parallels  may  be  cited  in  manuscript  illuminations 
(Ml)  which  cannot  be  dated  later  than  the  thirteenth  century. 

There  are  other  features  that  make  this  thanka  unique. 
Not  only  are  the  colors  different  from  post-fifteenth-century 
arhat  paintings,  but  they  also  have  an  unusually  rich  tonality. 
The  principal  figure's  robe  is  as  sumptuous  as  the  expression  on 
his  face  is  intense.  The  border  of  the  robe  is  rendered  in  a  pecu- 
liar fashion;  while  much  of  it  is  painted  with  red  floral  vines  on 
a  gold  ground,  the  section  that  forms  a  loop  around  the  neck  is 
embellished  with  a  gold  floral  pattern  in  high  relief  that  looks 
like  gesso  work.  This  technique  has  been  employed  on  one  other 
thanka  (Tucci  1949,  pi.  4,  p.  333),  also  on  the  border  of  a 
monk's  robe;  Tucci  suggested  a  fifteenth-century  date  for  this 
thanka,  but  it  may  well  be  earlier.  Finally,  the  unusual  row  of 
Buddhas  along  the  narrow  red  border  both  places  the  composi- 
tion within  the  "Buddha-field,"  so  to  speak,  and  symbolizes  the 
idea  of  the  thousand  Buddhas  who  pervade  all  space. 

It  may  be  concluded,  then,  that  the  thanka  was  painted 
by  a  Tibetan  master  well  acquainted  with  the  various  Chinese 
styles  of  arhat  painting  in  the  Song  and  Yuan  periods.  The 
most  likely  model  may  have  been  the  popular  style  of  the  Song 
painter  Zhang  Sigong  (Chang  Ssu-Kung),  whose  works  may 
have  been  familiar  to  the  Tibetan  artist,  and  who  may  have  been 
a  Sakyapa  monk.  The  Sakyapas  maintained  a  close  relationship 
with  the  Yuan  dynasty  until  its  fall  in  1368.  A  date  in  the  first 
half  of  the  fourteenth  century  for  this  thanka  seems  both  stylisti- 
cally and  historically  consistent,  although  a  still-earlier  date — 
the  end  of  the  previous  century  —  is  not  improbable. 


P5 


Gyalpo  Palseng,  early  15th  century 

Mandalas  0/  Hevajra  and  Other  Deities 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery),  c.  1400 

29  x  26'/6  in.  (73.6  x  66.2  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 77. 19.6 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  pp.  1 12-13;  Fisher, 

pp.  18,  38. 

See  plate  11 

According  to  the  dedicatory  inscription  {see  Appendix), 
this  thanka  was  dedicated  as  an  inner  spiritual  support  for  the 
lama  Jamyang  by  the  monk  Gyeltsen.  Although  the  inscription 
is  illegible  in  parts,  it  appears  that  Jamyang  was  expected  to 
attain  complete  fulfillment  by  seeing  this  thanka,  and  thus  it 
can  be  assumed  that  it  was  painted  during  his  lifetime. 

The  Jamyang  mentioned  in  the  inscription  is  difficult  to 
identify,  but  he  may  be  the  same  person  who  is  mentioned  as 
the  translator  in  an  inscription  in  the  kumbum  of  the  Narthang 
monastery.  He  was  responsible  for  composing  that  inscription 
(Tucci  1949,  1,  pp.  188;  11,  pp.  674-76),  which  records  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  building  and  painting  the  monument.  Tucci 
has  established  that  the  abbot  in  whose  memory  the  edifice  was 
raised  died  in  1376.  Presumably,  therefore,  the  kumbum  was 
built  a  few  years  thereafter.  Thus,  the  Jamyang  of  the  Narthang 
inscription  could  well  be  the  same  one  named  in  this  thanka. 
The  inscription  on  the  Museum's  thanka  also  tells  us  that  it  was 
painted  by  a  group  of  artists  led  by  Gyalpo  Palseng.  Curiously, 
one  of  the  artists  named  in  the  Narthang  inscription  is  Gyalpo 
Dar  (of  Gro  bo  long),  and  he  may  well  have  been  related  to 
Gyalpo  Palseng.  These  considerations,  as  well  as  the  thanka's 
style,  have  led  us  to  suggest  a  date  around  1400.  The  style  is  con- 
sistent with  that  characterizing  Nepali  paintings  of  the  period 
and  is  very  close  to  a  Vasudhara  mandala  painted  in  1367  (Pal 
!975>  P-  59)- 

Altogether,  seventeen  different  mandalas  of  the  Hevajra 
cycle  form  the  principal  subject  matter  of  this  thanka.  Sixteen 
smaller  mandalas  surround  the  central  mandala  of  Hevajra,  one 
of  the  most  important  deities  of  esoteric  Buddhism.  In  the 
pericarp  of  the  lotus,  Hevajra  dances  in  ecstasy  while  embracing 
his  prajna,  known  as  Nairatmya.  He  has  eight  heads,  sixteen 
arms,  and  four  legs.  As  Hevajra  himself  says  in  the  Hevajra- 
tantra  (Snellgrove  1959,  p.  no): 

The  circle  is  the  same  as  described  before,  square  and 
with  four  portals,  and  adorned  with  garlands  and  chains 
and  tw/'ra-threads.  There  at  its  centre  am  I,  O  Fair  One, 
together  with  you.  The  Joy  innate  I  am  in  essence,  and 
impassioned  with  great  passion.  I  have  eight  faces,  four 
legs,  and  sixteen  arms,  and  trample  the  four  Maras  under 
foot.  Fearful  am  I  to  fear  itself,  with  my  necklace  made 
of  a  string  of  heads,  and  dancing  furiously  on  a  solar 
disk.  Black  am  I  and  terrible  with  a  crossed  vajra  on  my 
head,  my  body  smeared  with  ashes,  and  my  mouth  send- 
ing forth  the  sound  HUM.  But  my  inner  nature  is  tran- 
quil, and  holding  Nairatmya  in  loving  embrace,  I  am 
possessed  of  tranquil  bliss. 


/ 


138 


P5 


Manda/as  of  Hevajra  and  Other  Deities 
See  plate  1 1 


On  the  eight  petals  of  the  central  lotus  are  dancing 
figures  of  the  goddesses  who  emerge  from  the  union  of  the  prin- 
cipal pair.  They  are  Gauri,  Cauri,  Vetali,  Ghasmari,  Pukkasi, 
Savari,  Candali,  and  Dombini.  The  four  maras  whom  Hevajra 
tramples  under  his  feet  are  the  Hindu  gods  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
Siva,  and  Indra.  Each  of  Hevajra's  sixteen  hands  holds  a  skull- 
cup;  each  skullcup  contains  one  of  the  following  objects:  (on  the 
right)  elephant,  horse,  ass,  ox,  camel,  man,  lion,  and  cat;  (on 
the  left)  earth,  water,  air,  fire,  moon,  sun,  Yama,  and  Vaisravana. 
The  mandala  is  circumscribed,  as  is  usual,  by  the  eight  crema- 
tion grounds,  each  well  separated  and  reflecting  the  conventional 
iconography  (see  pp.  44~45).  Thus,  there  is  no  doubt  that 
Hevajra  is  a  cosmic  god  like  the  eleven-headed  Avalokitesvara; 
his  entire  iconography  reflects  his  universal  form.  The  god 
himself  is  given  eight  heads  and  sixteen  arms.  His  own  man- 
dala is  surrounded  by  sixteen  others;  sixteen,  like  eight,  is  a 
cosmic  number. 

Apart  from  its  iconographic  richness,  the  thanka  is  of 
great  art  historical  significance  because  its  inscription  contains 
the  artist's  name.  Without  the  name,  which  presumably  indi- 
cates that  the  artist  was  a  Tibetan,  this  could  easily  have  been 
mistaken  for  a  Nepali  painting.  Thus,  here  we  have  an  instance 
of  a  Tibetan  artist  who  was  well  trained  in  the  Nepali  tradition. 


P6 


Akshobhya  in  His  Abhirati  Heaven 

Western  Tibet  (Guge),  15th  century 

591/2  x  49 '/4  in.  (151. 1  x  125. 1  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by  the 

Jane  and  Justin  Dart  Foundation 

M.81.90.3 

Literature:  Tucci,  1935,  pi.  XLVin;  Tucci, 

1949,  11,  pp.  347—48,  pis.  14—22;  Pal, 

1969  A,  pp.  56,  134;  Huntington,  1972, 

pp.  108— 11  and  pi.  LVla. 

This  heaven  belongs  to  Akshobhya,  one  of  the  transcen- 
dental Buddhas  of  the  Vajrayana  pentad.  Called  Abhirati 
(meaning  pleasure)  in  Sanskrit,  Akshobhya's  heaven  is  not  so 
well  known  as  the  more  famous  Sukhavati  heaven  (P7,  P8). 
No  separate  text,  like  the  Sukhavativyuha,  is  devoted  to  the 
Abhirati.  However,  a  brief  description  occurs  in  another  impor- 
tant Mahayana  Buddhist  text  known  as  Vima/akirtinirdesa,  and 
Tucci  has  drawn  our  attention  to  this  passage,  which  is  the 
closest  verbal  model  for  this  rarely  portrayed  subject.  While 
displaying  the  heaven  to  the  community,  Vimalakirti  declares: 

I  will  show  this  Abhirati  heaven,  with  several  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  Bodhisattvas  and  gods  and  Nagas  and 
Yaksas  and  Gandharvas  and  Asuras,  surrounded  by  the 
mountain  which  encircles  it  (Cakravala);  and  waterfalls, 
ponds,  sources,  lakes,  oceans,  Sumeru,  mountains,  hills 
and  knolls,  and  the  moon,  the  sun  and  the  constellations 
.  .  .and  villages,  cities,  countries,  and  regions,  and  king- 
doms and  monks  and  women;  Bodhisattvas,  listeners,  and 
the  Tathagata  Aksobhya's  bodhi  tree,  and  the  Tathagata 
Aksobhya  explaining  the  Law,  seated  amid  an  assembly 
vast  as  the  ocean;  and  lotuses  [scattered]  in  the  ten 
points  of  space,  fseated  on  which  he  shows]  the  actions 


139 


proper  to  a  Buddha,  and  a  threefold  ladder,  wrought  with 
gems,  going  from  the  Jambudvlpa  up  to  Trayastrirhsa's 
heaven,  and  on  that  noble  ladder  the  Trayastrirhsa's  gods 
descend  into  the  Jambudvlpa  to  see  the  Tathagata 
Aksobhya  and  to  do  him  homage  and  worship  him 
to  hear  the  Law. 

Although  Huntington  does  not  find  Tucci  convincing,  there 
seems  little  doubt  that  Tucci  was  perfectly  justified  in  making 
his  suggestion.  That  the  central  figure  is  Akshobhya  is  certain 
because  of  the  gesture  of  his  right  hand  (bhumisparsamudra)  and 
the  vajra  (thunderbolt)  placed  on  his  left  hand.  Both  are  appro- 
priate symbols  of  Akshobhya. 

While  the  general  description  of  the  paradise  is  not  dif- 
ferent from  that  of  the  Sukhavati,  one  detail,  pointed  out  by 
Tucci,  not  only  distinguishes  this  painting  but  also  relates  it  to 
the  text  cited  above.  Unlike  the  Sukhavati  paintings,  here  the 
Trayastrimsa  heaven  of  the  gods  is  connected  with  the  Abhirati 
by  means  of  two  ladders  on  either  side  of  Akshobhya's  head. 
Furthermore,  as  is  described  in  the  passage,  there  is  two-way 
traffic  up  and  down  the  ladder.  Thus,  we  can  go  a  step  further 
than  Tucci  and  identify  the  upper  register  of  the  painting  as  the 
heaven  of  the  gods.  That  Akshobhya  is  also  engaged  in  preach- 
ing is  evident  from  the  congregation  of  monks  and  bodhisattvas, 
seated  on  either  side  of  the  throne,  listening  to  the  discourse. 
And  indeed,  lotuses  scattered  over  the  entire  surface  of  the 
painting  represent  the  "ten  points  of  space." 

This  spatial  symbolism  adds  a  cosmic  significance  to  the 
vision  of  the  paradise,  a  significance  further  reinforced  by  the 
presence  of  the  ladders.  The  ladder  is  employed  elsewhere  in 
Buddhist  mythology  and  art,  as,  for  instance,  when  the  histor- 
ical Buddha  Sakyamuni  himself  ascended  to  the  same  heaven  to 
preach  to  his  parents.  It  is  well  known  that  in  other  mythol- 
ogies, too,  the  ladder  is  a  cosmic  symbol  (Jacob's  ladder  in  the 
Old  Testament).  Another  feature  in  the  thanka  bearing  a  similar 
cosmic  significance  is  the  lotus  below  Akshobhya's  throne; 
in  this  instance,  the  flower  symbolizes  the  universe,  which 
floats  in  the  cosmic  ocean,  while  the  stalk  represents  the 
axis  mundi. 

A  curious  feature  of  Akshobhya's  Abhirati  heaven  is  that 
it  is  situated  at  a  lower  level  than  the  heaven  of  the  gods.  In 
fact,  it  is  specifically  stated  that  the  heaven  is  in  Jambudvipa, 
which  is  one  of  the  terrestrial  continents  (of  which  India  is  a 
part)  of  Indian  cosmology.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  Ak- 
shobhya's paradise  of  pleasure  is  terrestrial  rather  than  celestial. 

Whatever  its  verbal  model,  there  is  no  doubt  that  vi- 
sually there  is  very  little  conceptual  or  compositional  difference 
between  this  thanka  and  its  contemporary  Sukhavati  paintings 
(P7).  Indeed,  the  stylistic  similarities  between  the  two  thankas 
are  so  overwhelming  that  it  could  safely  be  concluded  that  they 
are  the  work  of  the  same  ateliet,  if  not  the  same  master. 


P? 


Amitabha  in  His  Paradise 

Western  Tibet  (Guge),  15th  century 

41V2  x  34  in.  (105.4  x  86.4  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.  77.19. 12 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  II,  pp.  348-51 

and  pis.  23  and  H;  Huntington,  1972, 

pi.  Lix  and  pp.  1 14-15;  cf.  Dieux  et 

demons,  p.  98. 

See  plate  12 

As  is  usually  the  case  in  such  paintings,  the  central  figure 
of  Amitabha  and  his  companion  bodhisattvas,  Avalokitesvara 
and  Mahasthamaprapta,  are  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  thanka 
by  a  red  aureole.  Dressed  in  a  monk's  robes,  Amitabha  is  seated 
in  meditation  on  a  lotus  throne  with  a  begging  bowl  in  his 
hands,  which  make  the  gesture  of  meditation.  On  either  side  of 
him  are  monks  and  bodhisattvas  seated  in  rapt  attention,  listen- 
ing to  the  discourse.  The  lotus  supporting  Amitabha  springs 
from  the  cosmic  ocean.  Vines  or  shoots  from  the  central  stem 
curl  into  medallions  which  contain  lions  and  peacocks,  this  bird 
being  the  symbol  of  Amitabha.  The  rest  of  the  painting's  surface 
is  occupied  by  various  gatherings  of  monks  and  celestial  inhabi- 
tants of  the  paradise.  There  are  limpid  pools  with  lotuses,  be- 
jeweled  trees  and  banners,  light  and  airy  pavilions,  and  flowers 
all  over  the  place.  There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  painting 
is  modeled  on  the  descriptions  of  the  celebrated  Western 
Paradise  as  given  in  the  Sukhavativyuha. 

The  paradise,  called  Sukhavati,  is  described  in  ecstatic 
language  as  a  delightful  place,  "with  its  groves,  resplendent 
with  gold.  .  .adorned  with  the  sons  of  Sugata.  .  .full  of  many 
jewels  and  treasures"  (MiAller,  p.  42).  The  country  has  no 
mountains  but  is  level  on  all  sides.  The  trees  are  made  with 
precious  stones  and  the  lotuses  with  gems  and  gold.  Seated 
cross-legged  on  the  lotuses  are  those  who  are  filled  with  faith. 
According  to  another  text  (H.  Kern,  tr.  Saddharmapundarika . 
New  York,  1963,  p.  417),  which  contains  a  brief  description 
of  this  paradise,  the  figures  sitting  in  the  "undented  cups  of 
lotuses"  are  the  sons  of  Jina.  We  are  further  told  that  "the  Chief 
Amitabha  himself  is  seated  on  a  throne  in  the  pure  and  nice 
cup  of  a  lotus,  and  shines  as  the  Sala-king." 

Elsewhere  in  the  Sukhavativyuha  the  paradise  is  said  to 
contain  beautiful  palaces  and  pavilions.  "And  in  these  delightful 
palaces  they  dwell,  play,  sport,  walk  about  being  honoured, 
and  surrounded  by  seven  times  seven  thousands  of  Apsarases." 
Apsarases  are  divine  courtesans,  and  it  is  rather  surprising  that 
they  should  be  the  entertainers  in  Sukhavati,  for  the  Saddhar- 
mapundarika categorically  excludes  women  from  the  land  of 
bliss.  "There  no  women  are  to  be  found;  there  sexual  intercourse 
is  absolutely  unknown.  .  ."  Indeed,  if  we  look  carefully  at  the 
thanka,  we  will  be  hard  pressed  to  find  a  single  woman  in  this 
composition,  which  teems  with  masses  of  celestial  beings.  It 
also  appears  that  while  the  lotuses  are  occupied  entirely  by 
Buddhas,  the  pavilions  are  reserved  for  bodhisattvas  who  are 
richly  adorned. 

As  Tucci  writes,  there  are  no  known  Indian  prototypes, 
at  least  insofar  as  paintings  are  concerned,  for  such  paradise  rep- 
resentations. It  would  be  a  mistake,  however,  to  rule  out  the 


140 


P6 

Akshobhya  in  His  Abhirati  Heaven 


<W'« 


141 


possibility  altogether.  Some  of  the  rock-cut  reliefs  in  western 
Indian  caves,  particularly  at  Kanheri  and  Aurangabad,  as  well  as 
those  on  steles  in  Gandhara,  may  represent  similar  paradise 
themes,  albeit  in  a  more  summary  fashion.  Tucci  also  suggests 
that  the  immediate  forebears  of  thankas  such  as  this  one  are  the 
Central  Asian  representations  of  Amitabha's  paradise.  However, 
the  differences  between  the  two  seem  to  be  more  pronounced 
than  the  similarities.  For  instance,  most  Central  Asian  Sukhavati 
paintings  include  the  stories  of  kings  Bimbisara  and  Ajatasatru, 
which  are  not  included  in  this  thanka.  The  Central  Asian  paint- 
ings are  less  specific  in  following  the  detailed  textual  descrip- 
tions, and  often  include  a  scene  with  celestial  dancers,  not  part 
of  the  Tibetan  iconography.  On  the  other  hand,  the  paradise  in 
this  thanka  bears  a  conceptual  similarity  to  the  so-called  theophany 
reliefs  in  Gandhara,  where  there  is  also  a  central  Buddha  seated 
on  a  lotus,  surrounded  by  other  Buddhas  on  lotuses  and  princely 
figures  in  pavilions. 

P8 

The  Healing  Buddha  and  His  Celestial 

Assembly 

Western  Tibet  (Guge),  15th  century 

31V4  x  24V4  in.  (80.6  x  61.6  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.  77.19. 13 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  II,  pp.  380—81 

and  pis.  30,  31;  Dieux  et  demons,  pp.  94, 

99;  Birnbaum,  pi.  6.  (Birnbaum's  book 

is  the  most  comprehensive  work  on  the 

subject.) 

See  plate  13 

The  center  of  this  painting  is  dominated  by  the  enthroned 
figure  of  a  golden  Buddha.  His  right  hand  holds  a  myrobalan, 
a  dried  astringent  fruit  used  mainly  in  tanning  and  inks,  but 
also  employed — as  indicated  here — medicinally.  The  left 
hand  holds  a  bowl.  These  symbols  help  identify  the  figure  as 
Bhaishajyaguru,  or  the  Healing  Buddha.  The  two  attendant 
bodhisattvas  on  either  side,  therefore,  are  Suryavairocana  and 
Candravairocana.  The  concept  of  the  Buddha  as  both  a  physical 
and  spiritual  healer  goes  back  to  early  Buddhism,  but  artistic 
remains  suggest  that  the  cult  was  most  popular  outside  India 
(see  Birnbaum  reference  above).  Indeed,  the  cult  of  the  Healing 
Buddha  was  so  popular  in  Japan  that  an  entire  temple  complex, 
that  of  Yakushiji,  was  constructed  in  730  in  Nara  to  symbolize 
his  spiritual  realm  on  earth. 

Although  Tucci  suggests  that  the  painting  represents  the 
heaven  of  Bhaishajyaguru,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  this 
thanka  differs  considerably  from  the  two  other  paradises  already 
discussed  (P6,  P7).  Rather  than  the  sprawling  compositions  — 
filled  with  rich  vignettes  of  various  activities  and  interesting 
architectural  motifs — of  the  other  paradise  scenes,  in  this  paint- 
ing the  various  teachers  and  divinities  are  organized  in  formal 
registers  and  columns  around  the  Healing  Buddha,  as  is  the  case 
with  thankas  depicting  monastic  lineages  (P3,  P18).  It  is  also 
curious  that  while  the  texts  strongly  emphasize  that  both  the 
Buddha's  own  body  and  his  realm  are  constituted  with  pure 
lapis  lazuli,  blue  is  the  weakest  color  in  this  thanka. 


Tucci  discusses  the  iconography  of  this  particular  paint- 
ing at  length  and  Birnbaum  covers  the  concept  and  cult  of  the 
Healing  Buddha  in  general.  The  following  comments  are,  there- 
fore, offered  as  supplemental  information.  The  Bhaishajyaguru- 
sutra  (written  before  the  sixth  century)  makes  this  Buddha  far 
more  than  a  healer  of  either  the  body  or  the  spirit.  He  is  con- 
ceived, rather,  as  a  supreme  and  cosmic  figure  who  illuminates 
the  entire  world  and  possesses  infinite  knowledge.  It  is  also  in- 
teresting to  note  that  the  sutra  places  considerable  importance 
on  the  worship  of  the  Healing  Buddha's  image.  The  worshiper 
should  "bathe,  and  with  a  pure  mind  try  to  be  friendly  to  all 
beings.  After  this  he  is  to  circumambulate  the  image  with 
music.  .  ."  (Dutt,  p.  56)  The  Chinese  translation  further  states 
that  "if  one  makes  an  image  of  this  buddha,  or  if  one  recites  the 
text  of  the  sutra,  he  will  escape  from  the  nine  ways  of  death" 
(ibid.,  p.  53). 

The  painting  includes  a  number  of  interesting  icono- 
graphic  features.  Immediately  above  the  Healing  Buddha's  head 
is  an  image  of  Sakyamuni,  and  surrounding  the  nimbus  are  the 
figures  of  the  eighteen  arhats.  Eight  Buddhas,  also  of  healing, 
and  eight  bodhisattvas  are  represented  on  two  pillars  flanking 
the  central  figure.  These  are  very  likely  the  eight  bodhisattvas, 
seven  of  whom  are  named  in  the  Chinese  text  (Manjusri,  Av- 
alokitesvara,  Mahasthamaprapta,  Akshayamati,  Pao-t'an-houa, 
Bhaishajyaraja,  and  Bhaishajyasamudgata),  who  are  said  to 
attend  the  deceased  and  conduct  him.  to  the  place  of  delight 
if  he  should  dream  of  the  Healing  Buddha  at  the  time  of  death. 
Along  the  top  of  the  thanka  are  thirty-five  identical  figures  rep- 
resenting the  Thirty-five  Buddhas  of  the  Confession  of  Sins. 
Immediately  below  the  central  figure,  represented  against  the 
overhanging  carpet,  are  Amitayus  and  the  goddess  Ushnishavi- 
jaya,  both  of  whom  are  worshiped  to  prolong  life. 

Below  the  carpet  is  a  cartouche  containing  representa- 
tions of  the  donors  watching  the  enactment  of  rituals.  As  is  fre- 
quently the  case,  the  god  being  worshiped  is  Jambhala,  also 
called  Kubera,  the  dispenser  of  wealth.  Three  monks  are  en- 
gaged in  offering  worship,  and  behind  them  are  three  female 
donors.  The  first  lady  has  a  young  boy  in  her  lap,  while  the  lady 
behind  her  is  suckling  an  infant.  This  cartouche  is  flanked  by 
two  images  of  Tara,  one  white  and  the  other  green. 

Particularly  curious  are  the  ink  sketches,  without  any 
color  washes,  depicting  scenes  from  the  life  of  Sakyamuni — end- 
ing with  his  cremation — found  along  the  lowermost,  narrow 
register  of  the  throne.  Stylistically,  the  painting  forms  a  group 
with  the  two  paradise  thankas  (P6,  P7).  All  three  are  fine 
examples  of  the  distinctive  style  developed  in  Guge  in  the  fif- 
teenth century.  The  forms  of  the  demons  and  lions  supporting 
the  throne  are  probably  derived  from  Chinese  paintings. 

P9 

Arhat  Kanakavatsa 

Central  or  Eastern  Tibet,  late  15th 

century 

29  x  21V2  in.  (73.7  x  54.6  cm.) 

The  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

L.69.24.325 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  pp.  53,  133; 

Dieux  et  demons,  pp.  113,  116  (no.  86), 

and  no.  85  for  another  from  the  series. 

See  plate  14 


142 


P7 

Amitabha  in  His  Paradise 
See  plate  12 


P8 

The  Healing  Buddha  and  His  Celestial  Assembly 
See  plate  1 3 


143 


Kanakavatsa  is  said  to  reside  on  the  saffron  hill  in 
Kashmir  where  he  preaches  that  form  of  religion  which  helps 
to  develop  intuition  and  uplift  the  heart.  It  is  also  said  that 
at  the  very  moment  he  was  born — to  a  middle-class  family  in 
Magadha  (Bihbar) — a  she-elephant  gave  birth  to  a  golden-colored 
calf  (kanakavatsa);  hence,  the  future  arhat  was  named  Kanakavatsa. 
He  was  sent  to  preach  the  doctrine  in  the  world  of  serpents 
(nagas),  who  presented  him  with  a  jeweled  string  to  show  their 
gratitude.  This  string  or  rope,  clearly  depicted  in  this  thanka, 
became  his  distinctive  attribute. 

The  large  figure  of  Kanakavatsa,  looking  to  the  right, 
dominates  the  composition;  it  is  necessary  to  look  carefully  to 
recognize  the  undulating  forms  on  either  side  that  represent  the 
saffron  hill  of  Kashmir.  Perhaps  because  he  resides  in  Kashmir, 
he  has  been  given  bright  blue  eyes,  which  are  the  most  arresting 
feature  of  his  expressive  face.  (In  Chinese  paintings,  blue  eyes 
are  often  given  to  people  from  the  western  lands,  including 
Kashmir.)  His  balding  head  is  surrounded  by  a  nimbus  and  he 
is  clothed  in  voluminous  robes.  A  most  curious  feature  of  this 
painting  is  the  manner  in  which  the  figure  has  been  foreshortened 
so  that  he  appears  disproportionate  and  somewhat  stunted. 

The  arhat  is  confronted  by  a  dark,  ominous  figure,  heav- 
ily robed  in  a  colorful  Mongolian  costume.  His  right  leg  firmly 
planted  near  Kanakavatsa's  right  foot,  the  figure  raises  a  bowl 
with  his  left  hand.  A  monk  holding  a  mirror  and  a  vase  looks 
down  at  the  Mongolian  warrior.  Above  him  another  monk 
stands  holding  a  fly  whisk.  On  the  left  of  Kanakavatsa  an  atten- 
dant wearing  a  turban  peers  from  behind  a  pillar,  as  if  afraid  to 
emerge.  Rather  curious  is  the  fact  that  although  Kanakavatsa 
wears  sandals,  a  pair  of  shoes  with  curled  toes  is  placed  before 
his  feet.  On  either  side  of  the  tiered  roofs  of  the  shrine  are  four 
deities,  each  enclosed  in  a  roundel.  Three  of  them  are  goddesses, 
and  one  is  an  angry,  black  god. 

A  comparison  with  an  earlier  arhat  painting  (P4),  that 
may  also  represent  Kanakavatsa,  shows  both  iconographic  and 
stylistic  differences.  Exactly  when  the  rope  or  string  became 
Kanakavatsa's  distinctive  attribute  is  not  clear,  but  it  was  proba- 
bly before  the  early  fifteenth  century.  The  figure  dressed  in  the 
Mongolian  garb  near  the  arhat 's  right  foot  may  be  the  "barbarian" 
king  of  Kashmir  (see  P4),  although  he  is  supposed  to  kneel 
rather  than  stand.  Another  unusual  trait  is  the  row  of  thunder- 
bolts decorating  the  lower  part  of  the  back  of  the  throne. 

Even  a  cursory  glance  makes  it  clear  that  the  painting  is 
based  on  a  Chinese  prototype.  The  elaborate  throne  or  chair  on 
which  the  arhat  sits  and  the  rich  folds  and  overlapping  draperies 
have  parallels  in  the  paintings  of  the  Ming  period  (1368— 1644) 
(de  Visser,  pi.  x,  fig.  22)  as  well  as  in  the  Gyantse  murals  of  the 
early  fifteenth  century.  The  very  expressive  face  of  the  arhat, 
with  its  strong  well-defined  nose,  bushy  eyebrows,  bright  blue 
eyes,  and  slightly  open  snarling  mouth,  seems  to  carry  mem- 
ories of  a  much  earlier  tradition.  The  blue  and  green  sloping 
hills  on  either  side  of  the  throne  are  quite  different  from  the 
typical  formula  of  jagged  shapes  and  forms  that  are  derived  from 
Ming  paintings  and  dominate  later  Tibetan  landscape  pictures. 
Here  they  have  the  gentle  undulation  that  we  encounter  in 
fifteenth-century  Tibetan  paintings,  which  was  derived  from 
Buddhist  pictures  of  Central  Asia.  Thus,  it  would  seem  that 
this  series  of  arhats  (three  other  examples  of  the  series  are  in  pri- 
vate collections)  was  painted  sometime  in  the  fifteenth  century 
and  predates  the  period  when  Tibetan  artists  consciously  began 
copying  landscape  elements  from  Ming  paintings.  This  date  is 


also  substantiated  by  the  forms  of  the  three  goddesses,  who  are 
stylistically  akin  to  figures  in  pictures  rendered  in  China  in  the 
third  quarter  of  the  fifteenth  century  (cf.  Pal  1969  A,  p.  57; 
Dieux  et  demons,  p.  114,  nos.  80—81). 

Despite  the  curious  foreshortening,  the  arhat  is  an  im- 
pressive figure.  The  expressive  face  is  sensitively  rendered  and 
seems  lifelike.  The  swirling  and  cascading  folds  of  the  garment 
and  the  undulating  hills  make  the  representation  lively  and 
compensate  for  the  rather  limited  palette  of  blue,  green,  and 
red.  Browns,  yellows,  and  whites  are  used  sparingly,  and  the 
coloring  is  not  so  subtle  or  luminous  as  in  the  earlier  arhat 
painting  (P4).  However,  the  composition  is  not  so  densely 
packed  as  that  of  the  other  thanka,  and  the  arhat  predominates. 
Like  the  other,  this  thanka  offers  no  clue  as  to  the  place  where  it 
was  painted. 

Pio 

Mahakala  with  Companions 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery), 

1450  or  earlier 

343/4  x  31V8  in.  (88.3  x  80.3  cm.) 

The  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

L. 69. 24. 265 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  p.  113;  Pal,  1977, 

97—102;  Pal,  1978,  fig.  208  and  pp. 

150-52. 

See  plate  15 

Mahakala,  one  of  the  dharmapalas,  is  a  major  figure  in 
the  Tibetan  pantheon  and  is  represented  by  a  variety  of  images. 
In  this  painting  he  is  portrayed  in  an  especially  popular  form 
known  in  Tibetan  as  Gur  gyi  mGon  po.  (See  S27  for  an  explana- 
tion of  his  iconography.)  He  is  accompanied  by  two  male  deities 
on  his  right  and  two  goddesses  on  his  left.  The  deity  with  the 
four  arms  is  Bhutadamara  Vajrapani,  while  the  two-armed  figure 
is  Legden  Nagpo,  an  emanation  of  Mahakala;  both  gods  are 
militant.  The  two-armed  female  wearing  a  blouse  is  Ekajati  and 
the  other  is  Lhamo  (see  P20).  Except  for  Lhamo,  who  is  blue, 
all  the  figures  are  black  and  are  portrayed  against  a  striking  fiery 
red  background.  Mahakala's  elaborate  yellow  hair  is  surrounded 
by  a  circle  of  scavenging  animals,  birds  of  prey,  snakes,  and 
prancing  demons,  with  the  khyung  at  the  apex.  The  khyung  is  a 
garuda-like  mythical  bird  that  serves  as  Mahakala's  messenger. 
Below  and  above  this  fiery  realm,  the  conventional  cremation 
grounds  are  depicted  in  typical  crowded  compositions.  Two 
other  interesting  iconographic  details  must  be  pointed  out.  In 
the  central  lobe  of  Mahakala's  crown  is  an  image  of  Tathagata 
Akshobhya,  and  immediately  above  his  hair,  at  either  end,  are 
several  figures  who  appear  to  be  Mara  and  his  retinue.  Thus, 
Mahakala  is  being  attacked  by  demons  of  the  senses. 

Along  the  top  of  the  thanka  monks  of  the  Sakyapa 
lineage  are  led  by  Vajradhara,  Mahakala,  the  mahasiddha  In- 
drabhuti,  and  another  mahasiddha  who  cannot  be  definitely 
identified.  Along  the  bottom,  from  left  to  right,  are  the  Eight 
Guardians  of  the  Directions,  a  seated  monk  holding  the  bell  and 
the  thunderbolt,  four  dancing  dakinis,  a  walking  Buddha  or 
monk,  and  four  more  figures,  three  of  whom  appear  to  be  angry 
deities. 

There  seems  little  doubt  that  stylistically  this  thanka  is 
closely  related  to  the  Vajrabhairava  (P12);  both  must  have  been 


144 


p9 


Pio 


Arhat  Kanakavatsa 
See  plate  14 


Mahakala  with  Companions 
See  plate  15 


executed  in  the  same  ateliet.  Not  only  are  the  details  rendered 
in  a  similar  fashion,  but  both  reflect  the  same  manner  of  draw- 
ing and  an  identical  palette.  The  minor  differences,  however, 
are  noteworthy.  Whereas  the  form  of  Vajrabhairava  in  the  other 
thanka  is  made  more  expressive  by  the  use  of  gray  patches  on  his 
body  to  highlight  the  modeling,  Mahakala  and  his  companions 
are  uniformly  black.  The  drawing  in  the  Mahakala  painting 
seems  to  be  more  refined,  and  the  details,  especially  of  the  gar- 
ments, crowns,  and  jewelery,  are  rendered  with  greater  finesse. 
The  brush  has  been  used  more  sweepingly  in  the  Vajrabhairava 
than  in  the  Mahakala,  as  is  apparent  from  a  comparison  of  the 
flame  motif  in  the  two  paintings.  The  slightly  earlier  date  is 
suggested  for  the  Mahakala  because  of  its  closer  stylistic  kinship 
to  Nepali  paintings  of  the  mid-fifteenth  century  (cf.  Pal  1979, 
figs.  90-91). 

P11 

Mahakala  and  Companions 

Central  Tibet  (Gyantse?),  1450-1500 

39V2  x  34  in.  (100.3  x  86.3  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by  the 

Jane  and  Justin  Dart  Foundation 


M.  81. 90. 4 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  II,  pp.  584-87, 
pi.  195;  Dieux  et  demons,  pp.  127,  134. 
See  plate  16 

Because  Tucci  explains  the  iconography  of  this  monu- 
mental thanka  at  length,  this  discussion  will  simply  summarize 
his  observations,  concentrating  more  on  the  style;  for,  as  will  be 
made  clear,  this  is  a  rare  and  historically  important  painting. 

As  in  PIO,  the  principal  figure  here  is  Mahakala,  but  his 
iconography  is  different.  He  stands  erect  on  the  prostrate  figure 
of  Ganesa,  the  elephant-headed  god  regarded  by  Hindus  as  the 
remover  of  obstacles.  The  Buddhists'  ambivalent  attitude  to- 
ward this  god  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  in  the  lower  left- 
hand  corner  of  the  thanka  a  monk  is  seen  worshiping  another 
image  of  Ganesa,  even  while  Mahakala  tramples  him  above.  In 
this  instance  Ganesa  represents  an  obstacle,  a  threat  to  the  faith 
of  which  Mahakala  is  the  defender.  Two  of  Mahakala's  six  arms 
hold  the  chopper  and  the  skullcup  (PIO,  S28);  the  other  four 
hold  a  rosary  of  skulls,  a  kettledrum,  a  noose,  and  a  trident.  In 
addition,  with  his  two  upper  arms,  he  stretches  the  hide  of  an 
elephant. 


i45 


He  is  surrounded  by  various  other  deities  forming  his 
troupe,  or  family;  the  five  principal  companions  are  shown  at 
the  head  and  feet  of  the  recumbent  Ganesa  and  in  the  middle 
and  extremities  of  the  lowermost  row  of  the  thanka.  The  two 
figures  above  Mahakala's  head,  represented  along  the  axis  of  the 
thanka,  are  emanations  of  Vajradhara.  Monks,  mahasiddhas,  and 
other  deities,  both  benign  and  wrathful,  complete  the  mandala. 
Only  two  of  the  monks  wear  the  peaked  yellow  hats  of  the 
pundit.  Above  the  bottom  of  the  thanka  are  several  deities,  in- 
cluding Ganesa  and  Kubera  (the  god  of  wealth),  and  a  monk 
engaged  in  worship.  An  interesting  group  of  deities  are  the  Ten 
Guardians  of  the  Directions,  each  riding  his  mount,  represented 
in  a  vertical  row  on  either  side  of  Mahakala.  The  tantric  tradi- 
tion adheres  to  the  theory  often  directions,  which  encompasses 
the  nadir  and  the  zenith. 

Tucci  states  that  this  painting  was  procured  in  Guge  and 
is  stylistically  related  to  murals  at  Tsaparang.  He  also  suggests 
that  it  may  be  dated  between  the  sixteenth  and  the  seventeenth 
century.  In  Dieux  et  demons  the  authors  observe  that  the  thanka 
reflects  the  style  of  the  main  temple  at  Gyantse,  which  was 
founded  in  142^.  Hence,  the  authors  cautiously  suggest  a 
"firteenth-century  or  more  recent"  date. 

A  connection  with  the  style  of  Gyantse  murals  and  a 
fifteenth-century  date  for  this  thanka  may  be  confirmed  by  a 
close  comparison.  The  central  figure  of  Mahakala  is  so  similar — 
down  to  the  minute  details  of  the  peculiar  curls  of  his  golden 
beard — to  a  representation  of  Vajrapani  in  one  of  the  Gyantse 
chapels  that  both  must  be  attributed  to  the  same  workshop. 
Furthermore,  the  distinctive  flying  hairstyle  of  the  two  figures 
riding  animals  at  the  bottom  of  the  Museum's  thanka  occurs 
frequently  in  the  Gyantse  murals,  as  do  mahasiddhas  similar  to 
those  depicted  in  this  thanka.  Thus,  Gyantse  seems  to  be  a 
likely  place  of  origin,  even  though  the  thanka  was  found  in 
western  Tibet. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  thanka  presents 
interesting  iconographic  features,  especially  in  the  rare  form  of 
Mahakala  and  the  inclusion  of  the  ten  gods  of  directions.  Stylis- 
tically, too,  it  is  a  thanka  of  unusual  importance,  for  no  other 
known  example  can  be  so  closely  associated  with  the  style  of 
Gyantse,  which  was  one  of  the  major  centers  of  Tibetan  art 
and  religion. 

P12 

Vajrabhairava 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery),  1500 

or  earlier 

38V8  x  31V2  in.  (97.5  x  80  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 77.19. 8 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  pp.  60,  135; 

Fisher,  pp.  15,  35;  Dieux  et  demons. 

pp.  27,  127. 

See  plate  17 

An  ominous  belligerent  figure  with  multiple  limbs 
occupies  the  center  of  this  thanka.  His  dark  form  is  prominently 
set  off  by  a  fiery  red  aureole  fringed  with  stylized  tongues  of 
flame.  The  ithyphallic  god  has  eight  demonic  heads,  the  princi- 


pal one  being  that  of  a  buffalo,  and  the  ninth,  at  the  summit, 
that  of  a  benign  bodhisattva.  His  multiple  arms  spread  out  in 
all  directions  and  hold  a  variety  of  emblems,  mostly  weapons. 
His  primary  hands  hold  the  chopper  and  the  skullcup.  He  has 
several  pairs  of  legs,  some  of  which  trample  gods,  animals,  and 
birds,  while  others  appear  to  be  dancing.  Surrounding  the  au- 
reole of  fire  are  stereotypical  scenes  of  cremation  grounds.  Along 
the  top  of  the  thanka  is  a  row  of  seated  figures,  including  the 
bodhisattva  Manjusri,  the  mahasiddhas,  and  Sakyapa  monks. 
Immediately  below  this  row  and  in  the  two  corners  are  the  im- 
ages of  two  protector  deities;  twelve  more  ferocious  gods  are 
represented  along  the  bottom  of  the  thanka.  In  the  left-hand 
corner  a  Sakyapa  monk  adores  an  image  of  Jambhala. 

The  principal  figure  is  Vajrabhairava,  an  angry  manifes- 
tation of  Manjusri,  the  gentle  bodhisattva  of  wisdom,  whose 
golden  head  tops  all  the  others.  Conceptually,  Vajrabhairava  is 
no  different  from  Yamantaka,  another  angry  form  of  Manjusri, 
though  their  forms  differ  slightly.  The  bhairava  in  his  name  and 
his  iconography  demonstrate  that  Vajrabhairava  is  an  adapta- 
tion into  the  Buddhist  pantheon  of  Mahabhairava,  the  fierce 
form  of  the  Hindu  god  Siva.  In  fact,  just  as  Mahabhairava  is  the 
cosmic  form  of  Siva,  so  also  is  Vajrabhairava  that  of  Manjusri. 
His  eight  heads  represent  the  eight  directions,  while  the  ninth 
symbolizes  the  center  of  the  universe.  His  arms  and  legs  pervade 
the  entire  universe,  symbolized  by  the  cremation  grounds; 
like  Siva,  his  legs  simultaneously  trample  upon  the  various 
creatures  of  the  world  as  he  dances  the  cosmic  dance  of  destruc- 
tion. {See  also  S28  for  Tsongkhapa's  explanation  of  Vajrabhairava's 
form  in  terms  of  Vajrayana  theology.) 

The  inclusion  of  the  Sakyapa  monks  makes  the  sectarian 
affiliation  of  the  thanka  clear,  and  its  stylistic  features  make  it  a 
likely  production  of  the  Ngor  monastery.  However,  murals  in 
this  style  are  found  in  other  monasteries  as  well  and  attribution, 
therefore,  must  remain  tentative.  What  is  certain  is  that  this 
thanka,  along  with  its  contemporary  Mahakala  (P10),  strongly 
reflect  fifteenth-century  Nepali  style  and  may  have  been  painted 
by  a  Nepali  master. 

No  matter  where  it  was  executed,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  it  is  one  of  the  finest  and  most  expressive  paintings 
done  in  this  style.  Although  the  details  of  the  cemeteries  and 
the  small  figures  along  the  top  and  bottom  are  rendered  with 
great  skill  and  finesse,  it  is  clear  that  the  artist  intended  to  over- 
power the  viewer  with  the  commanding  and  compelling  image 
of  Vajrabhairava.  In  terms  of  its  scale  and  expressive  power, 
this  is  indeed  a  cosmic  image,  one  that  admirably  portrays  the 
powers  and  fury  of  the  god.  Especially  intriguing  is  the  manner 
in  which  the  artist  has  represented  the  multiple  legs,  anticipat- 
ing techniques  that  would  be  used  in  still  photography. 

Pi3 

Sakyapa  Lineage 

Central  Tibet  (Ngor  monastery?), 

1475-1500 

53  x  46  in.  (134.6  x  116. 8  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by  the 

Jane  and  Justin  Dart  Foundation 

M. 81. 90. 1 

Literature:  Fisher,  pp.  17,  37;  Dieux  et 

demons,  pp.  128,  136—37. 

See  plate  18 


146 


Pn 

Mahakala  and  Companions 
See  plate  16 


Pl2 

Vajrabbairava 
See  plate  17 


147 


This  is  one  of  the  finest  and  largest  of  a  type  of  thanka 
portraying  the  lineage  of  Sakyapa  monks  that  was  especially 
popular  with  monasteries  of  that  sect.  In  such  thankas  one  or 
two  important  personages  of  the  lineage  are  usually  represented 
as  large  figures  in  the  center,  surrounded  by  smaller  images.  The 
deities  of  the  Vajrayana  pantheon  and  several  of  the  mahasiddhas 
are  added  in  this  painting  to  complete  the  hierarchy. 

The  two  central  figures  here  are  identified  by  faint  in- 
scriptions (see  Appendix)  on  the  petals  of  the  lotuses  on  which 
they  sit.  The  figure  on  the  left  is  Kunga  Wangchuk,  a  disciple 
of  Kunga  Sangpo.  The  figure  on  the  right  is  Sonam  Senge. 
Among  the  others,  the  best  known  are  Phakpa  and  Sonam 
Tsemo.  Although  not  much  information  is  available  about 
Kunga  Wangchuk,  his  guru,  Kunga  Sangpo  (1382— 1444),  was 
the  celebrated  founder  of  the  Ngor  monastery.  Sonam  Senge  was 
the  founder  of  another  well-known  Tibetan  monastery,  Thubten 
Namgyal,  established  in  1478. 

There  is  very  little  to  distinguish  these  two  monks,  who 
are  dressed  in  identical  attire  of  red  and  orange  robes  and  the 
red  hats  typical  of  Sakyapa  monks.  Characteristic  of  such 
idealized  portraiture  are  the  gestures  of  exposition  made  by 
both,  and  the  stringlike  lotus  stem  held  by  each.  Open  flowers 
at  shoulder  level  support  different  attributes.  One  monk  has  the 
thunderbolt  and  the  bell,  while  the  other  has  the  sword  and  the 
manuscript.  Neither  the  emblems  nor  the  gestures,  however,  are 
necessarily  characteristic  of  either  figure,  but  are  ubiquitously 
displayed  by  monks  and  teachers.  Thus,  but  for  the  inscriptions, 
it  would  be  impossible  to  identify  such  figures. 

The  most  noteworthy  feature  of  such  lineage  thankas  is 
that  the  figures  in  them  are  often  connected  with  each  other, 
and  with  the  central  personages,  by  means  of  intertwining  vines 
which  conveniently  form  roundels  that  also  serve  as  aureoles. 
This  further  emphasizes  the  divine  nature  of  the  monks  (indi- 
cated also  by  the  halos  behind  their  heads)  who  are  in  any  case 
emanations  of  one  another,  as  well  as  of  the  mahasiddhas  and 
the  various  gods.  Interestingly,  with  the  exception  of  one  or  two 
divine  figures  at  the  top,  most  of  the  deities  are  represented  in 
two  rows  along  the  bottom.  Two  goddesses,  Ushnishavijaya  and 
Tara,  are  depicted  on  either  side  of  the  elaborate  base  of  the 
throne.  Most  of  the  monks  are  bareheaded,  make  different  ges- 
tures, and  display  considerable  variety  in  their  attire;  those 
wearing  white  robes  represent  Sakyapa  hierarchs  who  were  al- 
lowed to  marry.  Some  of  the  monks  are  older  than  others,  but  in 
general  the  portraits  conform  to  stereotypes. 

It  would  not  be  farfetched  to  assume  that  this  painting 
was  made  soon  after  the  demise  of  the  two  principal  monks  as  a 
sort  of  memorial.  There  are  close  correspondences  with  the 
Nepali  artist  Jivarama's  sketches  done  in  1435  (Lowry  1977). 
The  style  lingered  in  Ngor  for  a  considerable  time,  as  is  evident 
from  this  thanka  which  could  not  have  been  painted  earlier  than 
1478,  the  year  Sonam  Senge  founded  his  monastery.  That  is  why 
the  thanka  is  dated  toward  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The 
date  may  be  corroborated  by  other  stylistic  comparisons  as  well. 
A  comparison  with  other  Sakyapa  thankas  (P10,  P12)  also  indi- 
cates a  date  close  to  the  year  1500.  The  predominant  colors  are 
red,  green,  and  blue — hues  typical  of  Ngor  paintings  of  that 
time,  as  well  as  of  those  from  Gyantse. 

Its  size  and  superb  condition  make  this  thanka  an  un- 
usual example  of  Tibetan  hieratic  portraiture.  The  pleasing 
overall  design  emphasizes  the  continuity  of  the  religious  family. 


It  was  not  important  whether  the  portraits  were  realistic;  the 
artist's  intent  was  to  capture  the  serenity  of  the  other  shore 
where  the  monks  presumably  went  after  death.  In  this  he  was 
eminently  successful.  The  abundance  of  vegetative  forms  imbues 
the  surface  with  an  organic  rhythm  that  adds  to  the  liveliness  of 
the  otherwise  hieratic  composition. 

P14 

The  Life  of  Milarepa 

Western  Tibet  (Kagyupa  monastery), 

c.  1500 

51V2  x  41I/2  in.  (130.8  x  105.4  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by  the 

Jane  and  Justin  Dart  Foundation 

M. 81. 90. 2 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  pp.  61,  135; 

Dieux  et  demons ,  pp.  22,  95. 

See  plate  19  (detail) 

This  thanka  is  a  rich  and  detailed  illustration  of  the  mys- 
tical life  of  Milarepa,  the  central  figure  depicted  here.  (For  a 
discussion  of  his  personality  and  iconography,  see  S40.)  Around 
him  are  represented  scenes  from  his  life,  identified  with  inscrip- 
tions that  are  very  difficult  to  read.  The  episodes  illustrated  do 
not  always  follow  the  accounts  given  in  the  various  known 
biographies  of  Milarepa,  although  some  can  be  identified  from 
these  texts.  It  is  likely  therefore  that  the  events  shown  are 
drawn  from  a  biography  that  was  adhered  to  in  the  region  where 
this  thanka  was  painted. 

The  scenes  from  Milarepa's  life  are  too  numerous  to  iden- 
tify at  length  here,  but  one  or  two  will  be  discussed  below.  It 
may  be  noted  that  most  of  the  incidents  occur  in  the  mountains, 
and  that  the  cave  is  the  dominant  feature  of  the  landscape.  How- 
ever, some  of  the  scenes  are  laid  in  villages  and  towns  which  are 
indicated  perfunctorily  by  small  pavilions  or  houses.  Milarepa 
eschewed  urban  settlements,  preferring  to  wander  around  the 
countryside  like  a  true  ascetic,  often  seeking  shelter  in  caves, 
as  yogis  still  do  in  the  remote  regions  of  the  Himalayas. 

The  golden  figure  of  the  great  yogi  is  seated  on  a  lotus 
throne  within  a  golden  cave.  Milarepa  wears  golden  robes  and  a 
red  sash,  and  cups  his  right  ear  with  his  right  hand,  a  pose  char- 
acteristically his  own.  A  blue  and  red  aureole  deftly  integrates 
the  golden  cave  with  the  rest  of  the  thanka.  Within  this  cave 
two  other  monks,  one  wearing  a  hat  and  golden  robes  and  the 
other  orange  and  red  robes  but  no  hat,  flank  Milarepa  like  sen- 
tinels. Two  smaller  figures  of  monks,  probably  wearing  yellow 
hats,  are  on  either  side  of  the  yogi's  head. 

Outside  the  aureole,  two  groups  of  three  monks  stand 
columnlike  on  either  side;  below  them  are  groups  of  listeners 
consisting  of  demons  and  lay  personages.  The  carpet  overhang- 
ing the  base  of  the  throne  is  adorned  with  the  image  of  Sarasvati 
holding  a  lyre  (P23).  At  the  lower-right  corner  of  the  throne  a 
tent  with  several  figures  representing  the  donors  is  positioned; 
on  the  left  side  a  pavilion  with  nagas  floats  on  a  lake.  This  lake 
is  the  source  of  a  river  which  flows  along  the  front  of  the  throne. 
In  the  upper  corners  of  the  central  section  various  demons  attack 
the  yogi.  Above  the  demons,  in  a  row,  are  the  seated  figures  of 
gods,  mahasiddhas,  Marpa  (Milarepa's  guru),  and  several  monks 
wearing  hats  typical  of  the  Drukpas,  a  subsect  of  the  Kagyupas. 


148 


Pi3 

Sakyapa  Lineage 
See  plate  18 


Pi4 

The  Life  of  Milarepa 
See  plate  19  (detail) 


149 


This  central  section  encapsulates  two  important  themes 
of  the  Mila  Grubum,  Milarepa's  biography:  his  victory  over  the 
demons  and  his  teaching  —  of  the  demons  as  well  as  of  his  dis- 
ciples and  others.  The  entire  first  part  is  dedicated  to  the  con- 
sistent harassment  of  the  yogi  by  demons  and  dakinis.  In  the 
second  part  are  stories  of  the  conversion  of  human  teachers  and 
his  discourses  to  them.  The  attack  of  the  demons  probably 
helped  to  establish  a  homology  between  the  Tibetan  mystic  and 
the  concept  of  the  Buddha  Sakyamuni,  whose  bodbi  (enlighten- 
ment) is  symbolized  by  his  victory  over  Mara  and  his  demons 
at  Bodhgaya. 

In  the  very  first  composition  in  the  upper  left-hand  cor- 
ner—  the  incidents  move  from  left  to  right  —  Milarepa  is  as- 
saulted by  Indian  demons  while  he  is  living  in  the  Eagle  Castle 
of  Red  Rock  Jewel  Valley.  The  next  segment  depicts  Milarepa's 
brief  halt  at  Dreloon  Joomoo  on  his  way  to  the  Lashi  Snow 
Mountain.  Here  he  enjoyed  the  hospitality  of  a  rich  young  girl 
named  Shindormo  before  continuing  on  his  journey.  In  the  third 
scene  the  solitary  Milarepa  is  meditating  in  a  cave  within  a 
strikingly  painted  rock  formation,  where  he  is  once  again  at- 
tacked by  demons,  this  time  from  Nepal.  The  two  birds  within 
the  nest  are  probably  the  vultures  that  appeared  to  him  in  his 
dreams  as  he  was  receiving  initiation  from  his  guru,  Marpa.  In- 
terpreting the  dreams,  Marpa  is  supposed  to  have  said:  "The 
vulture's  nest,  clinging  to  the  rock  shows  that  his  life  shall  en- 
dure as  the  rocks"  (Lauf  1976  B,  p.  199).  Another  composition 
(see  detail)  illustrates  the  story  of  the  deer  and  the  hunter.  When 
Milarepa  was  living  on  a  secluded  mountain  near  the  border  be- 
tween Nepal  and  Tibet,  the  serenity  of  the  hermitage  was  dis- 
turbed one  day  by  the  barking  of  a  bitch.  On  emerging  from  his 
cave,  the  yogi  noticed  a  panting  deer  and  out  of  compassion 
sang  a  song.  While  the  deer  sat  at  his  side,  the  bitch  arrived 
and  she  too  became  docile  on  hearing  the  master's  sermon.  Fi- 
nally, the  hunter  followed  with  his  bow  and  arrow  and  at- 
tempted to  kill  Milarepa,  but  the  arrow  missed  him.  Milarepa 
then  preached  to  him  as  well,  and  the  converted  hunter  became 
known  as  Cirarepa. 

This  painting  is  both  historically  important  and  one  of 
the  most  colorful  in  the  collection.  Dominated  by  blue,  green, 
and  gold,  the  combination  of  colors  is  most  unusual  and  does 
not  stem  from  any  known  school  of  Tibetan  painting.  It  is, 
therefore,  extremely  difficult  to  relate  this  thanka  to  a  particular 
style,  but  it  almost  certainly  comes  from  western  Tibet  and 
shows  Central  Asian  influences.  Although  the  headdresses  of  the 
donor  figures  are  not  recognizable,  their  regal  postures  as  well  as 
their  halos  must  indicate  that  the  donors  are  royal  personages. 
In  that  case,  this  thanka  is  the  result  of  yet  another  royal  com- 
mission. The  large  figure  wearing  a  blue  dress  and  holding  a 
rosary  probably  represents  the  king.  The  figures  below  him  may 
be  his  sons,  but  the  one  behind  him  has  neither  a  halo  nor 
headgear.  Rather,  his  hair  seems  to  fly  behind  him,  and  this 
particular  hairstyle  may  also  be  seen  on  one  of  the  donors  in  a 
thanka  of  the  Drukpa  order  which  Tucci  acquired  in  Namgyal 
near  the  Indian  border  (Tucci  1949,  pi.  42). 

Stylistically,  the  thanka  is  related  to  another  painting  of 
the  Drukpas  (ibid.,  pis.  40,  41)  as  well  as  to  three  fragmentary 
murals  recovered  from  southern  Tibet,  now  preserved  in  Rome 
(Tucci  1967,  pi.  1).  These  mural  fragments  are  usually  dated 
to  the  sixteenth  century,  but  the  Milarepa  is  probably  earlier. 
The  closest  stylistic  parallel  for  the  figurative  types  may  be  seen 


in  a  thanka  in  the  Victoria  and  Albert  Museum  believed  to  be 
from  western  Tibet  and  dated  to  the  fourteenth  century  (Lowry 
1973  A,  cover  and  p.  63). 


Pi5    

Sakyapa  Monks 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery), 

c.  1500 

28V2  x  27  in.  (72.4  x  68.6  cm.) 

Purchased  with  Funds  from  The 

Ahmanson  Foundation 

M.81.26 

See  plate  20 

Four  Sakyapa  monks  wearing  different  kinds  of  robes, 
but  seated  on  almost  identical  thrones,  dominate  this  richly  col- 
ored thanka.  The  thrones  differ  only  in  the  designs  of  the  over- 
hanging carpets  and  the  dispositions  of  the  white  lions  with 
green  manes.  The  principal  monks  are  surrounded  by  small 
figures  of  other  monks  of  the  lineage  but  only  three  deities. 
Notwithstanding  the  idealized  nature  of  the  portraits,  each 
principal  figure  has  a  recognizably  different  face  and  varying  at- 
tributes. Each  pair  consists  of  a  younger,  black-haired  monk  and 
an  older,  balding,  white-haired  monk.  All  four  wear  the  cus- 
tomary orange  robe,  but  both  the  color  and  design  of  the  inner 
garments  are  different. 

The  younger  monk  in  the  upper  row  wears  a  garment  of 
red  and  gold  with  green  sleeves  and  a  white  sash.  His  left  hand 
is  placed  on  his  lap  and  the  right  hand,  which  holds  a  lotus 
stalk,  forms  the  gesture  of  exposition.  His  companion  wears  a 
short,  sleeveless  inner  jacket  of  red  and  orange;  a  shawl  em- 
broidered with  red  and  orange  rectangles  is  wrapped  around  his 
left  shoulder,  leaving  the  right  arm  free.  His  right  hand  forms 
the  gesture  of  charity  and  his  left  holds  a  blue  lotus.  The  older 
monk  on  the  lower  left  wears  an  inner  garment  of  white  with 
gold  patterns  and  red  sleeves.  The  inner  garment  of  his  younger 
companion  is  blue-black  with  gold  designs.  Both  display  the 
same  gesture  of  turning  the  Wheel  of  Law;  both  also  hold  thin, 
golden,  stringlike  stems  of  two  different  kinds  of  lotus  flowers. 
The  same  attributes,  a  sword  and  a  book,  are  placed  on  each 
pair  of  flowers.  Despite  these  specific  iconographic  features,  it  is 
not  possible  to  identify  the  individuals  except  to  say  that  they 
are  important  members  of  the  Sakyapa  hierarchy. 

Two  other  thankas  of  this  series  are  known  (see  Pal  1969 
A,  pp.  44,  133-34;  Lauf  1969,  pp.  67-68  and  color  pi.  A.);  in 
each  instance  the  composition  is  identical.  In  one  of  them  there 
are  two  mahasiddhas  and  two  Sakyapa  monks,  and  in  the  other 
there  are  four  monks,  one  of  whom  wears  a  yellow  hat.  In  addi- 
tion, at  least  four  other  smaller  figures  in  that  thanka  wear  yel- 
low hats.  Since  yellow  hats  are  worn  by  the  Gelukpas,  it  seems 
that  the  series  portrays  monks  of  both  the  Sakyapa  and  Gelukpa 
lineages,  and  was  probably  painted  for  a  Sakyapa  monastery 
after  it  was  taken  over  by  the  Gelukpas.  Since  several  monas- 
teries in  Tsang  were  taken  over,  the  thanka  is  attributed  to  that 
region,  but  it  is  not  possible  to  be  more  precise  about  the 
identification  of  the  monastery. 

The  rich,  resonant  tonality  of  colors  in  this  series  is  strik- 
ing and  unlike  those  of  any  other  paintings  of  the  Sakyapa 


/ 


150 


Pi5 


Sakyapa  Monks 
See  plate  20 


school  or  the  Nepali  tradition.  Because  the  composition  is  not 
so  crowded  as  in  other  such  lineage  thankas  (P13),  the  deep  and 
intense  indigo  blue  of  the  background  is  unusually  prominent. 
The  other  colors  employed  are  orange,  red,  green,  dark  blue, 
and  black;  the  flesh  of  the  figures  is  pink.  Gold  has  been  applied 
lightly  on  the  costumes  but  is  thicker  where  it  is  used  as  trim- 
ming, especially  in  the  arches  of  the  thrones.  All  these  colors, 
although  seen  in  other  paintings  of  the  Sakyapa  tradition,  are  far 
more  intense  and  vibrant  in  this  series  and  create  a  dazzling 
visual  effect. 

In  an  earlier  publication  (Pal  1969  A,  p.  55)  I  suggested 
a  date  of  around  1400  for  another  of  the  series,  but  at  that  time 
I  was  not  aware  of  the  example  showing  Gelukpa  monks.  In 
Laufs  Tibetische  Kunst  no  attempt  is  made  to  date  the  thanka  and 
it  is  suggested  that  the  style  is  predominantly  Nepali.  While 
certain  elements  in  the  series  do  reflect  Nepali  influence,  such  as 
the  design  of  the  thrones  and  the  three  divine  figures,  neither 
the  composition  nor  the  strong  bright  colors  are  encountered  in 
other  Sakyapa  or  Nepali  paintings.  However,  the  specific  Nepali 
elements  are  seen  in  mid-fifteenth-century  paintings  rendered  in 
that  country  (cf.  Pal  1978,  figs.  83—89),  while  among  Tibetan 
works,  a  thanka  in  the  Victoria  and  Albert  Museum  (Lowry 
1973  A,  pp.  60—61)  offers  a  close  parallel.  Lowry  dates  the  Vic- 
toria and  Albert  painting  to  the  first  half  of  the  fifteenth  century, 
and  thus  a  date  toward  the  end  of  that  same  century  for  this 
thanka  is  probable. 

P16 

Three  Mandalas 

Tibet  (Ngor  monastery),  16th  century 

i6'/s  x  12 V2  in.  (41.3  x  31.8  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 77.19. 15 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  pi.  Z  and  p.  600; 

Pal,  1966,  pp.  119-20. 

See  plate  21  (detail) 

The  inscription  at  the  bottom  of  this  thanka  states  that  it 
was  part  of  a  series  of  twelve  mandalas  and  was  dedicated  by 
Gyaltsen  Ozer  for  the  removal  of  his  sins,  those  of  his  parents, 
and  of  all  creatures.  It  also  prays  that  the  learned  Lama  Tshulgyi 
Ozer  may  attain  fulfillment  of  his  wishes  {see  Appendix;  also 
Tucci  reference  above).  It  would  seem  that  the  donor  and  the 
lama  were  related;  they  may  have  been  nephew  and  uncle.  The 
lama  is  otherwise  unknown  and,  as  Tucci  suggests,  he  may  have 
been  an  abbot  of  the  Ngor  monastery  where  the  thanka  was 
acquired. 

Of  the  three  mandalas,  the  upper  one  belongs  to 
Amitayus  (see  PI,  P17),  while  the  principal  deity  in  the  others  is 
Vajrasattva.  Tucci  identifies  the  mandalas  as  well  as  the  other 
figures,  who  include  Buddhas,  bodhisattvas,  dharmapalas,  and 
yidams.  along  with  monks  belonging  to  various  liturgical  cycles 
having  no  apparent  relationship  to  each  other.  While  most  of 
the  divine  figures  are  represented  in  a  hieratic  manner,  each 
seated  or  striding  against  a  red  aureole,  a  slight  variation  is  in- 
troduced in  the  depiction  of  Kubera/ Vaisravana  and  his  troupe 
consisting  of  .eight  figures  (center-left).  All  are  dressed  in  Mon- 
golian costumes  and  ride  horses.  Kubera  rides  his  lion.  The 


151 


Pi6 


P17 


Three  Mandalas 
See  plate  21  (detail) 


The  Buddha  of  Endless  Life  (Amitayus) 
See  plate  22 


detail 


entire  group  appears  to  move  toward  a  seated  monk,  as  if  he 
has  conjured  up  these  forms.  This  may  well  be  true,  since  the 
figures  are  enveloped  with  swirling  clouds  which  indicate  that 
they  are  riding  through  the  air.  Generally,  such  scenes  of  invoca- 
tion are  included  at  the  bottom  of  a  thanka  and  depicted  far  less 
elaborately.  The  monk  may  well  be  Tshulgyi  Ozer.  And  possibly 
this  is  the  last  of  the  series  of  thankas,  since  it  contains  the 
dedicatory  inscription. 

Apart  from  the  unusual  placement  of  the  visionary  invo- 
cation scene  with  Kubera,  the  general  configuration  of  the  com- 
position is  somewhat  curious.  The  three  mandalas  are  placed 
asymmetrically;  normally,  thankas  with  mandalas  follow  strict 
symmetrical  designs.  There  is  also  no  focal  point  in  this  compo- 
sition and  the  center  is  occupied  not  by  the  principal  figure  of  a 
mandala  but  by  three  protective  deities  of  lesser  importance. 
Whether  such  striking  deviations  reflect  the  whimsy  of  the  artist 
or  are  parts  of  an  overall  design  involving  other  thankas  in  the 
series  is  difficult  to  determine.  In  any  event,  the  asymmetrical 
disposition  of  the  mandalas,  as  well  as  the  variant  placement 
of  the  invocation  scenes,  enhance  rather  than  detract  from  the 
visual  appeal  of  this  thanka.  Noteworthy  also  is  the  diamond 
shape  of  the  lotus  petals  within  each  mandala. 


Although  the  mandalas  with  their  decorative  elements 
and  the  swirling  forms  behind  the  figures  are  reminiscent  of  the 
more  familiar  Nepali  style  at  Ngor,  the  facial  features  as  well  as 
the  treatment  of  the  garments  appear  more  Chinese.  Certainly 
in  the  delineation  of  the  garments  and  their  folds,  which  reveals 
a  sense  of  volume,  and  of  the  stylized  white  cloud  patterns  in- 
terspersed between  the  figures,  the  artist  displays  his  familiarity 
with  Chinese  mannerisms. 

Pi? 

The  Buddha  of  Endless  Life  (Amitayus) 

Ladakh  (Basgo  citadel),  early  17th  century 

30V4  x  2  53/4  in.  (78.1  x  65.4  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 77.19. 14 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  II,  pp.  363—64, 

pis.  37,  38;  Pal,  1966,  pp.  118-19; 

Dieux  et  demons,  p.  23,  no.  60. 

See  plate  22 


152 


The  golden  figure  of  Amitayus  sits  on  a  lotus  throne  and 
holds  a  vase  containing  a  plant.  As  is  usually  the  case  with  this 
tathagata,  he  is  bedecked  in  ornaments;  this  contrasts  with  his 
hypostasis,  Amitabha,  who  is  represented  as  a  humble  monk  at 
the  top  of  the  painting.  In  addition,  in  this  depiction,  Amitayus 
has  a  sash  tied  across  his  body  and  various  scarves  and  ribbons 
billow  around  him.  Both  of  his  attending  bodhisattvas  also 
have  golden  complexions,  and,  but  for  their  facial  features,  are 
almost  identical.  A  lotus  rises  from  the  bottom  of  the  painting 
with  a  great  flourish  —  its  stems  carry  peacocks,  lions,  and 
other  symbols.  The  swaying,  flowering  stems  surround  the  three 
figures  and  continue  to  the  top  of  the  thanka. 

The  roots  of  the  lotus  spring  from  a  small  mound  with 
larger  hills  on  either  side.  On  the  right  are  three  tantric  divini- 
ties, including  the  god  of  wealth.  On  the  left  is  a  court  scene. 
There  is  a  column  of  monks,  most  of  whom  are  of  the  Kagyupa 
sect — with  some  early  Gelukpas  included  as  well — on  each 
side  of  the  painting.  The  Indian  yogis  along  the  top  edge,  with 
their  characteristic  ascetic  hair  arrangements,  are  iconographi- 
cally  interesting.  The  esoteric  deity  Guhyasamaja  is  seen  in 
a  little  vignette  in  the  upper  left-hand  corner  near  the  second 
monk  from  the  top. 

Art  historically,  this  scene,  in  which  a  turbaned  king  sits 
on  a  throne  accompanied  by  his  sons,  is  the  most  important  sec- 
tion of  the  thanka  (see  detail).  Tucci  suggests  that  the  principal 
figure,  the  donor,  is  very  likely  King  Senge  Namgyal  (c.  1570— 
1642)  of  Ladakh.  This  suggestion  may  be  confirmed  by  royal 
portraits  painted  on  the  wall  of  the  Maitreya  temple  in  the 
citadel  of  Basgo  in  Ladakh  (see  Snellgrove  and  Skorupsky  1977, 
fig.  75).  In  fact,  Tucci  obtained  this  thanka  at  Basgo,  a  resi- 
dence of  the  kings  of  Ladakh,  and  it  was  probably  painted  by  a 
lama  or  an  artist  attached  to  that  monastery.  The  presence  of  the 
king's  portrait  makes  it  possible  to  date  the  painting  with  rela- 
tive certainty.  This  thanka  is  one  of  the  few  known  and  datable 
paintings  from  Ladakh,  and  is  of  great  historical  significance. 
Since  it  was  a  royal  commission,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  imag- 
ine that  the  finest  available  artist  of  the  period  was  employed  to 
paint  it. 

Senge  Namgyal,  the  donor  of  this  thanka,  was  respon- 
sible for  building  the  Serzang  temple  where  the  murals,  unfor- 
tunately, are  now  much  too  indistinct  to  be  photographed.  As 
Snellgrove  and  Skorupski  remark,  however,  they  are  similar  to 
those  in  the  upper  Maitreya  temple  erected  by  Tshewang  Nam- 
gyal (Snellgrove  and  Skorupsky  1977,  pp.  95-97)-  A  compari- 
son of  this  thanka  with  a  published  mural  from  the  Maitreya 
temple  (ibid.,  fig.  87)  seems  to  confirm  this  suggestion. 

In  previous  publications  this  thanka  has  been  attributed 
to  the  Guge  school.  While  it  may  reflect  some  Guge  characteris- 
tics, it  certainly  is  notably  different  from  the  earlier  Guge  style 
(P6-P8).  The  composition  is  more  open,  and  landscape  ele- 
ments, however  perfunctory,  are  now  introduced  to  enrich  the 
design.  The  drawing  is  not  so  careful  or  fine  as  that  in  earlier 
thankas  but  is  more  spontaneous.  There  is  a  general  exuberance 
of  style  manifested  in  the  excessive  use  of  flying  draperies,  un- 
dulating plants,  and  in  the  exaggerated  stances — particularly  of 
the  two  bodhisattvas.  The  garment  designs  and  the  form  of  the 
lotuses  are  now  more  stylized  than  in  fifteenth-century  Guge 
paintings  and  the  flower  looks  more  like  a  peony  than  a  lotus. 
The  facial  features  are  distinctly  Mongoloid,  which,  together 
with  the  swirling  forms  below  Amitayus'  throne,  the  use  of 


landscape  elements,  and  the  peonylike  lotuses,  indicate  that  the 
artist  responsible  for  this  thanka  was  familiar  with  contempo- 
rary central-Tibetan  painting  styles.  In  contrast  to  the  more 
mellow  colors  of  the  earlier  Guge  style,  much  brighter  shades, 
especially  a  glowing  blue  that  dominates  most  of  the  surface, 
are  applied  here. 


P18 


Sonam  Tsemo  and  His  Lineage 

Central  Tibet  (Ngor  monastery), 

early  17th  century 

31  x  26V2  in.  (78.7  x  67.3  cm.) 

Gift  of  Paul  E.  Manheim,  by  Exchange 

M.70.57 

Literature:  Fisher,  pp.  22,  41. 


The  central  figure  in  this  thanka  depicting  the  Sakyapa 
hierarchy  is  identified  twice — once  on  the  back  and  again  in  the 
dedicatory  inscription  at  the  bottom  (see  Appendix).  He  is 
Sonam  Tsemo,  the  eminent  Sakyapa  scholar  who  lived  from  1142 
to  1182.  The  collection  also  contains  a  bronze  portrait  of  this 
lama  (S38),  who  is  appropriately  characterized  in  the  inscription 
here  as  a  man  who  "achieves  immeasurable  virtue,  and  extends 
knowledge  and  wisdom,  and  is  an  excellent  friend  to  all 
creatures." 

As  is  usual  in  such  portraits,  the  other  hierarchs  of  the 
order  are  depicted  around  the  central  figure  in  neat,  orderly 
rows.  The  most  significant  difference  between  this  portrait  and 
the  version  in  bronze  is  that  here  Sonam  Tsemo  holds  the  thun- 
derbolt and  the  bell,  the  symbols  of  Vajradhara/Vajrasattva, 
against  his  chest,  whereas  in  the  bronze,  his  hands  form  the  ges- 
ture of  teaching  the  Law.  His  attire  is  somewhat  unusual  in  this 
thanka.  He  wears  a  richly  embroidered  blue  jacket,  and  the  gar- 
ment wrapped  around  his  legs  is  plain  and  yellow,  rather  than 
the  patterned  orange  more  customary  in  Sakyapa  hieratical 
representations. 

It  may  also  be  pointed  out  that  the  collection  contains 
yet  another  representation  of  Sonam  Tsemo.  He  is  included  in 
the  earlier  Sakyapa  lineage  thanka  (P13)  (cf.  fig.  12  in  Pi 3, 
Appendix).  There  he  is  shown  wearing  a  white  robe  over  a  gray 
jacket,  but  holding  the  thunderbolt  and  the  bell,  as  in  this 
painting.  Interestingly,  the  facial  features  differ  in  all  three  rep- 
resentations, which  confirms  the  suggestion  that  Tibetan  por- 
traiture is  more  idealistic  than  realistic. 

This  thanka  is  one  of  a  series  now  dispersed  in  various 
public  and  private  collections  (see  Pal  1971,  pi.  78;  Fisher,  p.  42; 
Lauf  1976  A,  pp.  92—93;  Dieux  et  demons,  pp.  128-29,  138—39). 
But  for  the  central  figures  wearing  different  costumes  and 
displaying  various  emblems  and  gestures,  the  composition  in 
all  the  examples  is  identical.  The  workmanship  is  careful  and 
flawless  and  the  details  have  been  rendered  with  great  finesse. 
The  faces  of  the  figures,  drawn  with  fine  pale  lines,  reflect  the 
influence  of  the  refined  Chinese  manner  of  draftsmanship.  The 
coloring,  however,  follows  the  Sakyapa  penchant  for  bright, 
deep  tones.  The  predominant  color  is  red,  but  in  some  of  the 
other  paintings  in  the  series  the  background  is  an  indigo  blue  of 
the  same  intensity  and  tonality  as  the  blue  in  an  earlier  Sakyapa 
portrait  in  the  collection  (P15). 


153 


Pi8 

Sonam  Tsemo  and  His  Lineage 


154 


Pi9 

Mahasiddbas  in  Landscape 


4'       '\  f 


P19 


Mahasiddbas  in  Landscape 

Central  Tibet,  17th  century 

Ink  on  cloth 

77/«  x  8  in.  (20  x  20.3  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.  Pal  in  Honor  of 

A.  Quincy  Jones 

M. 80. 155.2 

Figures  of  mahasiddhas  in  perfunctory  landscapes  are 
sketched  on  both  sides  of  this  cloth.  On  one  side  (a),  supported 
by  a  cushion,  a  solitary  mahasiddha  is  seated  in  meditation  on  a 
rock  beside  a  lake  (with  a  waterfall?).  The  inscription  identifies 
him  as  Sengepa.  On  the  other  (b)  are  two  mahasiddhas:  one 
plays  a  stringed  instrument;  the  other  supports  his  female  part- 
ner— who  holds  a  skullcup  in  her  left  hand — on  his  lap.  The 
musician  is  identified  by  the  inscription  as  Bainapa,  which  is  a 
variation  of  Vinapa.  The  inscription  for  the  other  mahasiddha  is 
difficult  to  read  and  so  his  identification  is  uncertain. 

Within  the  Tibetan  tradition  there  are  various  lists  of 
mahasiddhas  which  do  not  always  agree.  The  iconography  is  not 
consistent,  either,  which  increases  the  difficulty  of  identifying 
the  second  figure  in  (b).  Vinapa,  however,  is  a  familiar  figure 
and  is  known  from  the  Indian  scholar  Abhayadatta's  biographies 
of  the  mahasiddhas  (see  Robinson,  pp.  57-59).  He  was  called 
Vinapa  because  he  played  the  stringed  instrument  known  as  the 
vina.  Born  into  a  royal  family  of  the  country  of  Gahuri,  Vinapa 
was  a  musical  prodigy  who  refused  to  give  up  music — even  for 


the  throne.  Ultimately  he  was  initiated  by  another  mahasiddha 
known  as  Buddhapa  and  achieved  siddhi  (enlightenment) 
through  his  music. 

Sengepa  is  not  known  in  the  Indian  tradition  and  is  obvi- 
ously a  Tibetan  figure.  It  has  been  suggested,  however,  that  he 
may  be  the  same  as  Samudra  of  the  Indian  list  (Schmid  1958, 
p.  98),  but  if  so,  the  representation  here  follows  a  completely 
different  iconographic  tradition.  Since  Samudra  is  said  to  have 
brought  forth  riches  from  the  ocean,  he  is  generally  shown  in  a 
boat  or  floating  on  a  skin  in  the  ocean.  Here,  however,  he  is 
simply  a  meditating  yogi. 

Few  sketches  from  Tibet  have  survived.  These  probably 
formed  part  of  an  artist's  pattern  book.  The  same  brush  appears 
to  have  been  used  to  sketch  the  compositions  and  write  the 
inscriptions.  Thus,  although  certain  elements  of  the  style  are 
derived  from  the  Chinese  pictorial  tradition,  the  artist  was  very 
likely  a  Tibetan.  He  was  also  an  assured  draftsman,  for  the  out- 
lines are  drawn  with  clarity  and  firmness.  Because  of  the  Indian, 
rather  than  the  Chinese,  types  of  figures,  the  sketches  are  as- 
signed to  central  rather  than  to  eastern  Tibet.  Two  other  ex- 
amples from  the  same  set  of  sketches  are  in  private  collections. 


i55 


P20 


Kunga  Tashi  and  Incidents  from  His  Life 
See  plate  23  (detail) 


m&. 


mH  * 


*       * 


-i       i 


i   -  1- 


**i 


^^  fa> 


ft- 


i  •      1  \ 


'"*■ « 


«rjfc 


•■4,*^ 


156 


P20 


Kunga  Tashi  and  Incidents  from  His  Life 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery), 

1675-1700 

37  x  27V4  in.  (94  x  69.2  cm.) 

The  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

L. 69. 24. 322 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  II,  pp.  372-73, 

pis.  54-58. 

See  plate  23  (detail) 

The  subject  of  this  thanka  is  of  unusual  interest,  for  it 
combines  hieratical  portraiture  with  narrative  panels  depicting 
incidents  from  the  life  of  the  principal  personage  portrayed.  It 
differs  from  the  Milarepa  thanka  (Pl4)  in  that  the  events  repre- 
sented are  more  biographical  than  hagiographical.  The  various 
episodes  are  identified  by  copious  inscriptions,  transcribed  by 
Richardson  in  this  catalogue's  Appendix  and  discussed  ade- 
quately by  Tucci  (see  literature  above). 

The  principal  personage  depicted,  in  the  center  of  the 
thanka,  is  Kunga  Tashi  (1349— 1425).  Wearing  the  typical  red 
hat  of  the  Sakyapas,  he  holds  a  flowering  vase  of  immortality 
with  his  left  hand.  In  his  right  is  a  flower  topped  by  a  sword 
and  a  manuscript,  the  emblems  of  Manjusri  who  is  seated  near 
his  right  shoulder.  On  the  other  side  is  the  goddess  Tara.  Imme- 
diately above  Kunga  Tashi  is  a  small  image  of  a  monk  display- 
ing the  gesture  of  the  god  Vajradhara  who  is  at  the  summit. 
Immediately  below  the  throne  are  the  portraits  of  the  monk's 
two  disciples,  who  were  the  principal  donors  of  the  thanka.  Be- 
low them  is  an  image  of  Mahakala,  the  protecting  deity  of  the 
Sakyapa  order,  who  is  identified  in  the  inscription  as  Gur  gyi 
mGon  po.  He  is  accompanied  by  two  different  forms  of  Lhamo. 
The  two  monk  donors  of  this  thanka  were  apparently  supported 
by  a  lay  donor  from  eastern  Tibet,  who  is  portrayed  as  a  high 
official  (wearing  a  fur  cap)  with  his  bureaucratic  retinue  in  the 
lower  right-hand  corner. 

Various  activities  which  must  have  been  the  highlights  of 
Kunga  Tashi's  religious  life  are  depicted  elsewhere  in  the 
thanka.  Since  Tucci  has  described  all  these,  only  two  are  men- 
tioned here. 

On  the  left,  immediately  below  the  image  of  Manjusri, 
is  the  scene  of  the  restoration  of  the  great  temple  Lhakhang 
Chemo,  one  of  the  important  monasteries  of  Sakya.  The  upper 
terrace  is  actually  being  repaired  by  workmen  under  the  super- 
vision of  a  monk  wearing  an  enormous  headgear  who  must 
represent  the  foreman  or  manager.  At  the  other  end  of  the 
monastery  monks  in  ceremonial  dress  are  engaged  in  consecrat- 
ing the  building  by  performing  appropriate  rites.  It  would  be 
interesting  to  determine  the  accuracy  of  the  representation 
by  comparing  it  with  the  existing  structures  of  the  monastery. 
A  particularly  intriguing  scene  is  depicted  on  the  other  side  of 
Kunga  Tashi,  immediately  below  the  image  of  Tara.  In  it,  a 
man  is  offering  a  golden  statue  to  the  monk.  The  inscription 
states  that  the  lama  had  ordered  his  treasurer  to  have  the  golden 
image  made,  and  the  scene  here  shows  its  presentation  to  Kunga 
Tashi  for  his  inspection  and  approval. 

There  is  some  disagreement  about  the  identification  of 
Kunga  Tashi,  although  it  is  agreed  that  he  was  a  Sakyapa. 


According  to  Tucci,  he  was  a  contemporary  of  the  Fifth  Dalai 
Lama.  This  Kunga  Tashi  was  confirmed  in  1668  and  both  he 
and  the  Fifth  Dalai  Lama  shared  the  same  guru  (Dargay,  p.  189). 
However,  Richardson  identifies  Kunga  Tashi  as  the  thirty-second 
abbot  of  Sakya  (see  Appendix).  And  since  the  incidents  from 
his  life  recorded  in  the  painting  do  not  mention  his  death, 
Richardson  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  thanka  could  have  been 
painted  while  he  was  still  alive. 

This  conclusion  is  difficult  to  accept,  however,  in  view  of 
the  style  of  the  thanka.  The  fifteenth-century  Sakyapa  style  is 
well  documented  by  several  examples  in  this  collection  (P10- 
P13,  P15).  The  style  of  this  thanka  not  only  differs  notably  from 
that  of  the  earlier  examples  but  is  closely  related  to  the  style  of 
several  dated  paintings  of  the  second  half  of  the  seventeenth 
century  (see  Pal  1978,  figs.  214—15). 

For  instance,  the  forms  of  Mahakala  and  his  acolytes  are 
very  similar  to  those  seen  in  another  Sakyapa  thanka  painted 
around  1700  (P21).  The  figures  of  the  lamas  in  the  various  struc- 
tures, too,  are  closer  to  those  seen  in  thankas  of  this  period  than 
to  those  in  thankas  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The  cursory  model- 
ing of  some  of  the  faces  (particularly  Kunga  Tashi's),  of  the 
other  important  monks,  and  of  the  deities  above  is  more  typical 
of  the  seventeenth  century  than  of  earlier  periods.  The  forms  of 
the  trees  and  the  clouds  are  seen  more  commonly  in  later  paint- 
ings, while  the  lay  donor  figure  in  the  lower  right-hand  corner 
wearing  a  hat  is  very  similar  to  representations  of  some  noble- 
men of  Kham  portrayed  in  another  thanka  published  by  Tucci 
(1949,  pi.  O),  a  thanka  which  is  unlikely  to  be  earlier  than  the 
seventeenth  century. 

Thus,  if  the  central  figure  in  this  thanka  is  indeed  the 
fifteenth-century  Sakyapa  abbot,  it  must  be  concluded  that  this 
is  a  seventeenth-century  copy  of  the  original.  Such  copies  were 
not  unknown,  especially  if  the  original  was  damaged  and  if  the 
thanka  was  as  historically  important  as  this  one.  It  is  also 
possible  that  the  donor  was  a  dignitary  from  Kham  who  was  a 
devotee  of  Kunga  Tashi  and  that,  on  a  visit  to  Sakya,  he  had  a 
copy  made  of  the  original.  Apparently,  there  is  an  inscribed  por- 
trait of  Kunga  Tashi  in  the  kumbum  of  Gyantse  (Karmay  1975, 
p.  80);  so  until  one  can  compare  the  two  portraits,  a  definite 
identification  is  not  possible. 

No  matter  who  the  person  portrayed  is,  the  thanka  re- 
mains one  of  the  most  significant  examples  of  Tibetan  biograph- 
ical painting.  It  is  of  particular  interest  to  students  of  Tibetan 
architecture,  since  it  both  illustrates  recognizable  buildings  and 
demonstrates  how  some  were  constructed.  Indeed,  the  signifi- 
cance of  this  thanka  for  the  cultural  history  of  Tibet  in  general 
far  exceeds  its  aesthetic  importance. 

P21 

Mahakala  and  Companions 

Central  Tibet  (Ngor  monastery),  c.  1700 

26 Va  x  21-V4  in.  (66.7  x  55.2  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 77.19. 11 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  p.  117;  Dieux  et 

demons,  pp.  128,  135;  Pal,  1977,  p.  100. 

See  plate  24 


157 


Mahakala  in  this  chanka  is  not  different  iconographically 
from  other  representations  in  the  collection  (P10,  S27).  The 
number  of  his  immediate  companions,  however,  has  increased. 
There  are  now  two  forms  of  Lhamo,  one  black  and  the  other 
blue,  both  riding  their  mules  through  a  sea  of  blood,  which,  ac- 
cording to  one  text,  issues  from  the  vagina  of  Ekajati  (Nebesky- 
Wojkowitz,  p.  50).  The  black  Lhamo  has  four  arms  and  the  blue 
Lhamo  only  two,  but  both  images  are  equally  gruesome.  There 
are  three  figures  on  the  other  side  of  Mahakala:  Bhutadamara 
Vajrapani,  Legden  Nagpo,  and  the  figure  of  an  Indian  ascetic, 
presumably  a  mahasiddha  (Heruka?),  seated  on  a  corpse  and 
carrying  a  skullcup.  This  mahasiddha  is  not  often  included 
with  representations  of  Mahakala.  In  front  of  the  throne,  five 
black  dakinis  on  the  warpath  are  being  chastised  by  an  armored 
guardian,  a  monk,  and  other  attendants  of  Mahakala.  Accord- 
ing to  one  Tibetan  tradition,  these  five  may  represent  the  five 
classes  of  dakinis  (mkha'  gro  sde  Inga),  while  the  Indian  text 
identifies  them  as  the  five  Mother  Goddesses:  Kali,  Karali,  Var- 
ali,  Kankali,  and  Mahakali. 

A  long  dedicatory  inscription  (see  Appendix)  at  the  bot- 
tom of  this  painting  provides  us  with  interesting  information, 
though  it  is  of  little  help  in  dating  the  thanka.  Most  of  the 
Sakyapa  lamas  depicted  above  Mahakala  are  also  identified  by 
the  inscriptions,  but  except  for  a  few  early  and  famous  names  in 
the  lineage,  the  majority  remain  unknown.  In  a  few  instances, 
the  names  read  by  Richardson  differ  from  the  readings  given  in 
Dieux  et  demons  (see  reference  above). 

The  inscription  identifies  the  central  figure  as  Gur  mGon 
(a  form  of  Mahakala),  but  more  importantly,  it  indicates  that 
the  thanka  was  consecrated  in  the  monastery  of  Evam,  another 
name  for  Ngor.  Presumably  it  was  painted  by  an  artist  attached 
to  this  monastery,  since  the  monks  are  all  of  the  Sakyapa  order; 
however,  one  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  it  was  executed 
somewhere  else  and  brought  to  Ngor  for  consecration.  The 
thanka  was  commissioned  by  mDo  khams  Ga  zi  ba,  about 
whom  nothing  is  known.  It  is  also  not  clear  whether  he  dedi- 
cated the  thanka  to  the  monastery  or  took  it  home  with  him. 
The  reason  for  the  commission  seems  to  have  been  to  purge  "the 
two  sins  and  attain  fulfillment  in  the  two  spheres"  [meaning  not 
clear]  of  the  father  and  grandfather  of  On  po  mkhyen  rab,  whose 
kinship  with  the  donor  is  not  explained. 

The  style  of  this  thanka  is  notably  different  from  ex- 
amples of  the  fifteenth-century  Ngor  style  (P10).  Although 
there  is  a  basic  similarity  in  the  composition,  the  figures  are 
now  less  regimented  and  seem  to  have  more  elbowroom.  The 
brushwork  is  unquestionably  bolder  and  reveals  greater  spon- 
taneity— the  figures  seem  considerably  more  freely  drawn.  The 
scene  with  the  dancing  dakinis  is  especially  lively  and  vigorous, 
and  the  animals  and  birds  appear  to  be  drawn  from  life.  One  can 
recognize  the  Tibetan  mastiff  in  the  dogs,  and  the  birds  fly  with 
much  greater  ease  and  naturalism  than  they  do  in  the  earlier 
painting.  The  crowded  cemetery  scenes  are  dispensed  with,  and 
the  billowing  scarves,  swirling  pools  of  water,  the  flying  birds, 
and  the  bold,  leaping  tongues  of  flame  make  this  a  lively  and 
dramatic  composition.  And  yet,  a  sense  of  calm  prevails  in  the 
upper  section  as  the  deified  lamas  and  others  watch  the  vigorous 
antics  of  both  gods  and  demons  with  serene  and  impassive 
detachment. 


P22 


Sakyasri  and  the  Lotsawa  of  Trophu 

Central  Tibet,  c.  1700 

11V2  x  9"/,6  in.  (29.2  x  24.3  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.77.19.10 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  p.  115;  Fisher,  pp. 

23.  43- 
See  plate  2  5 

Five  monks  and  two  deities  constitute  the  subject  matter 
of  this  thanka.  Two  of  the  five  monks  are  the  central  figures; 
they  are  seated  on  lion  thrones.  They  both  have  distinct  physi- 
ognomies and  display  different  gestures  with  their  hands.  The 
monk  on  the  left  exhibits  the  gesture  of  teaching  the  Law  while 
the  other  has  his  right  arm  extended,  the  left  resting  on  his  lap. 
Each  monk  has  an  image  of  a  deity  portrayed  at  the  base  of  his 
throne.  The  white  deity  on  the  left  is  Ushnishavijaya,  the 
goddess  of  long  life,  and  the  one  on  the  right  is  the  golden 
Vasudhara,  the  goddess  of  wealth.  Of  the  three  monks  along  the 
top,  each  of  whom  is  seated  on  a  lotus,  two  are  shown  teaching, 
while  the  figure  in  the  middle  holds  a  rosary  with  both  hands. 

An  exact  identification  of  the  principal  figures  is 
difficult,  but  they  may  represent  Sakyasri  (on  the  left)  and  the 
lotsawa  (translator)  of  the  Trophu  monastery  (on  the  right). 
Sakyasri  (b.  1145),  the  great  teacher  from  Kashmir,  came  to 
Tibet  in  1204  at  the  invitation  of  the  lotsawa.  He  vigorously 
spread  the  doctrine  in  the  country  and  was  probably  the  last 
great  Indian  scholar  to  have  played  an  eminent  role  in  the  his- 
tory of  Tibetan  Buddhism.  Trophu  is  a  monastery  associated 
with  the  Kagyupas;  it  played  an  important  role  in  the  life  of 
Buton  rinpoche  in  the  fourteenth  century. 

The  figure  on  the  left  is  the  more  important  of  the  two, 
for  he  is  teaching;  presumably,  the  other  is  listening.  Adding  to 
his  status  is  the  bump  on  his  head  that  represents  the  ushnisha. 
symbol  of  wisdom.  Moreover,  it  may  be  noted  that  the  lions 
below  his  throne  are  shown  roaring  while  those  below  the  other 
are  quiet.  The  roaring  lion  is  a  well-known  metaphor  for  a  great 
teacher — the  Buddha  Sakyamuni  is  often  said  to  roar  like  a  lion. 
Thus,  the  identification  of  the  figure  on  the  left  with  Sakyasri 
and  the  other  with  the  Trophu  lotsawa  seems  appropriate.  It  is 
not  known  whether  the  portrayals  are  realistic,  but  the  faces  of 
both  personalities  are  expressive  and  sensitively  drawn.  While 
the  lotsawa  is  distinguished  by  his  slight  smile,  the  other  figure 
has  very  distinctive  features,  especially  the  aquiline  nose,  the 
high  cheekbones,  and  the  rather  square  jaws.  Thus,  his  face  is 
definitely  related  to  a  much  earlier  portrait  of  Sakyasri,  probably 
painted  soon  after  his  death  (Pal  1969  A,  p.  52,  no.  5). 

Although  this  painting  may  have  been  rendered  for  a 
Sakyapa  monastery,  a  comparison  with  the  earlier  Sakyapa  por- 
trait (P13)  reveals  how  significantly  different  the  style  of  this 
work  is.  The  crowded  compositions  of  earlier  renderings  are  re- 
placed here  by  an  almost  stark  simplicity.  Nothing  is  allowed  to 
distract  our  attention  from  the  figures  which  seem  to  have  more 
elbowroom  in  the  unencumbered  background.  The  colors,  too, 
lack  the  intensity  of  the  earlier  styles,  and  their  soft  tonality  and 
subtle  shades  relate  this  thanka  to  the  contemporary  style  pre- 
ferred in  some  schools  of  central  Tibet. 


158 


P2I 


P22 


Mahakala  and  Companions 
See  plate  24 


Sakyasri  and  the  Lotsawa  of  Trophu 
See  plate  2  5 


9 

4 

-             T 

-V.lt,  i       f  /• 

i 

i$fet    *^ 

1 

detail 


159 


P23 

The  Goddess  Sarasvati 

Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  18th  century 

I43/i6  x  95/k  in.  (36.1  x  24.4  cm.) 

The  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

L. 69. 24. 282 

Literature:  Tucci,  1949,  pi.  R  and  p. 

See  plate  26 


570. 


On  a  white  lotus  rising  from  a  lake  is  seated  Sarasvati,  or 
Changchanma,  as  she  is  called  in  Tibet.  The  goddess  of  wisdom 
and  music,  Sarasvati  was  a  creation  of  the  Vedic  Aryans  (1500— 
1000  B.C.)  and  is  one  of  the  oldest  Indian  female  deities.  She 
has  remained  equally  popular  with  the  Hindus,  Buddhists,  and 
Jains.  Although  the  Vajrayana  Buddhists  had  other  deities  of 
wisdom,  such  as  Manjusri  and  Prajnaparamita,  Sarasvati,  be- 
cause she  was  considered  the  dispenser  of  intellect  and  eloquent 
speech,  remained  especially  popular  with  teachers  and  masters 
among  Tibetan  Buddhists.  Her  popularity  with  exorcists  and 
tantrics  is  due  to  the  fact  that  she  presides  over  most  mantras 
and  charms,  called  dharani  or  vidya. 

In  this  painting  the  slight  and  delicate  goddess,  with  her 
white  complexion,  is  elegantly  clad  in  a  light  silk  material  of 
brown,  red,  and  mauve.  A  green  scarf  and  an  orange  aureole 
accentuate  her  graceful  form,  and  she  holds  a  vina  in  her  supple 
hands.  Three  Sakyapa  monks  are  seated  in  the  sky  while  two 
others,  engaged  in  reading  manuscripts,  sit  beside  the  lake  at 
the  bottom. 

The  iconography  of  the  painting  agrees  in  essentials  with 
the  description  of  the  goddess  given  in  the  Sgrub  thabs  kun  btus 
(Wayman  1977,  p.  249): 

Surrounded  by  delectable  herbs  of  a  Mt.  Meru  grove, 
within  a  white  and  pure  ocean  of  milk  she  is  seated  on  a 
white  lotus  with  large  petals.  She  has  a  white  body,  one 
face,  two  arms,  her  face  calm,  smiling  and  lovely  with 
charming  youth  of  sixteen  years,  breasts  firm  and  high, 
narrow  waist,  in  squatting  posture;  with  her  hands  hold- 
ing an  instrument  of  many  strings  of  lapis  lazuli. .  .The 
upper  part  of  her  body  is  covered  with  white  silk,  and 
the  lower  part  wound  in  variegated  fashion  like  a  rainbow. 

This  is  precisely  how  the  artist  has  rendered  her  image  in  this 
painting. 

One  of  the  finest  thankas  of  the  Kham  tradition,  this  is 
evidently  the  work  of  a  master.  The  fluent  and  elegant  outlines 
are  firmly  drawn  in  a  controlled  manner.  The  open  and  spacious 
landscape,  though  reminiscent  of  the  Chinese  pictorial  tradi- 
tion, is  rendered  with  great  economy  of  form  and  a  penchant  for 
gentle  shapes  that  distinguish  this  style  from  the  more  domi- 
nant landscape  style  of  the  period  (P25,  P27).  Except  for  the 
orange  and  red  of  the  aureoles  and  the  robes,  the  colors  are  soft 
and  muted  and  impart  a  feeling  of  serenity  to  the  overall  com- 
position. It  may  well  have  been  rendered  by  the  same  master  re- 
sponsible for  another  delicate  thanka  now  in  a  private  collection 
(Tucci  1949,  pi.  N). 


P24 

Sakyamuni  and  the  Eighteen  Arhats 
Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  18th  century 
283/4  x  18 V2  in.  (73  x  47  cm.) 
The  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 
Collection 
L. 69. 24. 324 
See  plate  27 

This  delicately  painted  thanka  presents  an  unusual  sub- 
ject: a  vivid  portrayal  of  a  Tibetan  legend  about  Hva  Shang,  the 
seventeenth  arhat  in  the  Tibetan  pantheon  (P36).  As  briefly 
recounted  by  Tucci  (1949,  II,  p.  557),  Hva  Shang  was  a  monk 
who  lived  under  the  Ming  dynasty.  One  day  he  offended  the 
emperor,  and  fled  the  country  to  avoid  punishment.  Years  after, 
when  he  returned  in  a  boat,  the  arhats  came  out  of  the  sea  to 
protect  Hva  Shang  from  the  emperor's  wrath.  In  the  painting, 
seventeen  arhats  are  seen  emerging  from  the  ocean  on  various 
fabulous  aquatic  creatures.  Hva  Shang  sails  in  a  small  boat  in 
the  foreground.  At  the  lower  right,  a  dark  courtier  stands  be- 
side the  emperor  and  points  to  the  miraculous  appearance  of  the 
arhats,  while  an  attendant  holds  a  beautiful  peacock-tail  parasol 
behind  the  emperor's  head.  From  the  heavens  an  impassive 
Sakyamuni  appears  to  watch  the  scene,  although  he  is  not  part 
of  the  legend. 

Indeed  the  thanka  is  so  richly  detailed  that  unless  one 
looks  carefully,  many  interesting  features  may  be  missed.  At  the 
upper  right  a  celestial  being  empties  a  cloth  filled  with  flowers 
to  symbolize  the  auspiciousness  of  the  occasion,  while  one  of  the 
arhats  in  the  group  below  appears  to  conjure  up  several  monks 
from  a  gem  he  is  holding.  An  amusing  detail  shows  one  of  Hva 
Shang 's  fellow  sailors  looking  up  at  the  arhats  through  a  long 
telescope,  as  if  he  is  looking  for  land. 

Apart  from  the  principal  personages,  the  thanka  is  en- 
livened with  whorling  clouds,  dancing  waves,  and  various  birds 
and  animals — both  natural  and  mythological.  However,  despite 
all  the  activity,  the  composition  reflects  an  ethereal  and  serene 
atmosphere  achieved  by  the  controlled  use  of  the  brush  and  soft 
hues.  The  fine  calligraphic  lines,  the  stylized  though  exuberant 
waves,  and  the  expressive  faces  of  the  arhats  reveal  the  continued 
influence  of  the  Chinese  pictorial  tradition.  Especially  deft  and 
imaginative  are  the  renderings  of  animals,  particularly  of  the 
buffalo  and  horses,  which  are  convincing  in  their  fidelity.  The 
fantastic  creatures,  such  as  the  dragons  and  giant  tortoises,  re- 
veal the  richness  of  the  artist's  imagination.  Departing  from  the 
Tibetan  penchant  for  strong,  primary  colors,  the  artist  has  used 
a  wide  variety  of  mellow  hues,  such  as  muted  grays,  mauves, 
pinks,  lavenders,  and  a  gentle  green,  that  create  a  pleasant  con- 
trast with  the  deep  blue  of  the  sea.  The  arhats'  robes,  however, 
are  painted  in  bright  reds  and  oranges. 

It  is  difficult  to  be  precise  about  the  provenance  of  this 
thanka.  The  style  was  prevalent  in  central  as  well  as  eastern 
Tibet.  The  strong  influence  of  the  Chinese  tradition  here,  how- 
ever, leads  to  the  suggestion  that  it  may  have  been  painted 
somewhere  in  the  province  of  Kham.  It  is  interesting  to  note 
that  this  same  subject  is  painted  in  a  Chinese  temple,  as  is  evi- 
dent from  the  following  passage: 


160 


P23 


P24 


The  Goddess  Sarasvati 
See  plate  26 


Sakyamnni  and  the  Eighteen  Arhats 
See  plate  27 


161 


In  a  small  temple  called  Hung-fah-t' ang.  just  beyond  one 
of  the  two  large  monasteries  on  P'u-to-shan,  is  an  inter- 
esting representation  of  the  eighteen  Arhats  crossing  the  sea. 
They  are  seated  on  various  sea  animals  (de  Visser,  p.  138). 

It  is  obvious  that  the  picture  in  the  Chinese  temple  represents 
the  legend  depicted  in  this  thanka  and  may  have  served  as  the 
model  for  the  Tibetan  representation. 


P25 


P26 


Portrait  of  the  Fifth  Karmapa 
Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  18th  century 
31  x  17  in.  (78.8  x  43.2  cm.) 
Gift  of  Christian  Humann 
M.  71. 98. 2 
See  plate  28 

This  finely  preserved  and  colorful  thanka,  probably  from 
a  set,  portrays  the  fifth  Karmapa,  Dezhin  Shegpa  (1384-1415). 
The  names  of  the  other  figures  are  also  known  from  inscriptions 
{see  Appendix),  but  most  of  them  cannot  be  identified.  Above 
the  fifth  Karmapa  is  the  figure  of  Hevajra  in  yab-yum  with  his 
partner;  flanking  this  divine  tableau  are  two  monks  who  wear 
red  hats.  Among  the  three  figures  below,  the  one  in  the  red  hat 
is  Chospal  Yeshe  (1406-1452),  who  was  a  disciple  of  the  fifth 
Karmapa  and  the  third  member  of  the  Shamar  lineage.  The 
Shamarpas  are  distinguished  from  the  Karma-Kagyupas  by  their 
red  hats  which,  however,  are  different  from  the  red  hats  of  the 
Sakyapas. 

A  contemporary  of  Tsongkhapa,  the  founder  of  the 
Gelukpa  sect,  the  fifth  Karmapa  was  a  remarkable  man  who 
traveled  widely  during  his  brief  earthly  existence.  In  1407  he 
went  to  China  at  the  invitation  of  Emperor  Yongle  (r.  1403—24), 
who  bestowed  many  honors  upon  the  Karmapa.  Perhaps 
the  most  significant  gift  was  a  potent  black  hat  which  became 
the  distinctive  ceremonial  hat  of  all  later  Karmapas  and  is  still 
worn  by  the  present  leader  on  special  occasions.  Twice  Dezhin 
Shegpa  saved  his  country  from  a  Chinese  invasion,  a  service 
which  was  only  possible  because  of  his  sincere  and  intimate  rela- 
tionship with  the  emperor.  Although  Tsongkhapa  never  met 
Dezhin  Shegpa,  he  sent  the  Karmapa  a  letter  that  said,  in  part: 
"You  are  like  a  second  Buddha.  I  would  like  to  see  you,  but 
I  am  in  a  three  year  retreat.  So  I  am  sending  you  a  statue  of 
Maitreya  which  belonged  to  Atisa"  (Thinley,  p.  75). 

Clad  in  orange  and  red  robes,  the  Karmapa  is  represented 
as  a  teacher,  wearing  his  black  hat  and  seated  on  an  elaborate 
Chinese  chair  beside  a  river.  Offerings  are  placed  before  him  on 
a  table  and  on  the  ground  as  well.  The  predominant  colors  of 
the  landscape  are  various  shades  of  blue,  green,  gray,  and 
brown,  and  the  rocks  and  chair  are  outlined  in  gold.  Although 
both  the  facial  features  and  the  expression  are  individualistic,  it 
is  difficult  to  determine  if  this  is  a  true  likeness.  Indeed,  if  one 
were  to  compare  it  with  another  Kham  portrait  of  the  same 
Karmapa  (Thinley,  p.  70),  one  would  believe  they  were  of  dif- 
ferent persons.  Apparently,  there  were  various  iconographic  tra- 
ditions for  representing  the  fifth  Karmapa. 

Although  this  thanka  is  rendered  in  a  style  typical  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  the  strong  Chinese  influence  seen  here 
suggests  that  the  thanka  was  rendered  in  Kham,  which  has 
remained  a  stronghold  of  the  Karmapa  tradition. 


Buddha  Sakyamuni  and  Narrative  Scenes 
Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  18th  century 
34 V2  x  24/8  in.  (87.6  x  61. 1  cm.) 
Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 
M.75.23 
See  plate  29 

As  there  are  no  inscriptions,  exact  identifications  of  the 
narrative  compositions  in  this  beautiful  thanka  are  difficult.  As 
is  usual  in  such  thankas,  the  figure  of  Buddha  Sakyamuni  is  in 
the  center;  the  scenes  unfolding  around  him  may  represent  tra- 
ditional stories  of  his  previous  lives  (called  jatakas  or  avadanas) 
or  episodes  in  his  historic  life.  However,  none  of  the  scenes 
recalls  any  episode  from  his  life,  nor  can  we  relate  them  to  any 
of  the  earlier  birth  stories. 

In  the  upper  left-hand  corner  of  the  painting  a  princely 
figure,  seated  below  a  formation  of  colorful  rocks,  is  engaged  in 
conversation  with  a  kneeling  man.  As  we  move  clockwise  we 
encounter  what  may  be  the  same  prince  in  a  chariot  with  an  at- 
tendant holding  a  parasol  above  his  head.  The  chariot  seems  to 
be  approaching  a  house  where  two  persons  stand  on  the  terrace 
and  watch,  while  a  third  is  seated  on  a  veranda.  Curiously,  be- 
side the  seated  personage,  the  head  of  the  Buddha  emerges  from 
a  pile  of  cloth.  Below  this  building  a  group  of  people  is  seated 
beneath  a  tree  with  offerings  piled  before  them,  while  a  lama 
and  companion  point  upward  as  a  third  figure  turns  and  looks  at 
them.  Behind  them  are  three  heaping  bowls  of  grain.  Imme- 
diately below  is  a  two-storied  pavilion,  the  upper  story  of  which 
is  surrounded  by  clouds.  An  important  figure,  perhaps  the  same 
prince  as  in  the  upper  left-hand  corner,  is  receiving  a  messenger 
in  the  second  story  of  the  upper  pavilion.  On  the  lower  story 
a  divine  monk  with  a  rosary  and  a  book  is  preaching  to  a  con- 
gregation. A  bearded  ascetic  and  a  man  beneath  a  tree  outside 
the  fence  appear  to  be  listening  to  the  sermon.  On  the  other 
side  of  the  tree  a  princely  figure  is  conversing  with  three  ascetics, 
and  in  the  clouds  above  the  tree  a  shepherd  leads  two  cows. 

Because  of  the  presence  of  the  monks,  it  is  possible  that 
the  scenes  are  related  not  to  myths  concerning  the  Buddha 
Sakyamuni  but  to  the  hagiography  of  some  Tibetan  religious 
luminary  or  of  an  ancient  king.  The  emergence  of  the  image  of 
the  Buddha  from  the  ground  reminds  us  of  the  stories  about  the 
most  famous  statue  in  the  Jokhang  temple  in  Lhasa.  Apparently 
this  image  of  the  Buddha,  brought  to  Tibet  by  Songtsen  Gampo's 
Chinese  wife,  was  frequently  hidden  and  rediscovered,  once 
by  King  Thisong  Detsen  (b.742). 

Whatever  the  exact  identification,  the  thanka  is  a  fine 
example  of  the  Karma-gadri  style.  Although  somewhat  busier 
than  seventeenth-century  thankas  in  that  style,  the  painting 
conveys  a  sense  of  openness  and  reflects  the  harmony  and  seren- 
ity of  nature.  As  is  usual  for  Karma-gadri  paintings,  the  draw- 
ing is  refined  and  delicate  and  the  colors  are  applied  with  far 
greater  restraint  than  in  the  Tashilumpo  and  Narthang  styles. 
The  formulas  for  landscape  elements  do  not  differ  basically,  but 
nature  in  this  painting  is  less  overpowering.  Indeed,  the  scale  of 
the  rocks  and  trees  is  in  keeping  with  the  miniature  scale  of  the 
figures.  The  predominant,  characteristically  Karma-gadri  colors 
are  green,  blue,  and  red,  but  various  other  shades  are  employed 
with  a  subtle  yet  sensuous  effect. 


162 


P25 


P26 


Portrait  of  the  Fifth  Karmapa 
See  plate  28 


Buddha  Sakyamuni  and  Narrative  Scenes 
See  plate  29 


1  -- 

fls'i  tif  fj     tsn     bs a* 

>«tMI 

,—  *  * 

han^HHS^'v5*^ 

V- 

k 

* 
■ 
■ 

11 

Pi/  ir  ■ 

\  - 

* 

'«& 

li    4.  Ik  -; 

. 

Mr 

^5 
1. 

v 

C'j 

jjo*^      «■       ^  *3P^P"^^M 

tiliilK*  A  Ifl 

4 

4  1-    ^fm^^'tfi^f 

163 


P27 


A  Mahasiddha  and  Talungpa  Lamas 

Central  Tibet  (Talung  monastery), 

late  18th  century 

24  x  21V4  in.  (61  x  55.2  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Robert  Coles 

M.  81. 206. 2 

See  plate  30 

The  center  of  this  painting  is  occupied  by  an  elderly 
mahasiddha  wearing  a  printed  white  robe  with  yellow  lining. 
Seated  on  a  leopard  skin,  his  legs  are  crossed  and  he  holds  a 
skullcup  with  his  left  hand,  while  his  right  hand  makes  the  ges- 
ture of  touching  the  earth  (bhumisparsamudra) .  On  his  right  is  a 
blue  cushion  and  beneath  the  leopard  skin  are  rocks  painted  in 
light  and  dark  blue,  with  two  green  patches  and  swirling  purple 
designs.  The  mahasiddha  wears  the  crossbelts  and  earrings  typi- 
cal of  this  class  of  ascetic;  his  aureole  is  red,  his  nimbus  purple. 
On  his  left  the  other  ascetic  is  identified  by  a  tiny  golden  in- 
scription as  Nger  nas.  Further  left,  a  lady  approaches  the 
mahasiddha  with  a  skullcup  in  her  right  hand.  The  rocky  hills 
in  the  background  are  blue  and  green  and  on  the  right  are 
dotted  with  a  number  of  buildings. 

Below  rhe  mahasiddha  are  five  other  red-robed  monks, 
identified  by  golden  inscriptions.  Four  of  them  sit  on  tiger  and 
leopard  skins,  but  the  one  on  the  right  is  seated  on  an  elaborate 
chair.  Above  the  mahasiddha  the  bodhisattva  Manjusri  at  the 
center  is  flanked  by  two  more  lamas,  identified  as  Lama  Nang 
and  Lama  Gyalpa  khung  cheng  pa. 

Three  other  paintings  from  the  same  set  have  been  pub- 
lished (Dieux  et  demons,  pp.  232,  236,  and  nos.  273-75)  and 
have  been  attributed  to  eastern  Tibet.  That  attribution  is  based 
primarily  on  the  costumes  worn  by  some  of  the  lay  figures  in 
the  frontispiece  of  the  set — depicting  Vajradhara — which  are 
similar  to  those  worn  in  the  Mi-nyag  district  of  eastern  Tibet. 
In  another  publication  (Lauf  1976  A,  pp.  116— 17),  one  of  the 
set  portraying  abbots  has  been  attributed  to  the  Talung  monas- 
tery, north  of  the  capital.  According  to  this  author,  the  series  of 
thankas  depicts  the  various  teachers  and  abbots  of  the  Talungpa 
sect,  a  branch  of  the  Kagyupas.  The  monastery  of  Talung  was 
founded  by  Tashipal  in  11 80,  and  the  hats  worn  there  are  quite 
different  from  those  worn  by  other  red-hat  sects. 

The  only  figure  not  identified  by  an  inscription  is  the 
principal  mahasiddha.  He  is  very  likely  Luipa,  the  teacher  of 
Naropa,  who,  along  with  his  Tibetan  disciple,  is  especially 
associated  with  the  Kagyupa  lineage.  This  would  explain  the 
presence  of  the  skullcup-bearing  female,  who  must  represent  a 
dakini  who  plays  an  important  role  in  Luipa's  mystical  life.  More- 
over, in  the  Tibeto-Mongol  pantheon  (Olschak  and  Wangyal, 
p.  117,  no.  12)  Luipa  is  given  the  same  attributes.  The  other 
figures,  though  identified,  remain  merely  names,  but  each  figure 
is  given  a  distinct  physiognomy.  However,  it  is  not  possible 
to  determine  whether  these  are  actual  portraits,  or  simply  the 
work  of  a  perceptive  artist  who  did  not  care  to  make  all  his 
characters  look  alike.  Indeed,  the  representation  of  Luipa  with 
his  distinctive  features  and  rather  flabby  body  seems  quite 
realistic;  the  artist  may  have  used  a  model. 

Although  the  Talung  monastery  is  in  central  Tibet,  the 
series  could  have  been  painted  for  a  donor  from  Mi-nyag  who 
was  a  follower  of  the  Talungpa  order.  This  particular  landscape 


style  was  widely  popular  from  Tashilumpo  to  Kham  during  the 
eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries,  although  its  expression 
varied  from  region  to  region  and  artist  to  artist.  For  instance, 
similar  landscape  motifs  are  used  in  other  thankas  of  the  period 
(P25,  P29),  and  even  a  quick  glance  makes  clear  the  differences 
in  composition  and  emphasis.  In  most  of  the  Talung  portraits, 
the  artist  has  not  only  struck  a  balance  between  the  figures  and 
the  landscape  elements  but  has  also  made  extensive  use  of  archi- 
tecture. The  composition  seems  less  constrained  by  hieraticism 
and  more  concerned  with  purely  visual  effects.  Fantasy  still  pre- 
dominates, as  in  the  other  landscape  styles,  but  the  presence  of 
architectural  elements  (depicting  historic  buildings)  appears  to 
have  kept  the  artist's  imagination  more  earthbound. 


P28 

A  Biographical  Painting 

Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  18th  century 

31  x  23  in.  (78.7  x  58.4  cm.) 

Gift  of  The  Louis  and  Erma  Zalk 

Foundation 

M.82.9 

See  plate  3 1 

The  mate  to  this  thanka  is  in  a  private  collection  and 
depicts  scenes  from  the  life  of  the  Buddha  Sakyamuni.  Here,  the 
principal  figure  appears  to  be  royal,  and  thus  the  thanka  may 
represent  the  legendary  life  of  one  of  the  early  kings  of  Tibet. 

The  narrative  begins  in  the  upper  right-hand  corner  with 
the  representation  of  a  paradise  in  which  two  figures  are  seen 
conversing  in  a  pavilion.  The  figure  on  the  right  with  a  bare 
body  and  white  turban  is  seen  again  amid  the  clouds,  riding  a 
blue  elephant,  accompanied  by  soldiers  and  attendants.  Although 
he  now  wears  golden  garments,  the  turban  identifies  him  as 
one  of  the  figures  in  the  pavilion.  Apparently  he  has  been  dis- 
patched to  earth,  as  Sakyamuni  himself  was,  or  as  the  future 
Buddha  Maitreya  would  be.  The  journey  to  earth  continues 
further  down,  in  the  next  scene,  in  which  the  regal  figure  on  his 
elephant  is  being  entertained  by  musicians.  Next,  in  an  open 
pavilion  beside  a  lotus  pond,  a  child  is  presented  by  three  ladies 
to  an  imposing  figure  dressed  in  blue.  This  is  undoubtedly  our 
divine  hero,  who  is  next  shown  in  a  roofed  pavilion  enthroned 
as  a  universal  monarch  with  the  seven  symbols  of  such  a  king 
placed  before  him.  To  the  left,  the  white-turbaned  prince  rides 
with  two  companions  toward  a  grove  sheltering  three  thatched 
huts.  Such  isolated  huts  were — and  may  still  be — used  as  re- 
treats, and  are  frequently  mentioned  in  Tibetan  texts  as  places  of 
meditation  for  kings  as  well  as  lamas. 

In  the  architectural  composition  below  the  scene  of  en- 
thronement, the  hero  of  our  tale — now  dressed  in  a  red  jacket 
and  a  white  dhoti — is  seated  in  a  blue-tiled  courtyard.  Against 
the  wall  to  his  right  a  vendor  appears  to  offer  a  golden,  or 
perhaps  bronze,  head  to  an  ascetic  turbaned  figure  who  seems  to 
be  refusing  the  offer.  Behind  the  vendor,  a  lady — the  same  one 
who  is  seated  next  to  the  king  in  the  enthronement  scene — 
glides  on  a  rainbow  toward  the  king.  She  also  appears  at  the 
gate,  apparently  greeting  the  same  turbaned  figure  who  is  seen 
inside.  The  vendor,  as  well  as  the  two  figures  kneeling  before 
the  king,  wear  gray  Scythian  caps,  while  the  person  on  the 
monarch's  left  wears  a  garland  of  leaves  and  matted  hair  which 
indicates  his  forest  origin.  In  a  small  enclosure  with  a  red  door 
connecting  it  to  the  larger  courtyard,  we  see  a  man  decapitating 


164 


P27 

A  Mahasiddba  and  Talungpa  Lamas 
See  plate  30 


P28 

A  Biographical  Painting 
See  plate  31 


himself.  As  his  lifeless  body  falls  to  the  ground,  another  figure 
— perhaps  the  same  fellow  who  stands  at  the  entrance — has 
picked  up  the  head. 

Below  the  courtyard,  on  a  lake  or  ocean,  are  figures  in  a 
large  boat  and  in  a  dinghy  who  appear  to  be  transferring  an 
object  from  one  vessel  to  the  other.  Swirls  of  clouds  rise  from  the 
water  and  move  toward  two  pavilions  at  the  left.  In  the  smaller 
one  a  man  lies  on  a  bed  while  the  lady  we  have  encountered 
before  watches  from  the  larger  pavilion.  In  another  part  of  the 
pavilion  a  man,  clad  in  an  orange  robe,  is  adoring  the  Triratna 
(Three  Jewels  of  Buddhism)  placed  above  a  banner  and  a  pile  of 
multicolored  gems.  Outside,  two  men  lead  two  animals  while 
above  the  pavilion  a  man  holds  a  blue  gem  as  he  rides  through  a 
sea  of  clouds. 

There  seems  no  doubt  that  the  viewer  is  witnessing 
scenes  from  the  mystical  life  of  someone  who  may  be  a  Tibetan 
king  or  a  mahasiddha  born  into  a  royal  family.  Showing  him 
descending  to  earth  on  an  elephant  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to 
homologize  his  life  with  that  of  the  Buddha  Sakyamuni,  who 
entered  his  mother's  womb  as  a  white  elephant.  The  presence  of 
a  goddess  or  a  dakini  who  is  always  near  the  hero  like  a  guardian 
angel  is  also  a  common  feature  of  the  legendary  lives  of  great 


teachers  and  mahasiddhas. 

This  fine  example  of  the  Karma-gadri  style  was  probably 
painted  in  eastern  Tibet.  Although  stylistically  related  to  the 
two  preceding  examples,  the  delineation  here  is  even  more  sub- 
tle and  evocative  than  in  those  works.  The  delicate  forms  and 
the  soft  hues,  the  gentle,  misty  mountains,  and  the  fluffy  clouds 
imbue  the  painting  with  a  sense  of  real  elegance  and  enchanting 
simplicity. 


P29 

Arhat  Ajita  in  a  Landscape 
Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  c.  1800 
24 V2  x  i73/8  in.  (62.2  x  44.2  cm.) 
Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.  Pal 
M.  71. 107 

In  a  mountainous  landscape  a  man  with  a  mauve  com- 
plexion and  an  ugly  distorted  face  is  seated  on  a  rock  while 
clasping  his  right  leg.  He  is  clad  in  sumptuous  silks,  the  lower 
garment  being  blue  while  the  upper  robe  is  a  yellow  Chinese 
brocade  enlivened  with  multihued  cloud  patterns,  a  blue  dragon, 


165 


and  a  red  border.  The  dragon  and  clouds  are  well-known 
Chinese  symbols  that  appear  frequently  on  imperial  robes.  Be- 
fore him  is  a  low  table  with  a  basket  of  fruit,  a  blue  bowl  of 
rice,  and  a  pair  of  cymbals.  An  attendant  standing  beside  a  tree 
offers  a  fruit,  perhaps  a  peach,  to  the  master  who  seemingly 
snarls  at  him.  Miraculously  suspended  in  midair,  the  enthroned 
golden  Amitayus  appears  to  be  watching  the  scene.  The  elabo- 
rate rock  formations,  with  waterfalls  and  green  knolls  lined 
with  trees,  form  a  canopy  over  the  seated  figure.  In  the  fore- 
ground a  solitary  rock  projects  from  the  ground  like  a  missile  in 
an  otherwise  tranquil  landscape,  which  features  a  blue  lake 
where  some  deer  have  come  to  drink. 

Although  the  principal  figure  has  neither  attributes  nor  a 
nimbus,  he  very  likely  represents  an  arhat.  According  to  one 
Tibetan  tradition,  the  arhats  must  wear  silken  robes  and  be  sur- 
rounded by  cliffs,  animals,  and  pleasure-grounds,  but  nothing 
is  said  about  their  physiognomies.  Such  grotesque  arhats  as  this 
one  were  an  invention  of  the  celebrated  Chan  master  Guan 
Xiu  (Kuan  Hsiu)  (832-912);  one  of  his  famous  portrayals  was 
seen  and  admired  by  the  Qing  emperor  Qianlong  (Chien-lung) 
(r.  1736—95)  in  1757.  Stonecuts  of  these  arhats  were  made  and, 
among  other  copies,  at  least  one  set  of  paintings  is  in  the  Taka- 
hashi  collection  in  Japan  (de  Visser,  pp.  111-14).  In  that  series 
the  arhat  Ajita  is  portrayed  seated  on  a  rock,  like  the  others, 
"clasping  his  hands  round  his  right  knee;  with  an  open  mouth 
he  cries  out  his  sorrow." 

There  can  be  little  doubt,  therefore,  that  this  is  the 
arhat  Ajita  and  that  his  snarling  open  mouth  depicts  his  cry  of 
anguish  or  sorrow.  Like  the  arhats  in  the  series  in  the  Takahashi 
collection,  this  one  does  not  have  a  halo.  Thus,  although  this 
thanka  was  executed  in  eastern  Tibet  about  1800,  it  is  probably 
based  on  an  earlier  copy  of  Guan  Xiu's  famous  work.  Except  for 
the  arhat 's  figure,  the  rest  of  the  composition  probably  differs 
considerably  from  the  Chinese  model. 

The  landscape  is  a  design  of  pure  fantasy,  and  the  un- 
known artist's  attempt  to  suggest  a  sense  of  volume,  by  high- 
lighting the  structure  of  the  blue  rock  formations  with  patches 
of  green  and  brown  with  gold  accents,  is  a  purely  mechanical 
exercise.  This  is  also  evident  from  the  fact  that,  defying  all  laws 
of  gravity,  bushes  and  trees  of  miniscule  size  hang  upside  down 
from  the  edges  of  the  rock.  The  striking  analogy  between  the 
contorted  shapes  of  the  mountains  and  the  arhat 's  face  and  body 
is  remarkable.  Not  only  the  misshapen  lumps  on  his  head,  but 
his  shoulders,  knees,  and  firmly  clasped  hands  also  seem  to  echo 
the  formal  structure  of  the  rocks  around  him.  Perhaps  the  art- 
ist's intent  was  to  express  the  consubstantiality  of  the  arhat  and 
nature  by  emphasizing  such  formal  relationships.  Even  nature 
seems  to  echo  the  arhats  cry  of  anguish. 

P30 

Symbolic  Offerings 

Central  or  eastern  Tibet,  early  18th 

century 

36VH  x  22  Vn  in.  (93  x  56.2  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.81.8.5 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  pp.  115-16; 

Dieux  et  demons,  p.  170. 

See  plate  32 


This  remarkably  expressive  thanka  appears  to  be  in- 
complete and  may  be  a  fragment  of  a  large  offering  thanka,  or 
rgyan  tshogs  (sets  of  ornaments),  such  as  the  more  elaborate 
example  in  entry  P31.  Its  predominant  features  are  a  bannerlike 
construction  and  six  ferocious  dark  horses.  The  unique  design  of 
the  banner  is  almost  like  that  of  a  shrine,  with  an  eaved  super- 
structure shielding  a  chopper  and  a  skullcup  placed  on  a  stylized 
lotus.  Below,  a  piece  of  printed  silk  rises  from  a  skullcup  sup- 
ported by  three  skulls.  A  tongue  overhangs  the  rim  of  the  cup 
(decorated  with  two  large  eyes)  and  it  is  surrounded  by  tongues 
of  flame.  This  banner  is  very  likely  a  zor,  an  important  element 
in  the  Yama-offering  thankas  that  is  used  to  chase  away  evil 
spirits  (see  Wayman  1973,  pp.  71-81). 

A  flayed  skin  forms  a  canopy  over  the  banner,  and  on 
either  side  are  black  ravens — one  on  the  left  and  two  on  the 
right — with  human  organs  in  their  beaks.  Immediately  below 
the  bird  on  the  left  is  Vajrapani;  a  choten  is  below  the  other 
ravens.  Two  skeletons  seem  to  dance  as  they  circumambulate  the 
chbten.  They  may  represent  Citipati,  a  pair  of  skeletal  figures 
said  to  perform  the  Tsan  dance  on  the  cremation  ground.  Indeed, 
Yama's  realm  is  indicated  by  various  other  corpses  being 
trampled  by  the  horses  and  gouged  by  predatory  birds  in  the 
lower  section. 

The  artist  has  successfully  created  a  compelling  atmo- 
sphere of  the  bizarre  and  the  occult  for  a  thanka  that  was  obvi- 
ously used  in  esoteric  ceremonies.  Unquestionably  the  most 
arresting  figures  in  the  thanka  are  the  black  horses,  which, 
seeming  to  be  engaged  in  a  danse  macabre,  express  a  sense  of 
apocalyptic  vision.  With  swift  lines  and  deft  brushstrokes,  an 
unknown  master  has  created  a  group  of  animals  that  convey 
both  unnatural  energy  and  hellish  terror. 

P31 

A  Symbolic  Banquet 
Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  c.  1785 
Opaque  watercolors  on  cotton 
477/«  x  931/2  in.  (121. 6  x  237.5  cm.) 
Gift  of  Mr.  George  C.  Zachary 
M. 81. 211 


Peculiar  to  the  Lamaist  world,  this  type  of  painting  is 
known  either  as  rgyan  tshogs  (sets  of  ornaments)  or  as  Bskang 
rdsas  (material  for  the  banquet).  In  contrast  to  ephemeral  offer- 
ings, such  as  rice,  barley,  flowers,  and  incense,  these  paintings 
served  as  symbolic  though  permanent  offerings  to  the  deity.  In 
some,  the  center  is  occupied  by  the  mythical  Mt.  Meru,  the 
center  of  the  cosmos;  in  other  examples  such  as  this,  the  form  of 
the  deity  is  suggested  by  his  symbols.  The  god  represented  here 
is  probably  Mahakala.  Around  his  symbolic  representation  is  a 
great  variety  of  gifts  (lha  rdsas),  which  may  be  grouped  in  three 
broad  categories: 

i)  Mchod  rdsas  or  oblations,  such  as  the  eight  offerings, 
the  five  gratifications  of  the  senses,  the  seven  and  eight 
precious  things,  the  eight  precious  objects,  the  secret 
offerings,  etc.;  ii)  spyan  rdsas.  gifts  to  gratify  the  eyes  of 
the  god,  such  as  various  kinds  of  animals;  iii)  dam  rdsas 
or  "holy  objects,"  such  as  the  bell,  the  thunderbolt,  and 
other  ritual  objects  (Lessing,  pp.  iooff.). 


166 


P29 

Arhat  A  jit  a  in  a  Landscape 


P30 

Symbolic  Offerings 
See  plate  32 


167 


P3I 


A  Symbolic  Banquet 


PI1-*"*-*- 


I 


f 


A 


JsK 


r'% 


^3  c 


&#* ' 


v-» 


••I 


1 


Many  of  the  ritual  implements — the  bell,  the  thunder- 
bolt, swords,  a  chopper,  a  trident,  a  thunderbolt-and- 
skull-crowned  staff,  a  noose,  and  banners — are  included  in  the 
painting.  There  are  auspicious  symbols,  such  as  the  conch,  the 
pot,  the  parasol,  and  the  wheel,  while  various  organs  of  the 
body  are  offered  in  skullcups  filled  with  blood.  Other  organs, 
such  as  eyes,  kidneys,  and  the  heart,  are  carried  by  the  birds  in 
the  upper  region.  In  the  lower  half,  below  the  row  of  musical 
instruments,  are  various  animals,  among  which  the  horse,  the 
yak,  the  tiger,  the  lion,  and  the  boar  are  easily  recognizable. 

According  to  the  inscription  on  the  back  of  the  thanka 
{see  Appendix),  this  painting  was  given  as  an  act  of  faith  by 
Lobsang  Samten  in  the  "female  wood-snake  year."  At  the  time 
of  dedication,  Lobsang  was  the  retired  monk  who  led  prayers 
in  the  assembly  of  a  monastery  whose  name  is  not  clear.  The 
female  wood-snake  year  could  be  either  1725  or  1785.  A  compari- 
son with  another  painting  of  a  similar  subject  (P30)  leads  to  the 
suggestion  that  the  most  likely  date  for  this  painting  is  1785. 


P32 

A  Scroll  with  Astrological  Themes 

Eastern  Tibet,  18th  century 

22 Va  x  ioi'/j  in.  (56.5  x  257.2  cm.) 

Purchased  with  Funds  from  Christian 

Humann 

M. 72. 75. 1 

This  scroll  consists  of  astrological  and  divination  charts 
and  tables  used  to  make  horoscopes  and  foretell  the  future. 
Apart  from  its  usefulness  for  scholars  of  Tibetan  astrology,  the 
scroll  is  of  considerable  interest  to  the  student  of  Tibetan  culture 
in  general.  It  is  a  rich  source  for  the  shapes  and  forms  of  various 
symbols  and  utensils,  for  weapons  and  costumes,  and  for  ani- 
mals and  plants.  The  animals  that  symbolize  the  Tibetan  calen- 
dar— the  mouse,  elephant,  tiger,  hare,  dragon,  snake,  horse, 
ram,  monkey,  raven,  doe,  and  boar — are  repeated  often,  as  they 
are  of  fundamental  importance  for  astrological  calculations.  The 
style  of  writing,  although  cursive,  is  particularly  fine  and  leg- 
ible. The  bodhisattva  Manjusri,  who  is  represented  above  the 
trellislike  structure  connecting  four  very  tall  trees,  may  be  the 
presiding  deity  of  the  divination  texts. 

Drawn  with  freedom  and  spontaneity,  both  the  humans 
and  animals  here  are  lively  and  entertaining.  Especially  cap- 
tivating are  the  studies  of  animals  in  the  lower  middle  of  the 
scroll,  where  various  pairs  seem  to  confront  one  another  in  a 
snarling  match.  The  mandalalike  configuration  on  the  left,  with 
a  conceptually  rendered  but  convincingly  ferocious  tortoise  in 
the  center  surrounded  by  rows  of  animals,  forms  a  visually  at- 
tractive design.  By  and  large,  the  artist. has  confined  himself  to 
the  primary  colors,  which  are  lightly  applied. 


P33 

Yama  and  Yami 

Central  or  eastern  Tibet,  c.  1800 

97 V2  x  61  in.  (247.6  x  155  cm.) 

Gift  of  Jack  and  Muriel  Zimmerman 

M.71.78 


168 


P32 

A  Scroll  with  Astrological  Themes 


TtTTiTiSf 





detail 


169 


P33 

Yama  and  Yami 


170 


This  unusually  large  and  expressive  thanka  portrays  Yama 
and  his  sister,  Yami,  along  with  several  other  manifestations  of 
the  god.  An  ancient  Hindu  god  of  death,  Yama  plays  a  more  ex- 
panded role  in  the  Tibetan  pantheon  and  has  a  different  icono- 
graphy. Apart  from  being  the  Lord  of  the  Dead  (gShsin  rje),  he 
is  also  the  King  of  Religion  (Cos  gyal).  Furthermore,  Yama  is  one 
of  the  eight  dharmapalas  in  Tibetan  Buddhism;  hence,  he  is 
always  shown  in  a  terrifying  posture.  The  Hindu  Yama  simply 
rides  a  buffalo,  but  his  Buddhist  counterpart  has  the  head  of  a 
buffalo  and  rides  a  blue  bull.  In  fact,  the  iconography  of  the 
Buddhist  Yama  is  far  more  macabre  than  that  of  his  Hindu 
counterpart,  who  is  generally  portrayed  as  a  placid,  regal  figure. 
When  accompanied  by  his  sister,  as  in  this  thanka,  Yama  is 
known  as  Minister  of  the  Exterior  (Phyi  sgrub). 

Naked,  he  is  adorned  with  garlands  of  severed  heads,  a 
diadem  of  skulls,  and  various  other  ornaments.  With  hair  ris- 
ing like  flames  and  an  erect  penis,  his  is  a  menacing  figure;  he 
throws  his  arms  out  and  glowers  at  his  sister.  With  his  right 
hand  he  brandishes  his  chastising  staff  and  with  his  left  he  holds 
the  noose.  The  bull  is  as  aggressive  as  his  master  and  appears  to 
be  crushing  a  pink-complexioned  human  figure.  Although  Yami 
appears  to  be  no  less  terrifying  or  aggressive,  she  does  not  have 
an  animal's  head.  In  contrast  to  her  brother,  she  is  slender  and 
athletic  and  seems  to  be  dancing  as  she  steps  onto  the  bull  to 
offer  Yama  a  cup  of  blood.  With  her  other  hand  she  holds  a 
trident  with  streamers.  An  animal  skin  drapes  her  back  and  her 
long,  orange  hair  partially  covers  her  nakedness.  Her  complex- 
ion, like  that  of  the  bull,  is  blue-gray. 

Five  smaller  images  of  Yama,  in  different  colors,  are  in 
the  four  corners  and  at  the  apex  of  the  painting.  The  entire  tab- 
leau is  presented  against  a  background  of  leaping  and  dancing 
red  and  orange  flames.  At  the  bottom  of  the  painting  are  various 
offerings,  including  multicolored  gems  and  three  skullcups 
filled  with  blood,  a  red  tongue,  and  eyes.  The  strip  of  green 
pastures  and  hills  along  the  bottom  and  the  sides  supply  the 
only  relief  in  a  composition  dominated  by  fiery  and  bizarre 
forms  and  violent  action.  Notwithstanding  its  enormous  size, 
the  quality  of  the  drawing  is  excellent  and  the  brushwork,  espe- 
cially of  the  bold  flames,  is  vigorous  and  expressive. 


P34 


Palden  Remati  and  Her  Retinue 
See  plate  33 


P34 


Palden  Remati  and  Her  Retinue 

Central  Tibet  (Gelukpa  monastery), 

1800-1850 

28V2  x  21V4  in.  (72.4  x  54  cm.) 

The  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

L.69.24.323 

Literature:  Pal,  1980,  pp.  40,  89. 

See  plate  33 

The  figure  dominating  the  center  of  the  painting  is 
Palden  Remati,  a  form  of  the  better-known  Palden  Lhamo,  or 
Lhamo  for  short.  Lhamo  is  the  most  eminent  goddess  of  the 
Tibetan  pantheon  and  is  the  protector  deity  of  both  the  Gelukpa 
order  and  of  Lhasa,  the  capital  of  Tibet.  One  of  the  most  im- 
portant liturgical  texts  followed  by  the  Gelukpa  sect  is  named 
after  her  and  has  been  discussed  at  length  by  Tucci  (1949,  II, 
pp.  590-94)  and  by  Nebesky-Wojkowitz  (pp.  24-31).  She  has 


171 


an  enormous  retinue  of  followers,  which  appears  to  be  drastic- 
ally  teduced  in  this  thanka.  A  comparison  with  the  more  popu- 
lar form  of  the  goddess,  as  she  accompanies  her  spouse,  Mahakala 
(P10,  P21),  reveals  differences  from  this  particular  manifestation. 

Palden  Remati's  description  in  the  Gelukpa  text  is  worth 
quoting  extensively  for  two  reasons:  the  form  agrees  verbatim 
with  the  text,  and  the  passage  provides  a  graphic  verbal  model 
which  the  artist  had  to  follow. 

In  the  middle  of  a  vast  wild  sea  of  blood  and  fat,  in  the 
centre  of  a  black  storm  rides  on  a  kyang  with  a  white 
spot  on  the  forehead,  which  has  a  belt  of  raksasa  heads 
and  a  raksasa  skin  as  cover,  with  a  crupper,  bridle,  and 
reins  consisting  of  poisonous  snakes,  the  dPal  ldan  dmag 
zor  gyi  rgyal  mo  Remati,  who  comes  forth  from  the  syl- 
lable bhyo.  She  is  of  a  dark-blue  colour,  has  one  face  and 
two  hands.  Her  right  hand  wields  a  club  adorned  with  a 
thunderbolt,  which  she  lifts  above  the  heads  of  oath- 
breakers,  the  left  hand  holds  in  front  of  her  breast  the 
skull  of  a  child  born  out  of  an  incestuous  union  (nal 
thod)  full  of  substance  possessing  magic  virtues,  and 
blood.  Her  mouth  gapes  widely  open  and  she  bares  her 
four  sharp  teeth;  she  chews  a  corpse  and  laughs  thunder- 
ously [Nebesky-Wojkowitz,  pp.  25—26]. 

The  description  continues  on  in  this  vein,  painting  a 
gruesome  image  of  the  goddess  which  the  artist  of  the  thanka 
has  followed  in  explicit  detail.  Indeed,  as  the  text  states, "on  the 
crown  of  her  head  shines  the  disc  of  the  moon  and  on  the  navel 
the  disc  of  the  sun,"  which  is  exactly  what  we  see  in  the  thanka. 
Her  large  retinue  is  reduced  in  this  painting  to  only  nine 
figures.  She  is  flanked  by  two  animal-headed  deities  who  dance 
threateningly  as  they  brandish  their  weapons.  Above  Remati's 
head  are  the  four  goddesses  of  the  seasons,  each  riding  her  char- 
acteristic animal  and  appearing  belligerent.  The  forms  of  the 
three  goddesses  below  are  less  gruesome,  though  not  entirely 
benign.  Between  them  are  two  large  skulls  filled  with  blood  and 
plucked  eyes,  obviously  of  disbelievers  and  demons,  which  form 
her  offerings  as  they  do  with  other  angry  deities  (P30).  In  the 
upper  corners  two  menacing  dragons  add  to  the  macabre  imagery 
of  this  remarkably  expressive  composition,  one  which  simply 
bristles  with  swirling  cloud  patterns,  dancing  multiple-hued 
flames,  sprawling  oceans  of  blood,  and  gyrating  deities  who 
seem  to  revel  in  their  bizarre  orgy.  In  total  contrast,  a  monk  of 
the  Gelukpa  sect  sits  at  the  top  of  the  painting  with  a  book  in 
his  hand,  completely  unconcerned  with  the  frenetic  activity  below. 

An  identification  of  this  lama  would  help  in  the  precise 
dating  of  the  picture.  There  are,  however,  several  figures  in  the 
Gelukpa  hierarchy  with  this  identical  iconography.  The  earliest 
are  Gyeltsabje  and  Khedubje,  two  famous  disciples  of  Tsongkhapa, 
while  the  latest  is  the  Fourth  Panchen  Lama  (1781-1852).  If 
the  portrait  is  of  the  Panchen  Lama,  it  may  have  been  painted 
in  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  could,  in  fact, 
have  been  commissioned  by  him  and  rendered  in  the  Tashilumpo 
monastery,  the  seat  of  the  Panchen  Lamas.  This  date  is  con- 
sistent with  the  style  of  the  painting,  which  may  be  said  to 
have  evolved  in  central  Tibet  around  1750;  it  continued  to 
enjoy  popularity  until  at  least  1850.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  figure  represents  one  of  the  early  lamas,  the  thanka  could  be 
dated  to  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  painting 
is  related  stylistically  to  a  portrait  of  the  Seventh  Dalai  Lama 
(1708— 1757)  which  may  have  been  made  soon  after  his  death" 


(Olschak  and  Wangyal,  p.  90).  Whatever  its  exact  date,  the 
thanka  is  of  superb  workmanship  and  must  have  been  executed 
by  a  master  artist — strengthening  the  suggestion  of  a  commis- 
sion by  the  Fourth  Panchen  Lama  himself. 


P33     

Myriad  Buddhas 

Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  c.  1800 

31  x  223/4  in.  (78.7  x  57.8  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Michael  Blankfort 

M.  80. 2  2 1. 2 


Ninety  identical  blue-complexioned  Buddhas  surround  a 
central  Buddha  who  has  a  golden  complexion,  which  is  the 
only  feature  distinguishing  him  from  the  others.  The  right  hand 
of  each  Buddha  is  stretched  in  the  gesture  of  touching  the 
earth  and  the  left  holds  a  thunderbolt.  These  two  attributes, 
together  with  the  blue  complexion,  help  identify  this  Buddha  as 
Akshobhya.  The  central  figure,  too,  despite  his  golden  complex- 
ion, must  thus  be  identified  as  Akshobhya  (P6).  The  concept 
of  the  Thousand  Buddhas  of  the  Auspicious  Age  (bhadrakalpa) 
was  particularly  popular  in  the  northern  Buddhist  countries. 
Whether  the  number  is  ninety-one,  as  in  this  instance,  or  a 
thousand,  it  is  symbolic  of  infinity,  and  the  multitude  of  figures 
here,  therefore,  symbolize  the  pervasive  nature  of  the  transcen- 
dental Buddha. 

All  the  figures  wear  red  garments  and  are  represented 
against  two  aureoles:  the  smaller  is  either  green  or  indigo  blue 
and  the  larger  is  orange.  The  nimbus  behind  each  Buddha's  head 
is  green,  as  is  the  background.  The  central  Buddha  is  seated 
on  a  lotus  with  alternating  blue  and  orange  petals.  The  arrange- 
ment of  the  figures  in  such  paintings  is  strictly  symmetrical 
and  regimental,  but  the  overall  visual  effect  is  often  attractive. 


P36 

Hva  Shang  and  Guardians 
Central  Tibet,  19th  century 
25V2  x  18  in.  (64.8  x  45.7  cm.) 
Gift  of  the  de  Anda-Fast  Family 

M. 77.155. 3 

The  inscription  at  the  top  indicates  this  thanka's  place  in 
a  series  of  arhat  paintings.  Its  subject  is  Hva  Shang  and  two  of 
the  Eight  Guardians  of  the  Directions.  Hva  Shang  is  portrayed 
in  the  familiar  manner  as  a  dark,  obese,  and  jovial  fellow  sur- 
rounded by  children  whom  he  loves  and  protects.  He  holds  a 
lemon  (a  fertility  symbol)  with  his  left  hand,  a  rosary  in  his 
right,  and  seems  to  be  amused  by  the  boys'  antics.  While  the 
arhat  sits  on  a  tiger  skin  in  a  stylized  landscape,  the  two  guar- 
dians below  are  surrounded  by  swirling  clouds  and  dancing 
flames.  The  figure  holding  the  sword  is  Virudhaka,  the  regent 
of  the  south;  the  one  playing  the  lute  is  Dhritarashtra,  the  re- 
gent of  the  east.  They  are  dressed  in  attire  typical  of  Mongolian 
warriors.  Floating  in  the  sky  above  is  the  figure  of  Amitayus. 

Tucci  discusses  the  problem  of  Hva  Shang  at  length 
(1949,  11,  p.  555).  As  he  shows,  although  Hva  Shang's  icon- 
ography is  modeled  after  "Maitreya  of  the  big  belly,"  or  the 
laughing  Buddha  of  China,  he  is  not  included  in  the  Chinese 


172 


/ 


P35 

Myriad  Buddhas 


i73 


P36 

Hva  Shang  and  Guardians 


174 


P37 

Cosmic  Form  of  Avalokitesvara 


P38 

Shadakshari  Lokesvara  and  Twelve  Taras 


tradition  of  arhats  or  lohans.  On  the  other  hand,  Tucci's  belief 
that  Hva  Shang  was  unknown  in  the  Tibetan  tradition  prior  to 
the  eighteenth  century  appears  to  be  mistaken.  He  is  definitely 
included,  along  with  Dharmatala,  in  the  1435  sketchbook  of 
Tibetan  deities  made  by  Jivarama.  Thus,  the  literary  tradition 
{see  P24)  as  discussed  by  Tucci,  which  claims  that  Hva  Shang 
was  introduced  during  the  Ming  dynasty,  is  essentially  correct. 

The  style  of  this  painting  is  related  to  the  Narthang 
woodcuts  of  the  mid-eighteenth  century,  discussed  extensively 
by  Tucci.  A  remarkably  close  parallel  of  this  painting  is  in  a  pri- 
vate collection  (Lauf  1976  A,  pp.  62-63).  Although  there  are 
some  differences  in  detail,  both  may  have  been  based  on  a  mas- 
ter composition  cut  in  wood  (P47).  The  subsequent  prints  were 
modified  by  individual  artists  and  filled  in  with  colors.  For  a 
complete  set  of  arhats  in  the  same  style,  though  earlier  than  the 
present  example,  see  Olschak  and  Wangyal  (pp.  66-67). 


P37 

Cosmic  Form  of  Avalokitesvara 
Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  19th  century 
21  x  17 V2  in.  (53.3  x  44.4  cm.) 
Gift  of  Christian  Humann 
M. 71. 98. 3 


The  central  figure  here  is  that  of  the  bodhisattva  Avalo- 
kitesvara in  his  cosmic  form  (S19).  In  the  clouds  above  are  two 
transcendental  Buddhas,  one  golden  and  carrying  a  pot  (Sakya- 
muni),  the  other  blue  and  holding  a  thunderbolt  (Akshobhya). 
On  the  earth  below  are  Padmasambhava  on  one  side  and  a  choten 
on  the  other. 

The  cosmic  bodhisattva  stands  on  a  lotus  rising  from  a 
lake;  above  his  head  is  a  parasol  touching  the  clouds.  Thus,  he 
is  shown  as  the  cosmic  pillar  connecting  the  heavens,  the  atmo- 
sphere, and  the  earth.  He  is  given  eleven  heads,  eight  of  which 
represent  the  cardinal  directions  and  their  intermediate  points, 
and  the  other  three  of  which  signify  the  zenith,  the  center,  and 
the  nadir.  Nine  of  the  heads  have  benign  faces  and  are  depicted 
in  three  rows;  the  tenth  has  an  angry  face,  while  the  head  at  the 
top  is  Avalokitesvara's  parental  tathagata,  Amitabha.  In  addi- 
tion, he  is  given  a  thousand  arms  which  form  a  mandala  around 
his  body  and  symbolize  his  pervasiveness.  The  palm  of  each 
hand  is  marked  with  an  eye,  for  the  cosmic  god  is  said  to  have  a 
thousand  eyes  (sahasraksha)  as  well  so  that  he  can  see  on  all  sides. 
(For  a  further  discussion  of  the  symbolism,  see  Pal  1982  A.) 

With  its  gentle  landscape  and  muted  colors,  this  thanka 
is  related  stylistically  to  another  thanka  from  Kham  (P23). 


i75 


P39 

Commemoration  Thanka  for  Bhimaratha  Rite 


176 


P38 


P40 


Shadakshari  Lokesvara  and  Twelve  Tar  as 
Eastern  Tibet,  19th  century 
28V2  x  20V2  in.  (72.4  x  52  cm.) 
Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Michael  Blankfort 
M. 80. 221. 2 

Shadakshari  Lokesvara,  the  large  central  figure  in  this 
thanka,  is  an  important  manifestation  of  the  bodhisattva  Avalo- 
kitesvara  (Sio,  S19),  who  is  of  special  significance  to  Tibetans; 
the  Dalai  Lamas  are  said  to  be  incarnations  of  this  form  of  the 
bodhisattva. 

Seated  on  a  lotus  with  mauve  petals  in  the  classic  posture 
of  a  yogi,  he  is  clad  in  red  and  green  garments,  is  elaborately 
bejeweled,  and  wears  an  elegant,  intricate  crown.  His  smooth, 
white  complexion  is  set  off  against  a  light  blue  aureole  with 
radiating  golden  rays.  In  his  upper  right  hand  he  holds  a  rosary 
and  in  the  corresponding  left  hand  a  lotus.  The  second  pair  of 
hands  rests  against  the  chest  in  the  offering  gesture.  At  the  apex 
of  the  painting  is  a  golden  Buddha  with  a  pot  in  his  hand,  and 
at  the  bottom,  Kubera,  the  god  of  wealth,  rides  his  lion.  Lokes- 
vara is  surrounded  by  twelve  Taras;  the  six  on  his  right  are  white 
and  those  on  his  left  are  green.  Each  of  these  deities  is  portrayed 
against  radiating  aureoles,  and  some  are  surrounded  by  swirls 
of  clouds  tinted  green,  blue,  and  purple.  The  upper  half  of  the 
background,  representing  the  sky,  is  painted  blue.  Rocks, 
peaks,  and  knolls  in  different  shades  of  green  constitute  the 
earth's  landscape. 

The  central  figure  of  Lokesvara  is  given  a  satin-smooth 
finish  reminiscent  of  a  ceramic  figurine.  His  face  and  garments 
seem  more  Chinese  than  Tibetan,  and  it  is  possible  that  the 
artist  modeled  his  figure  on  a  Chinese  porcelain  prototype.  In 
any  event,  the  painting  was  very  likely  rendered  somewhere  in 
eastern  Tibet,  close  to  the  Chinese  border. 

P39 

Commemoration  Thanka  for  Bhimaratha  Rite 

Central  Tibet  (Tashilumpo  monastery), 

19th  century 

281/4  x  22  in.  (71.8  x  55.9  cm.) 

Gift  of  Christian  Humann 

M. 71. 98. 1 

Literature:  Pal,  1977,  p.  1974,  fig.  2. 

This  thanka  was  painted  in  the  Tashilumpo  monastery 
for  a  Newari  patron  from  Nepal.  It  became  a  common  practice, 
apparently  from  the  seventeenth  century  on,  for  Newari  mer- 
chants trading  with  Tibet  to  visit  this  famous  monastery  and 
commission  paintings  which  they  took  back  home.  Thus,  while 
the  style  of  such  works  closely  follows  the  contemporary  Tibetan 
formula — notable  both  in  the  figures  and  in  the  landscape  and 
architectural  elements  —  the  donors  at  the  bottom  and  the 
scenes  of  consecration  follow  the  Nepali  tradition.  Many  of  these 
export-style  thankas  are  inscribed  and  all  of  them  mention 
Tashilumpo  as  the  place  where  they  were  painted  {see  Pal  1978, 
pp.  153—55).  In  addition,  the  mount  in  this  example  is  painted 
with  designs  imitating  imperial  Chinese  brocade  which  was  of- 
ten used  to  mount  Tibetan  thankas  executed  for  such  important 
monasteries  as  Tashilumpo.  Since  the  brocades  were  for  the  use 
of  monasteries  only,  they  were  not  available  for  the  Newari 
merchants;  hence,  the  close  imitation. 


Amitabha  and  Eight  Bodhisattvas 


The  thanka  was  commissioned  to  commemorate  a  perfor- 
mance of  the  Bhimaratha  rite  which  was  particularly  popular 
among  the  Buddhist  Newars.  It  was  performed  by  an  individual 
or  by  a  married  couple  when  either  partner  reached  the  age  of 
seventy  years,  seven  months,  and  seven  days.  This  is  obviously 
a  senility  rite,  for  it  is  believed  that  by  performing  it  one 
is  absolved  of  all  moral  responsibility  for  one's  actions  from  that 
moment  until  death.  The  persons  in  whose  honor  the  ceremony 
is  performed  are  usually  portrayed  at  the  bottom  of  the  paint- 
ing riding  in  a  chariot  in  a  procession  of  much  mirth  and  fanfare. 
The  subject  matter  of  such  paintings  usually  consists  of  a  large 
stupa  in  the  middle  with  the  goddess  Ushnishavijaya  in  the 
dome  surrounded  by  various  gods  and  goddesses,  both  awesome 
and  benign.  (See  the  Pal  reference  above  for  a  further  discussion 
of  the  subject  and  such  export-style  thankas.)  Ushnishavijaya  is 
the  predominant  deity  in  such  paintings  because,  along  with 
Amitabha  and  the  White  Tara,  she  is  one  of  the  three  divinities 
of  long  life. 


P40 


Amitabha  and  Eight  Bodhisattvas 
Central  Tibet,  late  19th  century 
263/4  x  17 lA  in.  (68  x  43.8  cm.) 
Gift  of  the  de  Anda-Fast  Family 
M.77.155.2 


i77 


P^ 

Set  of  Twenty  Banners 


178 


The  central  figure  of  Buddha  Amitabha  is  seated  on  a 
lotus,  against  the  background  of  a  shrine  with  green  roofs 
trimmed  with  bright  orange.  The  lotus  rises  from  a  lake  and 
two  peacocks,  the  symbol  of  Amitabha,  are  represented  on  the 
throne  on  either  side  of  an  overhanging  carpet  of  orange,  green, 
and  gold.  Above  the  shrine  in  the  clouds,  a  golden  Buddha  is 
depicted  on  the  left,  and  the  bodhisattva  Vajrasattva  is  seen  on 
the  right.  Around  the  lotus  of  Amitabha  are  eight  seated 
figures,  constituting  the  mandala  of  the  Eight  Bodhisattvas. 
Each  has  a  different  color  and  a  different  attribute  (P2).  The  cult 
of  the  Eight  Bodhisattvas  was  popular  in  both  Central  Asia  and 
Tibet.  (See  Granoff,  and  Pal  1972-73,  for  further  discussions  on 
the  cult.)  Along  the  bottom  of  the  painting  are  the  figures  of 
Manjusri,  Shadakshari  Lokesvara,  and  the  angry  Vajrapani. 

Stylistically  the  painting  is  related  to  the  Bhimaratha 
thanka  (P39)  and  may  be  regarded  as  a  typical  example  of  the 
Tashilumpo  style  of  the  nineteenth  century.  As  is  usual  with 
such  thankas,  the  colors  are  bold  and  bright;  gold  has  been  used 
for  the  jewelry  of  the  various  deities  and  for  the  radiating  au- 
reoles. The  freshness  of  the  colors  leads  to  the  suggestion  of  a 
date  toward  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

P41 

Set  of  Twenty  Banners 

Central  Tibet,  19th  century 

Each  banner:  io-Vs  x  33/s  in.  (26.4  x 

8.6  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jack  Zimmerman 

M. 72. 109 

Each  of  these  banners  contains  an  image  of  a  deity 
mounted  on  blue  cloth,  the  upper  section  being  plain,  and  the 
lower — cut  along  the  middle  to  form  two  flaps  —  decorated 
with  circular  designs.  The  twenty  deities  may  be  divided  into 
three  groups:  eight  angry  deities,  six  Buddhas,  and  six  peaceful 
goddesses.  The  eight  angry  divinities  include  two  goddesses  and 
six  manifestations  of  Garuda  Vajrapani.  The  six  Buddhas  are 
members  of  a  pantheon  of  the  Thirty-five  Buddhas  of  Confession 
(M5).  The  remaining  six  goddesses  hold  various  objects,  such  as 
a  conch  shell,  an  incense  burner,  or  a  lute.  Strung  together,  the 
twenty  small  banners  may  once  have  belonged  to  a  larger  set. 


P42 


A  Terrifying  Deity  in  Yab-Yum 


The  artistic  quality  of  the  banners  is  indifferent;  they  are 
of  greater  cultural  than  art  historical  significance.  Although  the 
figures  are  rendered  with  correct  iconography,  the  drawing  is 
cursive  and  colors  are  crudely  applied.  It  is  possible  that  these 
miniature  paintings  represent  a  type  of  picture  known  in  the 
Tibetan  religious  tradition  as  tsa  ka  li  {see  Wayman  1973, 
pp.  56—57).  Such  pictures  were  used  by  masters  in  the  initiation 
ceremonies  of  adepts. 

P42 

A  Terrifying  Deity  in  Yab-Yum 
Northwestern  Nepal  or  Tibet, 
19th  century 

7  x  53/4  in.  (17.8  x  14.6  cm.) 
Gift  of  Dr.  Ronald  M.  Lawrence 
M. 74. 139.8 

A  dark,  terrifying  deity  is  seen  here  in  yab-yum  with  his 
red  prajna.  He  tramples  upon  two  nude  figures  as  he  strikes  a 


i79 


P43 


P44 


Eleven-Headed  Avalokitesvara 


Temple  Hanging 
See  plate  34  (detail) 


detail 


180 


militant  posture  (pratyalidha)  on  a  lotus.  He  is  clad  in  a  tiger 
skin  and  an  elephant-skin  cape.  His  right  hand  brandishes  a 
battle-axe,  and  his  left  holds  a  spear.  His  spouse  throws  her  left 
leg  around  his  waist  and  holds  a  skullcup  with  her  left  hand. 
The  figures,  surrounded  by  a  sea  of  orange  and  yellow  flames, 
are  difficult  to  identify,  but  the  male  may  represent  a  form  of 
Mahakala. 

The  painting,  acquired  by  the  donor  in  a  village  in 
northwestern  Nepal,  was  probably  rendered  locally  by  either  a 
monk  or  a  professional  artist,  but  its  style  is  related  to  nine- 
teenth-century paintings  from  Tibet. 

P43 

Eleven-Headed  Avalokitesvara 

Eastern  Tibet  or  Sichuan,  China, 

late  19th  century 

34  x  10  in.  (86.3  x  25.4  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jack  Zimmerman 

M.  81. 212.2 

In  the  center  of  this  painting  is  the  bodhisattva  Avalo- 
kitesvara in  his  eleven-headed  form  (S3).  Below  him  are  two 
Buddha  images,  one  seated  within  a  cave  and  the  other  in  a 
shrine.  The  upper  section  shows  a  demonic  figure  leading  a 
white  elephant  with  a  jewel  on  his  head  and  the  vase  of  immor- 
tality on  his  back.  Two  identical  Buddhas  are  seated  above  in 
cloud  cartouches.  All  four  surrounding  Buddhas  hold  pots  in 
their  left  hands;  the  right  hands  of  three  are  raised  to  the  chest. 
The  enshrined  Buddha  at  the  lower  right  forms  the  gesture  of 
touching  the  earth  with  his  right  hand. 

The  provenance  of  such  paintings  is  extremely  difficult  to 
suggest.  In  a  previous  publication  (Pal  and  Tseng,  pp.  40-41, 
fig.  21),  another  painting  in  this  identical  style  is  assigned  to 
the  Sichuan  province  of  China,  based  primarily  on  the  similarity 
of  such  works  with  Nakhi  (or  Nashi)  paintings.  The  Nakhis 
are  a  tribal  people,  related  to  the  Tibetan  family,  who  live  in 
Sichuan.  Although  these  paintings  are  somewhat  crudely  and 
perfunctorily  executed,  they  are  often  characterized  by  primi- 
tive vitality  and  spontaneous  liveliness.  The  drawing  here  is 
free  but  cursive,  and  the  artist  appears  not  to  have  been  very 
constrained  by  sophisticated  iconographic  standards.  The 
palette,  too,  with  its  muted  browns,  grays,  and  oranges,  is  dis- 
tinct and  differs  from  that  used  in  most  Tibetan  paintings. 
Thick,  black  brush  strokes  prominently  emphasize  forms  and 
shapes  such  as  clouds  and  mountains,  which  reflect  an  elemen- 
tary conceptualization;  the  artist  seems  to  have  been  totally  un- 
aware of  either  Chinese  or  eastern  Tibetan  landscape  paintings. 

P44 

Temple  Hanging 

Central  Tibet,  mid-ic)th  century  (?) 

Applique  with  cut  silks,  brocade,  and 

embroidery 

50  x  648  in.  (1.77  x  18.9  m.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Robert  D.  Mathey 

M.  81. 332 

See  plate  34  (detail) 

Unlike  the  other  applique  in  the  collection  (P45),  this 
example  does  not  have  an  inscription  on  its  back.  Although  it  is 


larger,  it  lacks  the  border  along  the  top  and  the  figures  are 
smaller  in  size.  These  include  the  five  tathagatas,  the  deities 
Vajrasattva  and  Hayagriva,  and  three  Gelukpa  lamas.  Vajrasattva 
and  Hayagriva  are  both  represented  in  yab-yum  and  are  placed 
at  the  two  ends  of  the  hanging.  Of  the  three  lamas,  one  can 
certainly  be  identified  as  Tsongkhapa,  the  founder  of  the 
Gelukpa  order.  The  others  are  very  likely  the  Seventh  Dalai 
Lama  and  the  Fourth  Panchen  Lama.  The  Seventh  Dalai  Lama 
was  a  great  scholar  who  lived  between  1708  and  1757;  the 
Fourth  Panchen  Lama's  dates  are  1781-1852.  Thus,  if  the 
identification  is  correct,  this  hanging  was  very  likely  made 
around  the  mid-nineteenth  century. 

Before  each  figure  is  an  altar  consisting  of  a  stylized  lotus 
bearing  various  objects,  such  as  a  butter  lamp,  a  wheel,  a  jade 
bowl,  and  tormas,  or  offerings.  The  greater  part  of  the  hanging 
is  comprised  of  flowers — mostly  lotuses — foliage,  banners, 
bells,  wheels,  thunderbolts,  skullcups  filled  with  blood,  chop- 
pers, fly  whisks,  and  tiny  figures  of  guardians.  All  are  inter- 
twined in  an  elaborate  tableau  of  bewildering  and  dazzling 
shapes  and  colors.  It  may  be  pointed  out,  however,  that  because 
this  hanging  is  older  than  the  later  example  its  colors  have 
acquired  a  softer  and  more  muted  tonality. 

It  is  not  known  how  ancient  is  the  tradition  of  such 
appliqued  and  embroidered  temple  hangings,  but  they  appear  to 
have  been  very  popular  among  the  Tibetans.  Most  Tibetan 
monasteries  have  their  halls  and  shrines  decorated  with  similar 
hangings  that  make  the  rooms  colorful  and  festive.  The  inscrip- 
tion on  P45  makes  it  clear  that  the  commission  and  dedication 
of  such  hangings  was  a  significant  religious  act.  Like  the  other 
hanging,  this  one  must  have  been  created  for  an  important 
Gelukpa  monastery. 

P45 

Temple  Hanging 

Central  Tibet  (Norbulinga),  1940 

Applique  with  cut  silk,  brocade,  and 

pearls 

48  x  516  in.  (1.42  x  13.2  m.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  James  Coburn 

M.78.74 

The  dedicatory  inscription  for  this  hanging,  included  in 
this  catalogue's  Appendix,  informs  us  that  this  "beautifully 
made  network  hanging"  was  offered  to  the  Norbulinga  monas- 
tery, the  summer  palace  of  the  Dalai  Lama,  by  Geshe  Lobsang 
Bangphyug  and  his  pupils  in  the  year  1940.  The  geshe  may  still 
be  alive  in  India.  The  present  Dalai  Lama  was  five  years  old  at 
the  time  the  hanging  was  executed.  It  was  paid  for  by  contribu- 
tions collected  from  the  whole  Vinaya  College,  and,  as  can  be 
seen  from  the  amount  of  silver  and  semiprecious  stones  listed  in 
the  inscription,  it  was  not  cheap. 

Except  for  the  smaller  figures  of  Tsongkhapa  and  the 
First  Panchen  Lama  (who  holds  a  string  of  pearls)  which  flank 
the  central  Buddha,  the  dominant  figures  are  seven  Buddhas,  all 
of  whom  are  seated.  Presumably  they  are  the  five  Buddhas  of  the 
past,  the  Buddha  Sakyamuni  of  the  present  era,  and  the  future 
Buddha,  Maitreya.  Their  images  are  interspersed  with  impres- 
sive grinning  kirttimukbas  (faces  of  glory)  or  kala,  symbolizing 
time.  To  each  head  is  attached  a  pair  of  hands,  with  which  the 
monster  appears  to  pull  strings  of  gems  from  his  mouth;  these 


181 


P45 

Temple  Hanging 


182 


P46 

Sakyamuni  and  the  Eighteen  Arhats 


183 


cascade  down  toward  the  Buddhas.  The  rest  of  the  hanging's 
surface  is  filled  with  lotuses,  foliage,  banners,  bells,  tassels, 
swirling  stalks,  and  cloud  patterns  in  both  silk  and  brocade.  Be- 
cause the  hanging  is  of  more  recent  origin  than  the  earlier  ex- 
ample (P44),  the  colors  of  the  fabrics  are  much  better  preserved. 
Altogether,  the  effect  is  that  of  a  sumptuous  visual  feast.  All  the 
material  used  was  imported  from  China  and  some  of  it,  with 
dragons  and  cloud  patterns,  was  probably  imperial  silk. 


P46 


P47 


Vajradhara  and  Spouse 


Sakyamuni  and  the  Eighteen  Arhats 
Eastern  Tibet,  19th  century 
Embroidered  satin 
41V2  x  29V2  in.  (105.4  x  75  cm.) 
Gift  of  the  de  Anda-Fast  Family 
M. 77.155. 1 

In  the  center  of  this  thanka  is  Buddha  Sakyamuni,  seated 
with  his  legs  crossed  atop  a  stylized  lotus  placed  on  a  lion  throne. 
Two  elephants  and  two  yakshas  (gnomes)  holding  gems  flank 
his  multicolored  aureole.  Beyond  them  are  the  figures  of  Sakya- 
muni's  two  chief  disciples,  Sariputra  and  Mahamaudgalyayana, 
standing  on  lotuses  holding  a  mendicant's  staff  and  bowl.  Sakya- 
muni's  right  hand  makes  the  gesture  of  touching  the  earth, 
and  his  left  holds  the  begging  bowl.  Above  his  head  are  the 
Triratna  (three  flaming  jewels)  flanked  by  two  makaras.  Above 
the  Triratna  symbol,  a  khyung  or  garuda  spreads  its  wings  to 
form  a  canopy;  immediately  above  this  creature  are  two  standing 
bodhisattvas.  Directly  above  them  in  the  clouds  is  the  seated 
figure  of  Tsongkhapa.  Surrounding  the  bodhisattva  figures,  the 
sixteen  arhats,  each  seated  on  a  chair  or  a  cushion,  are  spread 
out  in  a  semicircle.  Above  Tsongkhapa's  head  are  three  flying 
bats  and  the  symbols  of  the  sun  and  the  moon.  Below  Sakya- 
muni two  lions  seem  to  be  leaping  on  either  side  of  the  throne, 
it  would  appear,  at  the  two  remaining  arhats.  The  plump  arhat, 
surrounded  by  a  group  of  frolicking  boys,  is  obviously  Hva 
Shang  (P36),  while  the  other  is  Dharmatala,  who  sees  a  vision  of 
Sakyamuni.  The  four  guardians  of  the  cardinal  directions  float 
on  a  stylized  rock  that  emerges  from  the  water.  Offerings 
consisting  of  a  pile  of  gems  are  placed  on  the  right  along  the 
bottom  of  the  thanka.  The  entire  background  is  filled  with 
undulating  hills  and  peaks,  leafy  and  blossoming  trees,  rocks  of 
lapis  lazuli  of  various  shapes,  and  water  at  the  bottom  and 
clouds  at  the  top. 

This  thanka  is  rich  in  symbols,  and  there  is  no  doubt 
that  the  artist  intended  to  represent  the  entire  universe  in  it.  It 
is  divided  into  three  zones:  water  at  the  bottom,  earth  in  the 
middle,  and  the  heavens  with  the  clouds  and  planetary  symbols 
at  the  top.  Below  the  four  divine  guardians,  who  further  sym- 
bolize the  spatial  directions,  is  a  small  peak  emerging  from  the 
waters.  This  is  a  well-known  Chinese  motif,  which  was  used  on 
the  border  of  the  imperial  robes  to  signify  the  emperor's  role  as  a 
mediator  with  heaven  on  behalf  of  his  people;  the  mountain 
symbolizes  the  axis  mundi,  which  rises  from  the  middle  of  the 
"swirling  Sea  of  Possibilities"  (Pallis  i960,  p.  25).  Another  in- 
teresting Chinese  symbol,  rarely  encountered  in  Tibetan  thankas, 
is  the  flying  bat  above  Tsongkhapa's  head.  The  bat  (pien  fu) 
symbolizes  both  happiness  and  longevity,  and  although  only 
three  are  included  here,  "the  design  of  the  Five  Bats  is  a  picto- 
rial rebus  standing  for  the  Five  Blessings" — old  age,  wealth, 
health,  love  of  virtue,  and  natural  death  (Williams,  pp.  34-35). 
That  the  blessing  of  wealth  was  of  special  concern  to  the 
donor  is  evident  from  the  inclusion  of  the  yakshas  bearing  gems 
to  Sakyamuni. 


The  embroidery  is  of  very  fine  quality  in  the  "forbidden 
stitch,"  which  was  a  special  stitch  that  was  so  hard  on  the  eyes 
that  it  was  forbidden  in  China  in  the  early  years  of  this  century. 
The  colors  have  now  faded  because  of  water  damage,  but  what 
remains  shows  the  embroiderer's  very  subtle  use  of  muted  hues. 
The  background  is  a  silver  gray  satin;  hence,  the  entire  surface 
has  a  shimmering  quality.  The  faces  of  the  arhats  are  remarkably 
varied  and  expressive;  not  even  the  tiniest  detail  has  escaped  the 
careful  attention  of  this  deft  embroiderer.  The  inclusion  of  the 
bat,  apart  from  the  general  stylistic  features,  clinches  the  Sino- 
Tibetan  attribution. 

P47 

Vajradhara  and  Spouse 

Eastern  Tibet  (Kham),  20th  century 

Woodblock  print  on  paper 

2i3/4  x  16  in.  (55.2  x  40.6  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Edward  Cornacchio 

M.71.92 

Vajradhara,  holding  the  vajra  and  the  bell  with  his  two 
crossed  hands,  is  seated  cross-legged  on  a  lotus  and  embraces  the 
goddess  who  is  the  symbol  of  insight  (prajna).  She  holds  a 
skullcap  filled  with  blood  in  her  left  hand;  her  right  hand  clasps 
his  neck  and  carries  a  chopper.  He  is  the  primordial  Buddha 
( Adibuddha)  of  the  Vajrayana  pantheon.  This  modern  print  was 
made  from  a  nineteenth-century  woodblock.  Such  woodblock 
prints  were  often  used  as  transfers  for  the  outlines  of  thankas. 


184 


Sculpture 


With  the  exception  of  a  few  works  created  from  wood  or  bone  (R7),  most 
sculptures  in  the  collection  are  made  of  metal.  One  piece  in  unfired  clay  (Si)  is 
included  here,  although  its  Tibetan  attribution  is  uncertain.  From  the  earliest  period, 
both  clay  and  stucco  were  popular  sculptural  media  in  Tibet,  and  large  statues  made 
from  these  materials  adorn  many  of  the  monasteries.  Wood,  too,  was  a  favorite 
material,  though  used  more  often  for  entrances  to  temples  and  architectural  embel- 
lishments than  for  statues.  Elaborately  carved  entrances,  some  as  old  as  the  tenth 
and  eleventh  centuries  or  earlier,  are  often  the  only  ornate  features  of  the  exteriors  of 
otherwise  austere  though  dignified  buildings.  Some  idea  of  the  intricacy  and  finesse 
of  such  entrances  can  be  formed  by  looking  at  the  book  covers  (M5)  and  the  two 
sections  of  a  diadem  (R3)  in  the  collection.  Although  not  so  monumental  as  an 
entrance,  these  pieces  were  very  likely  made  by  the  craftsmen  who  also  carved 
entrances,  brackets,  and  beams.  Woodcarving  is  very  popular  throughout  the 
Himalayan  area,  and  the  Tibetans  share  this  love. 

More  typically  Tibetan,  the  solitary  bone  sculpture  in  the  collection  (S29) 
exhibits  the  same  rather  awkward  though  lively  manner  in  which  images  are  carved 
on  rocks  all  over  the  country.  Invariably  in  shallow  relief,  the  figures  are  often  crude 
but  impressive.  Although  the  Tibetans  have  always  used  stone  for  their  majestic 
buildings,  this  material  has  not  been  popular  with  sculptors.  In  this  respect,  they 
appear  to  have  followed  neither  the  Indians  nor  the  Nepalis,  nor  for  that  matter  the 
Chinese.  During  their  occupation  of  Chinese  Turkestan,  they  must  have  become 
familiar  with  the  great  sculptures  that  are  carved  from  live  rock  at  Dunhuang,  but 
their  own  attempts  at  rock  sculpture  proved  to  be  less  accomplished.  They  seem  to 
have  preferred  to  work  in  clay  and  stucco — which  were  popular  media  in  other  Cen- 
tral Asian  locales,  as  well  as  in  Buddhist  monasteries  in  Kashmir  and  its  neighbor- 
ing regions — and  in  bronze. 

Like  their  fellow  Buddhists  in  other  countries,  Tibetans  have  always 
delighted  in  gilding  and  painting  their  sculptures.  Stucco  and  clay  obviously  lend 
themselves  to  polychromy,  but  both  wood  and  bone  were  also  painted  in  bright 
colors  and  even  gilded.  Traces  of  gilding  may  still  be  discerned  in  the  segments  of 
the  diadem  and  the  book  covers  mentioned  above,  while  vestiges  of  pigment 
continue  to  adhere  to  the  bone  and  the  clay  figures.  Considerable  amounts  of  paint 
also  linger  on  S14,  the  wooden  bodhisattva. 

When  a  sculpture  is  polychromed,  the  skin  of  the  figure  is  painted  in  the 
liturgically  prescribed  colors.  Thus,  Amitabha  will  always  have  a  red  complexion 
and  Akshobhya  will  always  have  a  blue  one.  Gold,  however,  is  the  favored  color, 
and  any  image  may  be  gilded;  only  the  faces  may  be  brushed  with  cold  gold  and  the 
eyes,  hair,  and  mouth  painted  in  appropriate  colors.  Hair  is  invariably  rendered  in 

185 


blue  or  black,  except  for  angry  deities,  on  whose  hair  red  or  orange  is  used.  Red 
appears  to  symbolize  passion  and  violence  universally;  for  us  in  the  West,  of  course, 
the  "wrath"  of  the  redhead  is  proverbial.  Whenever  the  original  polychromy  faded 
or  peeled  off,  a  fresh  coat  was  applied,  as  has  recently  happened  to  a  small  gilt 
bronze  in  the  collection  (S20).  In  this  instance,  the  body  has  been  painted  in  silver 
and  the  face  in  gold. 

The  practice  of  painting  statues,  particularly  faces,  with  gold  paint 
appears  to  be  exclusively  Tibetan.  If,  therefore,  a  sculpture  looks  as  if  it  has  been 
given  a  face-lift  with  gold  paint,  it  is  likely  to  have  emerged  from  Tibet,  no  matter 
where  it  was  made.  Gold  paint  is  applied  even  to  gilded  bronzes,  and  reapplied 
from  time  to  time  as  the  paint  peels  off.  With  this  method,  known  in  Tibetan  as 
trang  ser.  which  means  "gold  coated,"  a  mixture  of  gold  powder  and  gelatin  is  applied 
with  a  fine  brush.  Although  the  practice  of  painting  statues  with  gold  satisfies  the 
Tibetans'  religious  needs,  it  is  aesthetically  less  pleasing,  for  the  thick  heavy  paint 
tends  to  obscure  the  contours  of  the  features.  Gilding  (tsa  ser).  by  comparison, 
is  a  much  more  complex  process,  one  that  requires  skill  and  precision.  A  mixture 
of  gold  and  mercury  is  applied  to  the  surface  and  heated  over  a  smokeless  fire;  the 
mercury  evaporates  and  the  gold  adheres  to  the  surface,  which  is  then  polished  with 
a  smooth  stone  resembling  a  cat's  eye. 

The  word  "bronze"  is  used  loosely  to  describe  Tibetan  metal  sculptures; 
that  term  is  used  here  for  the  sake  of  convenience.  However,  a  wide  variety  of  alloys 
have  been  utilized  in  casting  statues,  not  all  of  which  are  bronze.  (Tibetans  them- 
selves use  the  general  term  //'  for  the  metals  they  employ. )  A  glance  at  the  bronzes  in 
the  collection  will  reveal  the  remarkable  variation  in  surface  color.  Such  distinctions 
are  achieved  not  only  by  artificial  patination  but  by  varying  the  proportions  of  the 
metals  in  a  given  alloy.  Thus,  bronzes  containing  a  significant  amount  of  copper  tend 
to  have  a  reddish  surface,  while  those  with  a  good  deal  of  brass  bear  a  yellowish  hue. 

Although  some  texts  by  Tibetans  attempt  to  distinguish  styles  of  bronzes 
by  their  colors,  such  efforts  are  not  very  helpful.1  One  modern  scholar  has  also  di- 
vided Tibetan  bronzes  into  two  "schools,"  one  gilt  and  the  other  non-gilt,2  but  this, 
too,  is  unsatisfactory  because  gilding  was  not  confined  to  any  particular  school, 
atelier,  or  period.  More  to  the  point  is  the  fact  that  Tibetans  have  a  love  for  gold 
that  stretches  back  to  ancient  times.  This  love  is  reflected  in  their  workmanship  in 
gold,  which  was  praised  as  long  ago  as  the  Tang  period  in  Chinese  chronicles  and 
which,  therefore,  may  have  been  as  intrinsic  to  them  as  it  was  to  the  Scythians  in 
Central  Asia. 

Newari  sculptors  have  continued  until  today  to  cast  their  bronzes  in  an 
alloy  that  has  a  high  copper  content.  Copper  is  a  fairly  soft  metal,  and  so  Nepali- 
style  bronzes  have  smoother  surfaces  than  bronzes  produced  with  alloys  containing 
more  zinc  or  tin.  In  Kashmir  and  the  western  Himalayas  of  India,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  preference  was  for  brass  which,  with  its  dull  yellow  sheen,  approximates 
the  color  of  gold.  Kashmiri  sculptors  also  added  to  the  expressiveness  of  the  faces 
of  their  bronzes  by  inlaying  eyes  with  silver  and  mouths  with  copper.  This  practice 
was  adopted  in  Tibet  (S2,  S4),  though  not  so  widely  nor  with  so  much  finesse 
as  in  Kashmir. 

What  is  distinctive  about  Tibetan  bronzes  is  the  delight  taken  in  encrust- 
ing their  surfaces  with  semiprecious  stones,  such  as  turquoise,  opal,  agate,  crystal, 
and  carnelian.  Such  encrustations  add  texture  and  enhance  the  sumptuousness  of  the 
gilded  surface.  With  ritual  implements,  this  is  carried  to  such  an  extreme  that  the 
entire  object  appears  as  a  rich  mosaic  of  glittering  stones  (see  RIO-R12).  Anyone 

186 


who  looks  at  a  picture  of  a  Tibetan  woman  can  see  Tibetans'  strong  love  for  inlaid 
jewelry.  Although  turquoise  is  now  the  most  popular  stone,  the  original  favorite 
was  lapis  lazuli.  As  E.  H.  Schafer  summarizes  the  available  evidence: 

The  Chinese  were  not  alone  among  the  Far  Eastern  peoples  in  their  admiration 
for  the  blue  mineral.  The  Tibetans  valued  it  above  all  others,  even  ahead  of 
gold,  and  those  highlanders  saw  in  it  the  image  of  the  azure  sky,  and  said  that 
the  hair  of  their  goddesses  had  its  color.  Both  men  and  women  there  wore  it  on 
their  heads.3 

Neither  lapis  lazuli  nor  turquoise  is  a  local  stone;  they  come  from  further  west.  The 
kingdom  of  Khotan  in  Central  Asia,  an  ever-important  stop  along  the  Silk  Route, 
was  also,  during  Tang  times,  the  leading  market  for  gems.  The  Chinese  knew  the 
lapis  lazuli  as  the  "stone  of  Khotan."  Turquoise  came  from  Iran  but  passed  into 
Tibet  and  China  through  Khotan.  Tibet  occupied  Khotan  in  the  seventh  and  eighth 
centuries.  It  was  at  Khotan  that  the  Tibetans  must  have  first  been  enchanted  by  the 
rarity  and  magical  luster  of  lapis  lazuli  and  later  by  turquoise. 

Most  bronzes  were  cast  using  the  cire  perdue,  or  lost-wax,  process.  Although 
some  solid-cast  bronzes  were  made,  hollow  casting  was  the  preferred  method, 
since  it  enabled  the  images  to  hold  the  relics  and  charms  that  increased  their 
potency.  The  practice  of  inserting  relics  and  charms  (consisting  of  bits  of  paper  with 
mantras,  pieces  of  cloth,  and  grains)  inside  bronzes  was  more  common  in  Tibet  than 
in  India  or  Nepal.  The  thin  plate,  attached  at  the  bottom  to  seal  the  contents,  was 
frequently  embossed  or  incised  with  a  double-thunderbolt  symbol,  a  distinguishing 
trait  of  Tibetan  bronzes.  If  a  plate  was  attached  to  the  base  of  an  Indian  or  Nepali 
bronze,  it  was  not  adorned  with  the  double-thunderbolt. 

After  the  bronze  was  cast,  it  was  chased,  gilded,  and  inlaid — often  with  a 
jeweler's  precision.  Indeed,  adorning  the  surface  of  a  bronze,  particularly  with  the 
attire  in  portrait  sculptures  (S31,  S35,  S38),  appears  to  have  been  a  specialty  of  the 
Tibetan  tradition.  Most  small  bronzes  are  cast  in  two  major  pieces:  the  base  and  the 
figure.  Such  appurtenances  as  the  aureole  or  the  scarf,  however,  were  also  often  cast 
separately  and  later  attached  to  the  back.  In  some  instances,  especially  when  the 
images  are  in  yab-yum  (S28),  the  bronze  is  cast  in  several  pieces  and  skillfully  assembled. 
Both  the  repousse  and  beaten-metal  techniques  were  prevalent  (S16— S18).  Such 
methods  were  often  employed  to  encase  images  of  clay  or  wood.  Repousse  is  a  favorite 
mode  in  Nepal,  and  most  fine  Tibetan  objects  using  this  technique  were  probably 
made  by  Newari  craftsmen  working  in  Tibet.  Sometimes  small  bronzes  were  cast 
from  matrices  (S12),  presumably  when  the  demand  was  great  and  where  there  was 
a  brisk  trade  in  religious  souvenirs.  This  is  why  one  often  encounters  identical  bronzes 
which  have  minor  differences  and  rather  perfunctory  finishes.  Most  bronzes,  however, 
were  cast  using  the  cire  perdue  process,  and,  therefore,  each  is  one  of  a  kind. 

The  major  centers  for  metalwork  in  Tibet  were,  and  may  still  be,  Derge, 
Chamdo,  and  Reo-Chi — all  in  the  eastern  province  of  Kham.  Because  of  its  prox- 
imity to  China,  one  tends  to  find  a  close  relationship  between  the  aesthetic  tradi- 
tions of  Kham  and  China.  The  expressive  portrait  of  Arhat  Kaiika  (S36)  should  be 
characterized  as  Sino-Tibetan,  for  it  may  have  been  made  either  in  Kham  or  in  China 
proper.  Some  of  the  excellent  ritual  objects  were  certainly  made  in  Derge,  which 
was  widely  noted  for  its  metalwork.  Two  well-known  centers  in  the  province  of 
Tsang  were  at  Tsedong  and  Tanag.  The  sculptors  in  these  places  traced  their  charter 
to  Sakya  times,  at  least  back  to  the  thirteenth  century.  Gyantse  was  another  impor- 
tant religious  and  commercial  center  where  colonies  of  Newari  or  Banre  craftsmen 
settled.  In  western  Tibet,  the  most  celebrated  center  was  Luk  in  the  ancient  king- 

187 


dom  of  Guge.  And  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  in  Lhasa  on  which  rests  the  great  Potala 
palace  lived  (and  perhaps  still  does)  a  colony  of  hereditary  sculptors  who  were 
organized  into  a  guild  by  the  Fifth  Dalai  Lama  in  the  seventeenth  century. 

All  this,  however,  is  of  purely  academic  interest,  for  there  is  no  way  to 
distinguish  a  bronze  made  in  Luk  from  one  manufactured  in  Tsedong.  Neither  can 
one  determine  whether  a  bronze  was  cast  by  a  Newari  or  a  Tibetan,  or  by  a  monk  or 
a  layman.  Because  of  existing  murals  found  in  the  monasteries,  it  is  possible  to 
pinpoint  a  painting  style  with  some  precision,  but  to  localize  the  various  styles  of 
bronzes  is  a  much  more  difficult  task.  Being  easily  portable,  bronzes  have  traveled 
far  and  wide,  and  published  pictures  of  Tibetan  monasteries  reveal  how  remarkably 
varied  a  single  monastery's  collection  can  be.  What  does  seem  significant,  however, 
is  that  one  sees  very  few  Chinese  or  Central  Asian  bronzes  in  these  pictures.  Most 
are  from  Kashmir,  Nepal,  or  eastern  India,  and  one  even  clearly  recognizes  Jain 
bronzes  from  western  India. 

As  with  paintings,  the  three  major  traditions  which  influenced  Tibetan 
sculpture  were  those  of  India,  Nepal,  and  China.  From  the  seventh  century  until 
Buddhism  disappeared  in  India  around  1200,  Indian  influences  stemmed  largely 
from  two  sources:  Kashmir  and  the  adjoining  regions  of  Swat  and  Gilgit  in  the 
west,  and  the  regions  of  Bihar  and  Bengal  in  the  east.  Kashmiri  influence  was  felt 
more  strongly  in  the  western  parts  of  the  country,  although  Kashmiri  bronzes  adorn 
the  altars  of  temples  in  central  Tibet  as  well.  Both  Kashmiri  artists  and  bronzes 
were  imported  into  Tibet,  and  Kashmir's  influence  probably  prevailed  at  least  until 
the  fourteenth  century,  when  that  region  succumbed  to  Islam.  Influences  from  east- 
ern India  were  less  pronounced  in  western  Tibet  but  were  more  predominant,  until 
the  thirteenth  century,  in  the  central  and  southern  parts  of  the  country. 

It  was  only  natural  that  India's  impact  should  have  been  strongest  until 
the  thirteenth  century.  As  long  as  India  remained  the  spiritual  source,  Indian 
bronzes  must  have  been  repeatedly  copied.  Once  India  ceased  to  be  such  a  source  its 
influences  began  to  diminish,  and,  while  the  ancient  sacrosanct  bronzes  were 
piously  displayed  on  altars,  Tibetan  artists  began  to  exert  their  own  personality  in 
developing  a  more  Tibetan  style.  However,  it  is  not  possible  yet  to  define  exactly 
what  that  style  is. 

Even  when  Tibetan  bronzes  are  inscribed,  the  inscriptions  throw  little 
light  on  either  style  or  date.  When  relevant  information  is  present  it  creates  more 
problems  than  it  solves.  Two  examples  will  suffice  to  illuminate  this  situation.  A 
magnificent  bronze  Buddha  almost  three  feet  tall  (now  in  the  Cleveland  Museum  of 
Art)  bears  a  Tibetan  inscription  noting  that  it  was  the  personal  image  of  Lhatsun 
Nagaraja.4  Lhatsun  was  a  royal  title  used  in  eastern  Tibet,  and  we  do  know  of  a  prince 
by  that  name  who  lived  in  Guge  in  the  tenth  century.  The  bronze,  however,  is 
considered  by  scholars  to  be  a  Kashmiri  sculpture.  In  fact,  if  the  bronze  were  not 
inscribed,  no  one  would  have  connected  it  with  Tibet.  There  may  be  two  major 
ways  to  reconcile  the  inscription  and  the  style.  The  bronze  may  have  been  made  in 
Kashmir  and  brought  to  Tibet,  as  Rinchen  Sangpo  did  at  about  the  same  time, 
or  it  may  have  been  cast  in  Guge  by  one  of  the  Kashmiri  artists  brought  back  by 
Rinchen  Sangpo.  If  the  latter  is  true,  is  the  bronze  Tibetan  or  Kashmiri? 

A  Tibetan  inscription  on  a  much  smaller  and  less  important  bronze  indi- 
cates that  its  sculptor,  Aphajyoti,  was  from  Nepal  but  that  the  bronze  was  cast  in 
Tibet,  though  we  are  not  told  exactly  where.5  What  is  even  more  perplexing  is  that, 
contrary  to  what  one  might  expect  from  a  Nepali  sculptor,  the  bronze  is  clearly 
rendered  in  the  Pala  rather  than  the  Nepali  style.  It  is  possible  that  the  patron,  in 

188 


S3 1 


S39 


this  instance,  may  have  wanted  a  copy  of  a  famous  Pala  icon  and  that  the  Nepali 
sculptor  obliged. 

These  two  examples  underscore  the  difficulties  both  of  attempting  to  sort 
out  the  various  stylistic  influences  and  of  distinguishing  the  many  different  styles  of 
sculpture  that  flourished  in  Tibet  between  the  eleventh  and  the  nineteenth  century. 
Tibetan  artists  were  always  cognizant  of  the  three  major  traditions — Indian, 
Nepali,  and  Chinese — and  these  traditions'  influences  on  local  artists  and  ateliers 
naturally  varied  according  to  the  talents  and  tastes  of  individual  artists. 

For  these  reasons,  then,  the  attribution  of  bronzes  in  this  catalogue  either 
to  Tibet  in  general  or  to  specific  regions  must  remain  tentative.  Although  reasons 
for  such  attributions  are  given  in  the  individual  entries  that  follow,  one  can  only 
determine  whether  a  bronze  is  Nepali  or  Tibetan  through  experience  and  constant 
handling.  Certain  broad  indications,  however,  may  be  helpful. 

The  greatest  difficulty  one  encounters  in  distinguishing  a  Tibetan  bronze 
precisely  occurs  when  the  subject  matter  is  a  benign  deity.  This  is  especially  true  of 
the  early  stages  of  Tibetan  art  (prior  to  the  fourteenth  century),  when  the  sacrosanct, 
imported  models  were  faithfully  copied.  Thereafter,  however,  the  faces  of  the 
figures  begin  to  reflect  stronger  ethnic  features,  with  higher  cheekbones,  slanting 
eyes,  less  prominent  noses,  and  thinner  lips.  The  modeling  of  the  figure  becomes 
less  naturalistic  than  in  either  Kashmiri  or  Pala  figures.  Some  bronzes,  especially 
those  created  in  western  Tibet,  have  a  distinct  "provincial"  quality,  marked 
by  rather  clumsy  proportions  and  unfinished  backs.  Others  can  be  recognized 
from  the  color  of  the  bronze  or  from  surface  decorations.  By  and  large,  Tibetans 
have  had  a  more  distinct  predilection  for  enriching  the  surfaces  of  their  bronzes 
with  semiprecious  stones  than  their  Indian  and  Nepali  counterparts. 

The  easiest  to  recognize  are  portraits  of  mahasiddhas,  mystics,  and  reli- 
gious hierarchs  who  were  Tibetan.  No  mahasiddha  is  known  to  have  been  portrayed 
in  Indian  art.  In  fact,  even  Tibet,  which  has  preserved  so  many  Indian  and  Nepali 
bronzes,  has  not  yielded  a  single  mahasiddha  of  Indian  or  Nepali  origin.  Mystics 
such  as  Padmasambhava  (S37)  and  Dampa  Sangye  (S31)  were  revered  only  in  Tibet, 
as  were  Yuthok  Yonten  Gonpo  (S39)  or  Songtsen  Gampo  (S41).  Such  figures,  as  well 
as  all  portraits  of  religious  hierarchs  of  the  various  orders,  are  clearly  of  Tibetan 
origin  both  in  iconography  and  style. 

One  cannot  help  but  suggest  a  comparison  with  the  portrayals  of  historic 
figures  in  Japanese  Buddhist  art.  The  commanding  images  of  their  monks,  patri- 
archs, and  lohans  (arhats)  have  an  expressive  power  and  originality  that  are  admirable 
and  exciting.  Japanese  portraits  of  monks  and  priests  reveal  a  curious  but  com- 
pelling fusion  of  realism  and  hieratic  grandeur.  Similarly,  Tibetan  sculptures  of 
lamas  and  lotsawas.  mahasiddhas  and  arhats,  notwithstanding  their  stronger  ideali- 
zation, are  among  the  most  imaginative  and  spiritually  satisfying  religious  portraits 
created  anywhere. 

Invariably,  the  figures  in  the  Tibetan  portraits  are  seated  in  a  variety  of 
yogic  postures  (S31,  S32),  sometimes  in  a  relaxed  manner  (S3 3,  S36).  Often  only 
their  faces  emerge  from  the  subtle  folds  of  their  robes,  which  are  enlivened  with 
delicate  etchings.  These  sensitively  rendered  details,  as  well  as  the  expressive  faces 
with  eyes  that  seem  to  bulge  from  their  sockets,  exhibit  an  inner  energy  that  makes 
them  astonishingly  animated  figures  (S31,  S34).  The  representations  of  the  arhats 
and  the  mahasiddhas  are  totally  idealized,  but  once  again,  the  sculptor's  imaginative 
power  and  his  capacity  to  express  the  essence  of  the  personality  are  impressive.  The 


189 


extraordinary  realization  of  Dampa  Sangye  (S31),  whose  arresting  stare  leaves  no 
doubt  as  to  his  supranormal  powers,  is  a  good  example  of  this.  In  another  portrait 
of  a  lama  (S32),  made  soon  after  its  subject's  death,  the  artist  has  given  us  an 
imposing  representation  that  combines  the  required  idealization  with  a  sensitively 
modeled  face  that  must  be  a  true  likeness.  Generally,  however,  Tibetans  did  not 
indulge  in  realistic  portraiture,  as  the  Japanese  did.  In  this  regard,  they  adhered 
closely  to  the  message  of  Vajrayana  Buddhism,  in  which  expressions  such  as 
"reality"  and  "realism"  are  meaningless  and  form  is  thought  to  be  an  illusion. 

Statues  of  dharmapalas,  yidams,  and  other  terrifying  deities,  some  of 
whom  were  created  by  the  Tibetans  themselves,  are  also,  like  the  idealized  portraits, 
more  easily  recognizable  as  Tibetan.  Tibetans  appear  to  have  been  especially  adept 
and  imaginative  in  creating  expressive  images  of  terrifying  deities,  much  more  so 
than  their  fellow  artists  in  other  Buddhist  countries.  A  Tibetan  bronze  of  a  terrifying 
deity,  with  its  multiple  limbs  and  heads,  its  violent  postures  and  gestures,  appears 
as  a  coherent,  organic  mass — a  composition  that  is  forceful  and  alive  with  expres- 
sive power.  Although  they  may  at  first  shake  Western  sensibilities,  these  dynamic 
bronzes  are  informed  with  surging  energy  and  rhythmic  elegance,  whether  the 
figures  dance  (S26)  or  are  seated  (S24,  S25).  No  matter  how  bellicose  the  figure,  the 
sense  of  movement  is  always  restrained  and  the  multiple  limbs  are  invariably  arranged 
with  clarity  and  logic.  One  is  constantly  surprised  and  fascinated  by  the  extent 
of  the  artist's  fantasy  and  awed  by  his  technical  dexterity.  It  is  immaterial  whether 
the  artists  involved  were  Newars  or  Tibetans;  the  exciting  forms  they  created 
reflect  an  aesthetic  vision  and  psychological  insight  that  are  essentially  Tibetan. 


Notes 


Tucci,  1959. 

von  Schroeder,  pp.  395ff 

Schafer,  p.  232 

Pal,  1975,  pp.  100— 101. 

von  Schroeder,  p.  478,  no.  133B. 


190 


Si 

A  Buddhist  Deity 


Si 


A  Buddhist  Deity 

Tibet  (?),  nth—  12th  century 

Unfired  clay  with  polychrome 

24  in.  (61  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.  73-4-9 

Literature:  Rosenfield,  et.  al.,  p.  39. 

This  enigmatic  sculpture,  considerably  restored,  presents 
many  problems.  When  first  published  it  was  identified  as  a 
Buddhist  deity  made  during  the  eighth  century  in  the  region  of 
the  Indo-Iranian  border.  Because  the  original  arms  are  missing, 
its  identification  cannot  be  certain,  but  the  rendition  of  the 
hair  suggests  a  Buddhist  affiliation.  While  the  hairstyle  is  more 
like  that  of  a  Buddha,  the  ornamented  body,  the  posture,  and 
the  face  imply  an  attendant  bodhisattva.  The  thin  paper  that  has 
been  glued  to  the  head,  the  protruding  lump  atop  the  head, 
and  parts  of  the  arms  and  legs  are  rather  crude  attempts  at 
restoration. 

Although  the  sculpture  does  share  its  slim  elegance  with 
the  well-known  figures  from  Fundukistan  in  Afghanistan,  an 
atribution  to  the  Indo-Iranian  border  region  and  an  eighth- 
century  date  seem  highly  unlikely.  Polychromed  and  unbaked-clay 
sculptures  are  quite  common  in  Tibet,  as  is  the  strong  dehanche- 
ment  of  the  posture  which  results  in  an  almost  awkward  body 
position  (cf.  Tucci  1973,  figs.  151-52,  166,  172,  201).  The  face 
too  reflects  Mongolian  features,  and  the  gentle  expression — even 
though  more  characteristic  of  Nepal — is  also  encountered  in 
Tibetan  sculptures  of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries.  A 
Tibetan  attribution  for  this  puzzling  sculpture  seems  more 
likely  than  an  Indo-Iranian  one. 


191 


S2 

Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara 
See  plate  35 


S3 

Eleven-Headed  Avalokitesvara 
See  plate  36 


front 


back 


192 


S2 


Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara 
Western  Tibet  or  Kashmir,  nth  century 
Brass  with  inlaid-silver  eyes  and  inlaid- 
copper  lips 
141/2  in.  (36.8  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 
Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 
M.75.4.1 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  p.  69,  no.  58; 
Beguin,  1974,  p.  335,  fig.  5;  Dieux  et 
demons,  p.  89,  no.  41;  von  Schroeder, 
p.  130,  no.  22B. 
See  plate  3  5 

Swaying  slightly  to  his  right,  Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara 
stands  on  a  thin  plate,  which  was  once  attached  to  a  lotus  base. 
He  wears  a  dhoti  and  a  crown  and  is  bedecked  with  jewelry  and 
a  garland.  His  left  hand  holds  a  lotus  in  full  bloom  and  his 
right  is  outstretched  in  the  gesture  of  charity.  Spruces,  used  as 
channels  in  casting  the  metal,  remain  attached  between  the 
body  and  the  garland. 

In  previous  publications,  this  bronze  has  been  variously 
dated  between  the  tenth  and  the  twelfth  century.  There  is  also  a 
difference  of  opinion  about  its  provenance:  some  art  historians 
consider  it  to  be  from  Kashmir,  and  others  vacillate  between 
Kashmir  and  western  Tibet.  Precise  origins  of  such  bronzes  are 
very  difficult  to  determine.  Tucci,  while  publishing  a  similar 
bronze  which  he  saw  in  the  Samada  temple,  considered  it 
Nepalese  (Tucci  1941,  pp.  103-05,  fig.  23),  but  later  concluded 
that  the  sculptor  was  from  Kulu  (Tucci  1973,  fig.  20).  The  same 
bronze  is  given  a  western  Tibetan  attribution  in  a  recent  pub- 
lication (von  Schroeder,  p.  130,  no.  22A). 

An  inscription  in  the  Samada  temple  tells  us  that  the 
bronze  was  made  by  an  Indian  brahmin  whose  name  was  Mati 
and  who  came  from  "Pan-tso-ra."  Although  one  cannot  identify 
the  place  (could  it  be  Pir  Panjal,  a  mountain  range  in  Kashmir?), 
it  is  likely  that  he  was  from  Kashmir  or  the  Chamba  region, 
which  had  a  long-standing  tradition  of  bronze  casting.  It  is 
clear  that  not  all  Kashmiri-style  bronzes  were  simply  imported 
into  Tibet,  but  that  some  were  made  locally  by  Indian  artists. 
Thus,  like  the  Samada  bronze  and  many  others  which  are 
in  situ  in  monasteries  (mostly  in  western  Tibet),  this  bronze  may 
have  been  made  in  Tibet.  Many  of  these  bronzes  have  unfinished 
backs,  which  is  not  the  case  with  those  works  firmly  attributable 
to  Kashmir.  Moreover,  the  details  in  this  example  have  been 
rendered  more  summarily  than  in  other  bronzes  in  this  style. 
The  garment  is  plain,  without  any  incised  designs,  and  the 
garland  is  fashioned  in  a  crude  manner.  Nevertheless,  the  figure 
is  strongly  modeled  and  has  a  commanding  presence. 

S3 

Eleven-Headed  Avalokitesvara 

Ladakh,  nth  century 

Brass 

15V2  in.  (39.4  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Harry  Kahn 

M. 78.40 

Literature:  Pal,  1982  A,  pp.  16-18. 

See  plate  36 


Framed  by  an  aureole  and  a  nimbus,  the  eleven-headed, 
six-armed  deity  is  seated  on  a  lotus  in  the  classic  posture  of 
meditation.  The  lotus  rests  atop  a  pedestal  supported  by  a 
yaksha  (gnome)  and  two  lions,  with  the  bodhisattva's  knees 
extending  well  beyond  the  open  lotus.  Both  the  aureole  and 
nimbus  are  decorated  with  an  etched  design  of  flames  and  a  row 
of  beads  along  the  inner  rim.  Two  nimbused  celestial  beings 
with  garland  offerings  are  attached  to  the  place  where  the  aureole 
and  nimbus  overlap.  The  apex  of  the  nimbus  is  adorned  with  a 
chbten  decorated  with  festoons  and  crowned  with  the  solar  and 
lunar  symbols. 

The  bodhisattva  wears  a  dhoti  marked  with  incised  pat- 
terns; an  antelope's  skin  is  tied  diagonally  across  his  chest,  the 
animal's  head  hanging  from  the  left  shoulder.  In  addition  to  the 
usual  ornaments,  the  deity  wears  a  large  garland  that  overhangs 
the  lotus  on  which  he  sits.  Curiously,  the  tiara  on  each  head  is 
so  insignificantly  rendered  as  to  be  scarcely  noticeable.  The 
pyramid  of  heads  is  topped  with  that  of  a  tathagata.  Among  the 
others,  only  the  three  on  the  lower  tier  are  given  placid  faces 
while  all  the  remaining  seven  are  terrifying.  The  three  left 
hands  hold  the  stem  of  a  lotus,  a  pot,  and  a  staff;  one  right  hand 
holds  what  appears  to  be  a  fly  whisk  while  the  other  two  form 
the  gestures  of  charity  and  exposition. 

An  inscription  along  the  upper  molding  of  the  base  {see 
Appendix)  is  not  very  helpful.  It  says  that  the  bronze  was 
commissioned  by  an  unnamed  person  in  fulfillment  of  a  vow. 
However,  the  name  of  the  deity,  presumably  Nyag  Chang  Lha, 
is  unfamiliar.  It  is  certainly  not  a  known  epithet  of  the  eleven- 
headed  Avalokitesvara  whose  image  this  must  be,  despite  the 
inscription  and  the  minor  iconographic  variations.  Normally, 
in  this  popular  manifestation  of  the  bodhisattva,  only  one  head 
is  shown  as  terrifying  (P43),  but  in  Tibet  there  are  several  in- 
stances (the  most  famous  being  the  now-destroyed  image  in  the 
Jokhang  in  Lhasa)  in  which  the  deity  is  represented  with  multi- 
ple awesome  heads.  (See  Pal  reference  above.)  Also  unusual  for 
representations  of  this  manifestation  is  the  number  of  arms;  gen- 
erally there  are  eight,  but  here  there  are  only  six.  It  is  more 
common  to  encounter  six-armed,  eleven-headed  figures  in  Cen- 
tral Asian  representations.  Another  uncommon  feature  is  the 
inclusion  of  the  fly  whisk  as  an  attribute. 

The  symbolism  of  this  figure  is  complex  and  has  been 
discussed  at  length  elsewhere  (Pal  1982  A).  It  is  commonly  be- 
lieved that  once,  while  pondering  the  miseries  of  this  world, 
Avalokitesvara 's  head  split  into  ten  fragments.  Out  of  compas- 
sion they  were  reassembled  as  ten  heads  by  his  spiritual  father, 
Amitabha,  who  added  his  own  as  the  eleventh.  Fascinating  as 
this  myth  is,  it  probably  disguises  an  earlier  myth  of  cosmic  cre- 
ation in  which  a  primal  being  created  the  universe  by  disinteg- 
rating his  own  person. 

Although  strongly  Kashmiri  in  style,  the  bronze  was  very 
likely  executed  in  Ladakh.  Stylistically  similar  figures  may  be 
seen  in  the  murals  of  Alchi  as  well  as  in  the  eleventh-century 
manuscript  illuminations  in  this  collection  (Ml).  The  modeling 
of  the  figure,  especially  the  manner  in  which  the  pectoral  mus- 
cles are  delineated,  is  akin  to  that  seen  in  the  painted  images  at 
Alchi.  Among  Kashmiri  bronzes  the  closest  parallel  is  the  image 
of  Sugatisandarsana  Lokesvara  dedicated  during  the  reign  of 
Queen  Didda  (980-1003). 


193 


S4 

Bodhisattva  Manjusri 


194 


s4 


Bodhisattva  Manjusri 

Lakakh  or  western  Tibet,  nth  century 

Brass  with  inlaid  silver  and  traces  of 

gilding 

51/8  in.  (13  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.75.4.6 

Literature:  The  Art  of  India,  no.  54;  Pal, 

1966,  p.  70,  no.  60;  Pal,  1974,  pp.  152- 

53,  no.  54. 

The  bodhisattva  Manjusri  is  seated  in  the  lotus  posture 
on  an  open  lotus  atop  a  molded  base.  He  wears  a  plain  dhoti 
and  a  scarf  is  thrown  across  his  back,  its  ends  fluttering  on 
either  side  in  the  front,  and  is  adorned  with  two  sets  of  arm  or- 
naments and  a  pearl  necklace  with  three  pendants.  His  hair  is 
distinctly  rendered;  matted  above  the  head,  and  tied  with  a 
strand  of  pearls,  five  braids  fall  down  onto  his  shoulders.  This  is 
in  keeping  with  Manjusri's  epithet,  pancasikha,  which  means 
"five-crested."  The  figure's  right  hand  brandishes  the  sword 
which  dispels  ignorance  and  the  left  holds  the  book,  symboliz- 
ing wisdom,  against  his  chest.  His  head  is  set  off  by  a  flame 
nimbus,  but  the  aureole  is  plain.  In  this  form  the  bodhisattva  is 
known  as  Arapacana  Manjusri. 

In  previous  publications  this  bronze  was  hesitantly  attrib- 
uted to  Kashmir.  Without  a  doubt,  it  is  closely  related  to  Kash- 
miri bronzes  of  the  late  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries.  However, 
the  face  of  this  figure  is  not  quite  so  bloated  as  typical  Kashmiri 
faces.  Rather,  it  reveals  strong  Mongolian  features,  and  as  in  the 
Avalokitesvara  (S2)  the  details  do  not  appear  to  have  been  ren- 
dered with  the  kind  of  finesse  one  finds  in  Kashmiri  bronzes. 
For  instance,  the  lotus,  the  scarf,  and  the  hands  are  treated  in  a 
more  cursive  manner.  Moreover,  the  figure  may  be  compared 
with  representations  of  this  deity  on  terracotta  plaques  recovered 
from  Ladakh  (Kak,  pp.  82-83).  ^  would  seem,  therefore,  that 
the  bronze  was  made  either  in  Ladakh  or  in  western  Tibet 
following  a  Kashmiri  model. 

Whatever  its  exact  provenance  and  however  crude  some 
of  its  details,  the  artist  has  succeeded  eminently  in  capturing 
the  benign  essence  of  this  compassionate  bodhisattva.  Despite 
the  sword  in  his  right  hand,  he  is  hardly  a  menacing  figure. 
With  his  head  set  at  an  angle,  with  downcast  eyes  and  a  gentle 
expression  on  his  face,  he  seems  to  be  looking  compassionately 
at  the  devotee. 


S5 

A  Buddha 

Western  Tibet  or  Ladakh,  nth  century 

Brass  with  paint 

33/4  in.  (9.5  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.76.79 

Fully  clothed  in  monastic  robes,  this  Buddha  is  seated  in 
the  cross-legged  posture  on  the  pericarp  of  a  single-petaled  lotus. 
His  right  hand  is  extended  in  the  gesture  of  charity  and  his  left 
holds  a  bowl  with  something  indistinguishable  in  it.  The  curls 


of  his  hair  are  painted  black,  as  are  his  eyebrows  and  the  circle 
of  dots  that  decorate  his  robe  and  lower  garment.  That  he  is  a 
Buddha  is  certain,  but  whether  he  represents  the  Buddha 
Sakyamuni,  the  tathagata  Ratnasambhava,  or  the  Healing 
Buddha,  Bhaishajyaguru,  is  more  difficult  to  determine. 

The  style  of  the  bronze  is  as  enigmatic  as  its  identification. 
Although  it  relates  to  bronzes  from  Kashmir  and  Swat,  there 
are  notable  differences.  The  garments  are  much  more  summarily 
treated,  with  the  folds  indicated  by  widely  separated  double 
lines.  In  no  Kashmiri  or  Swat  bronze,  discovered  to  date, 
does  one  see  such  clusters  of  dots  on  Buddha's  garments.  The 
treatment  of  the  upper  part  of  the  robe  as  a  V-shaped  collar 
appears  contrived  and  flat  in  this  bronze,  while  the  additional 
band  (of  flesh?)  around  the  neck  makes  it  seem  as  if  the  head 
is  grafted  onto  the  body.  Unusual  also  are  the  painted  curls 
on  the  head  and  the  plain  topknot,  both  of  which  are  more 
likely  to  be  Tibetan  characteristics.  It  is  not  uncommon  in  Tibet 
to  indicate  the  hair  with  paint  {see  S30,  S32)  rather  than  with 
sculptured  volume  or  incisions.  On  the  whole  the  workmanship 
is  quite  crude,  especially  in  the  execution  of  the  right  hand  and 
the  lotus  base. 

It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  the  bronze  was  cast 
somewhere  in  Ladakh  or  western  Tibet  by  a  relatively  unskilled 
artist  who  was  trying  to  imitate  a  Kashmiri  bronze,  but  who 
added  several  touches  of  his  own. 


S6 

Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara 

Western  Tibet  or  Ladakh,  12th  century 

Dark  bronze 

7V2  in.  (19. 1  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.75.4.7 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  p.  70,  no.  59. 

The  bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara  stands  gracefully  in 
slight  contrapposto  on  a  rectangular  pedestal  with  moldings  at 
the  top  and  at  the  base.  The  recessed  portion  of  the  pedestal  in 
the  front  is  incised  with  a  thunderbolt  and  a  light  floral  design. 
An  aureole  etched  with  a  cursive  flame  design  rises  from  the 
pedestal  on  either  side  and  is  joined  at  the  top  to  a  nimbus,  un- 
fortunately broken.  The  bodhisattva  wears  a  dhoti  held  together 
at  the  waist  by  a  clasped  belt  and  a  sacred  cord.  He  is  sparsely 
ornamented  with  a  simple  strand  of  pearls,  earrings,  and  a  tiara. 
A  plain  garland  hangs  down  to  his  calves  and  his  left  hand 
grasps  the  stalk  of  a  lotus  which  rises  from  the  base.  The  right 
hand  is  broken,  but  originally  it  very  likely  displayed  the  ges- 
ture of  reassurance. 

Elegantly  proportioned,  this  bronze  is  less  detailed  than 
the  Kashmiri  bronzes  after  which  it  was  modeled.  The  modeling 
here  is  more  abstract  and  the  sculpture  is  informed  with  a 
greater  linear  quality  than  is  usual  in  Kashmiri  figures.  The 
dhoti,  however,  with  its  horizontal  folds,  reflects  greater  fidelity 
to  its  prototype.  In  a  previous  publication  {see  reference  above)  it 
was  attributed  to  Kashmir,  but  on  reconsideration,  it  seems 
more  likely  to  have  been  rendered  in  Ladakh  or  western  Tibet. 


195 


s5 


S6 


A  Buddha 


Bodbisattva  Avalokitesvara 


196 


St 

Bodhisattva  Vajrapam 


Si 


Bodhisattva  Vajrapani 

Western  Tibet,  12th— 13th  century 

Brass 

57/8  in.  (15  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Michael  Phillips 

M. 81. 276.4 

One  of  the  oldest  bodhisattvas  in  the  Buddist  pantheon, 
Vajrapani,  or  the  thunderbolt-bearer,  makes  his  first  appearance 
in  India  in  the  art  of  the  Kushan  period  (2nd  century  A.D.). 
Later,  in  the  Vajrayana  pantheon,  he  became  one  of  the  four  prin- 
cipal bodhisattvas,  and  although  portrayed  in  Indian  Buddhist 
art,  his  cult  was  more  popular  in  Tibet  and  Nepal.  In  the 
Vajrayana  pantheon  he  is  the  master  of  the  Vajra  family  of  deities, 
and  is  frequently  portrayed  in  Tibetan  art  in  both  his  benign 
and  angry  forms  (S22). 

In  this  bronze,  Vajrapani  is  benign.  He  stands  in  con- 
trapposto  on  a  summarily  rendered  lotus  that  rests  on  a  tall 
molded  base.  His  aureole  and  nimbus  are  cursively  delineated, 
as  are  the  ornaments  he  wears.  His  right  hand  is  stretched  out 
and  horizontally  holds  the  lotus;  the  left  hand  simply  rests 
against  the  left  thigh.  Although  Vajrapani's  legs  seem  somewhat 
elongated,  the  artist  has  made  some  effort  to  model  the  body 
naturalistically,  following  the  Kashmiri  manner.  The  design  of 
the  crown,  with  its  three  pointed  lobes,  is  similar  to  those  seen 
in  eleventh-to-twelfth-century  western  Tibetan  paintings,  such 
as  the  figures  in  the  manuscript  illuminations  (Ml).  As  is  also 
typical  of  western  Tibetan  bronzes,  the  back  is  crudely  finished, 
and  the  perfunctory  workmanship  in  the  front  indicates  that  the 
bronze  was  probably  cast  in  a  provincial  workshop  following  a 
Kashmiri  original. 


i97 


S8 


S9 


A  Divine  Figure 


Bodhisattva  Manjusri 
See  plate  37 


198 


S8 


A  Divine  Figure 

Western  Tibet  (?),  I2th-i4th  century 

Brass 

73/4  in.  (19.7  cm.) 

Julian  Wright  Bequest 

M.79.152.179 

This  divine  figure  stands  in  an  awkward  posture  on  a 
crudely  rendered  lotus  base,  which  was  cast  separately  from  the 
figure.  Wearing  a  dhoti,  he  is  adorned  with  various  ornaments 
and  a  tiara.  His  right  hand  holds  a  pot  or  a  vase  and  the  left, 
raised  to  the  level  of  his  ear,  holds  a  disc.  The  disc  may  repre- 
sent either  the  sun,  the  moon,  or  a  mirror.  That  it  represents  a 
wheel  is  unlikely  because  there  are  no  spokes.  If  the  disc  does 
symbolize  either  the  sun  or  the  moon,  the  figure  may  depict 
Bodhisattva  Suryagarbha  or  Bodhisattva  Candragarbha,  respec- 
tively. Both  these  bodhisattvas  are  companions  of  the  Healing 
Buddha  (P8).  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  disc  represents  a  mirror, 
the  figure  portrayed  may  be  a  Bonpo  deity. 

Neither  the  exact  provenance  nor  the  date  of  this  bronze 
can  be  determined  with  any  certainty.  From  time  to  time,  such 
bronzes,  usually  representing  triads  and  always  small  in  size 
(made  small  as  if  intended  for  domestic  or  traveling  shrines),  ap- 
pear on  the  market.  Some  of  them  have  been  assigned,  broadly, 
to  western  Tibet  (von  Schroeder,  pp.  172-76),  but  without  any 
evidence.  All  that  may  be  said  for  certain  is  that  the  group  pos- 
sesses unique  characteristics  and  was  very  likely  manufactured  in 
a  particular  atelier  by  artists  who  were  not  very  skillful. 

As  is  the  case  with  this  bronze,  the  figures  are  generally 
disproportionate  (although  not  without  charm),  their  postures 
are  stiff  and  without  grace,  their  modeling  is  summary  and 
reflects  anatomical  distortions,  and  their  details  are  crudely  and 
cursorily  rendered.  Von  Schroeder  assumes  that  they  were  often 
made  with  matrices  and  generally  regards  them  as  the  earliest 
western  Tibetan  creations  by  unskilled  artists  who  were  at- 
tempting to  copy  Indian  or  Nepali  models.  He  therefore  dates 
them  all  to  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries.  That  they  are 
crude  attempts  to  copy  Indian  models — here  the  model  may 
have  been  an  eleventh-  or  twelfth-century  Pala  bronze — is  in  no 
doubt.  But  in  view  of  the  visible  remains  in  western  Tibetan 
monasteries  that  are  from  the  same  period  and  of  excellent  qual- 
ity, it  is  difficult  to  accept  his  theory  that  these  are  the  earliest 
tentative  attempts  by  faltering  artists  of  the  region.  It  is  more 
probable  that  such  bronzes  were  made  in  or  near  a  small  monas- 
tery that  had  neither  the  material  nor  the  creative  resources  of 
the  more  important  artistic  centers.  In  other  words,  they  are  the 
products  of  a  provincial  atelier  in  some  remote  region  of  western 
Tibet  or  Nepal  that  cannot  yet  be  identified. 


S9 

Bodhisattva  Manjusri 

Western  or  central  Tibet,  13th  century 

Brass 

11  in.  (27.9  cm.) 

Gift  of  Doris  and  Ed  Wiener 

M. 78. 136 

See  plate  37 


The  bodhisattva  Manjusri  is  seated  gracefully  on  the 
pericarp  of  a  lotus  in  full  bloom,  and  his  body  seems  to  sway 
like  the  sinuous  stem  of  the  lotus  he  holds.  The  extended  left 
foot  rests  on  a  smaller  lotus  attached  by  a  stem  to  the  base  of  the 
large  flower.  Although  he  wears  a  plain  dhoti,  the  bodhisattva  is 
adorned  with  a  profusion  of  jewelry.  His  matted  hair  is  set  off 
by  a  tiara  tied  with  strings  whose  ends  project  prominently 
above  both  his  ears.  An  oval  beauty  mark  adorns  his  forehead  like 
a  third  eye.  A  sash,  broken  on  the  left,  goes  around  his  back 
and  overhangs  his  raised  right  arm  in  which  he  brandishes  a 
sword.  His  left  hand  holds  the  stems  of  a  lotus  which  supports  a 
manuscript.  (See  S4  for  the  explanation  of  these  attributes.)  From 
behind  his  right  thigh,  a  whimsical  stylized  lion,  Manjusri's 
mount,  looks  up  with  a  grin  at  his  divine  master. 

A  comparison  with  the  early  Pala-Tibetan  paintings  (Pl- 
P3)  reveals  the  stylistic  affiliation  of  this  bronze.  Although  such 
bronzes  have  indiscriminately  been  given  a  western  Tibetan  at- 
tribution, they  could  have  been  made  for  monasteries  in  central 
Tibet  as  well,  as  indeed  two  of  the  paintings  were.  It  is  clear 
that  these  bronzes  reflect  a  style  derived  from  Pala  rather  than 
from  Kashmir.  Although  given  a  distinctive,  local  expression, 
and  more  attenuated  than  Pala  figures,  the  exaggerated  sway  of 
the  postures,  the  sinuous  modeling  of  the  body,  and  the  strong 
emphasis  on  asymmetry,  with  a  pronounced  inclination  of  the 
head,  are  features  ultimately  derived  from  the  late  Pala  (11th- 
12th  century)  styles.  Rather  than  growing  organically  from  the 
body,  the  legs  appear  to  be  grafted  on  as  separate  appendages. 
The  forms  and  shapes  of  the  ornaments  are  also  different  from 
those  on  Pala  bronzes  and  are  more  akin  to  those  seen  in  the 
Pala-Tibetan  paintings.  The  shape  of  the  sword  is  more  Tibetan 
than  Indian,  and  the  elegant,  distinctive  design  of  its  handle  is 
especially  noteworthy.  The  content,  as  well  as  the  soft,  pale  yel- 
low color  of  this  bronze,  also  distinguish  it  from  its  Pala  models. 


Sio 

Shadakshari  Lokesvara 

Western  Tibet,  early  16th  century 

Brass  with  semiprecious  stones  and  paint 

10V2  in.  (26.7  cm.) 

Julian  Wright  Bequest 

M.79.152.106 

In  this  form  Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara  is  known  as 
Shadakshari,  or  the  Six-Syllabled  Lokesvara  (P38).  The  six  syl- 
lables are  om  mani  padme  hum  and  constitute  the  famous  mantra 
of  the  bodhisattva  that  is  constantly  chanted  by  devout  Tibetans. 
The  mantra  is  considered  so  efficacious  that  it  has  been  carved 
on  numerous  rock  faces  throughout  the  country.  Although 
bejeweled  and  crowned,  the  bodhisattva  is  represented  as  a 
perfectly  poised  yogi  seated  in  the  lotus  posture  on  a  lotus  base. 
His  half-shut  eyes  look  down  at  the  tip  of  his  nose  and  his  hair 
is  arranged  in  an  ascetic's  tall  chignon.  The  fillet  that  holds  the 
tiara  in  place  flutters  rhythmically  behind  his  ears.  The  princi- 
pal hands  are  raised  to  the  chest  with  the  palms  enjoined  in 
namaskaramudra,  the  gesture  of  prayer  or  greeting.  The  upper 
right  hand  displays  the  rosary,  while  the  corresponding  left  hand 
holds  the  lotus,  the  distinctive  emblem  of  this  bodhisattva. 

A  beautifully  proportioned  figure,  its  outline  is  defined 
with  clarity  and  its  facial  features,  as  well  as  the  fingers,  are 
delicately  rendered.  The  crisp  and  finely  chased  ornaments  still 


199 


Sio 

Shadakshari  Lokesvara 


200 


Sn 


Sl2 


Buddha  Sakyamuni 


Bodhisattva  Vajrapani 


retain  some  of  the  semiprecious  stones  that  enliven  the  surface 
of  this  handsome  figure.  The  face  and  neck  are  painted  in 
cold  gold. 

Sn 

Buddha  Sakyamuni 

Nepal  or  Tibet,  nth-i2th  century 

Light  bronze  with  paint 

5V2  in.  (14  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.  Pal  in  Memory  of 

Christian  Humann 

M.  81. 208 

The  extremely  poor  orthography  of  the  brief  Tibetan 
inscription  on  the  back  of  this  bronze  makes  it  difficult  to  read, 
but  two  words  seem  clear  enough.  These  are  mchog  sakya,  which 
means  "the  excellent  Sakya";  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  figure 
represents  Buddha  Sakyamuni.  He  is  seated  on  a  lotus  base,  the 
petals  of  the  flower  only  being  indicated  on  the  front  and  the 
sides.  Sakyamuni's  right  hand  makes  the  gesture  of  touching  the 
earth,  symbolizing  his  enlightenment  at  Bodhgaya.  His  hair 
was  painted  in  indigo  blue,  traces  of  which  still  remain;  the  face 
was  certainly  painted  in  cold  gold. 

The  bronze  is  strongly  Nepali  in  style  and  therefore  may 


have  been  made  in  Nepal  and  taken  to  Tibet  by  a  pilgrim.  In 
fact,  it  may  even  have  been  made  from  a  matrix  for  export,  with 
the  inscription  being  incised  by  a  Nepali  artist  whose  knowl- 
edge of  Tibetan  was  poor.  However,  both  the  inscription  and 
the  application  of  paint  clearly  indicate  that  it  was  used  by  a 
Tibetan,  though  we  cannot  be  certain  whether  in  a  monastery 
in  Tibet  or  in  northern  Nepal.  The  style  of  the  bronze  is  closely 
related  to  Nepali  images  of  the  eleventh  century  (cf.  Pal  1974, 
figs.  184,  205). 

S12 

Bodhisattva  Vajrapani 

Provenance  unknown,  nth-i2th  century 

Copper  with  traces  of  paint 

69/6  in.  (17.8  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Michael  Phillips 

M.  81. 276.6 

Iconographically,  this  Vajrapani  is  very  similar  to  another 
in  the  collection  (S7),  but  stylistically  the  two  are  poles  apart. 
Here,  as  in  S7,  Vajrapani  holds  the  thunderbolt  against  his  chest 
and  his  left  hand  rests  against  his  left  thigh.  Otherwise,  the 
treatment  of  the  garment,  the  designs  of  the  jewelry  and  the 
hairstyle,  and,  more  fundamentally,  the  modeling  of  the  two 
figures  are  ostensibly  different. 


201 


Several  bronzes  in  this  style  are  now  known,  and,  in  fact, 
two  others  are  stylistically  so  close  (von  Schroeder,  p.  173,  nos. 
30D,  30E)  that  they  must  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  same 
workshop.  In  first  publishing  a  similar  bronze,  1  tentatively 
suggested  a  western  Tibetan  origin  and  wrote  that  it  "may  rep- 
resent rather  early  Tibetan  workmanship,  which  is  not  yet  ma- 
ture in  technical  proficiency  but  which  displays  a  certain  naive 
and  spontaneous  charm"  (Pal  1969  A,  p.  144).  Von  Schroeder 
accepts  these  views  and  the  suggested  date  and  further  opines 
that  such  bronzes  were  made  with  "the  simplified  method  of 
plaster  casting  employing  reusable  matrices"  (p.  166).  It  is  more 
difficult,  however,  to  accept  that  such  bronzes  "were  quite  evi- 
dently modeled  after  early  Kashmiri  prototypes."  Even  a  cursory 
comparison  with  bronzes  in  this  collection  which  reflect  strong 
Kashmiri  styles  (S2,  S3)  reveals  that  this  Vajrapani  is  quite  dif- 
ferent. The  only  element  which  may  have  been  borrowed  from 
Kashmir  is  the  manner  in  which  the  thunderbolt  is  held  against 
the  chest;  otherwise,  the  bronze  is  much  more  akin  to  early 
Nepali  bronzes  than  to  those  from  Kashmir.  For  instance,  the 
most  distinctive  feature  of  this  Vajrapani  is  his  hair,  which  cas- 
cades down  the  left  side  of  the  head  in  a  stylized  version  of  what 
in  an  early  Nepali  bronze  is  a  more  graceful  swirl  of  the  locks. 
In  fact,  there  are  other  similarities  as  well,  such  as  the  place- 
ment of  the  right  hand  against  the  chest,  the  delineation  of  the 
design  of  the  dhoti,  and  the  slim,  elegant  modeling  of  the 
figure.  Moreover,  as  is  usual  with  Nepali  bronzes,  the  metal  is 
copper  rather  than  brass.  It  seems  much  more  cogent,  therefore, 
to  consider  this  a  sculpture  modeled  after  a  Nepali  prototype 
and  cast  in  a  workshop  that  may  have  been  located  in  western 
Nepal,  western  Tibet,  or  even  southern  Tibet. 

S13 

Bodbisattva  Avalokitesvara 

Central  Tibet  (?),  I2th-i3th  century 

Gilded  bronze 

4 1/2  in.  (11. 4  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.  72. 1.9 

Literature:  The  Art  of  India,  no.  52;  Pal, 

1966,  p.  87,  fig.  96;  von  Schroeder, 

p.  423,  no.  109D. 

Balancing  himself  with  his  left  arm,  which  would  have 
rested  on  the  now-missing  lotus  base,  Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara 
is  seated  in  the  cross-legged  posture.  He  wears  a  dhoti  printed 
with  a  design  of  squares  containing  dots  and  has  a  matching 
shawl  or  scarf  that  covers  his  body  diagonally  across  the  left 
shoulder.  The  dhoti  is  held  by  a  belt  with  a  plain  metal  clasp. 
His  other  ornaments  include  bangles,  armlets,  anklets,  a  neck- 
lace, ear  ornaments,  and  a  diadem  with  three  pointed  lobes.  The 
ends  of  the  fillet  that  secures  the  diadem  around  his  head  are 
spread  out  fanlike  behind  both  ears.  His  hair  is  gathered  in  a 
tall  chignon  and  a  tiny  image  of  Tathagata  Amitabha  is  in- 
cluded in  the  central  lobe  of  the  crown.  With  his  right  hand, 
Avalokitesvara  holds  a  round  object  which  may  represent  the 
fruit  amalaka  (myrobalan),  a  symbol  of  knowledge. 

This  work  sheds  light  on  the  difficulties  encountered  in 
the  study  of  Tibetan  sculpture.  Whether  the  bronze  was  cast  in 
Nepal  or  made  by  a  Newari  artist  in  Tibet  will  probably  remain 
unresolved.  In  a  recent  publication  the  bronze  was  attributed  to 
Tibet  with  a  date  of  between  1050  and  1150,  while  a  stylisti- 


cally identical  bronze  now  in  the  Musee  Guimet,  Paris,  was 
assigned  to  Nepal  with  a  tenth-century  date.  Indeed,  these 
two  bronzes  are  excellent  examples  of  the  eclectic  character  of 
Tibetan  art,  for  while  the  figures  are  rendered  in  a  Nepali  style, 
the  throne  back  in  the  Guimet  example  copies  a  Pala  model. 
This  figure  of  Avalokitesvara  may  once  have  had  such  a  throne. 
Moreover,  the  designs  of  the  textile  and  the  necklace  are  en- 
countered in  Kashmiri-style  bronzes.  Such  a  mixture  of  styles 
was  more  likely  in  southern  Tibet  than  in  Nepal,  which  already 
had  a  strong  artistic  tradition  and  appears  to  have  been  little  in- 
fluenced by  Pala  or  Kashmiri  sculptures.  The  abstract  modeling 
of  the  bodhisattva's  body  and  the  soft  and  gentle  expression  of 
the  face  are  clearly  Nepali  traits.  But  the  pinched  waist  on  his 
right  contrasting  with  the  almost  rigid  contour  on  his  left,  as 
well  as  the  narrow  eyes  and  slightly  puffed  face,  which  reflect  a 
more  Mongoloid  ethnic  type,  are  features  that  indicate  a  Tibetan 
origin.  As  I  wrote  in  1966,  "Probably  cast  in  western  Tibet, 
this  piece  shows  the  intermingling  of  many  influences."  I  would 
now  suggest  changing  the  word  western  to  central;  but,  con- 
sidering the  minor  Kashmiri  traits,  a  western  Tibetan  attribu- 
tion cannot  be  altogether  ruled  out. 

S14 

A  Bodhisattva 

Central  Tibet,  13th— 14th  century 

Wood,  gold,  and  paint 

13  in.  (33  cm.) 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.75.67 

This  bodhisattva  stands  in  slight  contrapposto  on  a  simple 
wooden  base.  His  broad  shoulders  rest  on  a  rather  slim  torso 
with  a  narrow  waist,  but  his  arms  and  legs  are  somewhat  thick- 
set. The  dhoti  he  wears  is  held  by  a  clasped  belt  and  its  folds 
cascade  between  his  legs.  The  only  other  adornments  are  a  pair 
of  substantial  ear  ornaments  and  a  tall,  impressive  crown  with 
the  image  of  a  tathagata  in  the  central  panel.  The  bodhisattva's 
matted  hair  bulges  out  on  either  side  of  the  crown  in  an  unusual 
arrangement.  The  figure's  arm  is  outstretched  along  the  body, 
the  hand  forming  the  gesture  of  charity;  the  left  hand  rests 
against  the  thigh. 

Normally  there  would  be  no  hesitation  about  identifying 
the  figure  as  the  bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara;  but  there  is  no  in- 
dication of  the  lotus,  his  ubiquitous  symbol.  Also,  the  Buddha 
in  his  crown  is  not  Avalokitesvara's  spiritual  father,  Amitabha, 
who  is  generally  shown  seated  with  his  hands  in  the  dhyana- 
mudra.  Here,  the  Buddha  is  standing  and  the  gesture  of  the 
right  hand  implies  that  he  is  Tathagata  Ratnasambhava.  Thus, 
although  an  exact  identification  cannot  be  made,  the  fact  that  he 
represents  a  bodhisattva  is  certain. 

The  body,  crown,  and  face  have  been  painted  in  gold,  the 
face  perhaps  more  recently  than  the  rest  of  the  sculpture.  The 
eyes  and  eyebrows  are  realistically  painted,  while  the  hair  has 
been  indifferently  colored  in  black.  In  fact,  where  the  black  pig- 
ment has  peeled  off  one  can  see  the  rather  finely  carved  lines  of 
hair.  At  least  two  other  wood  sculptures  and  an  ivory  in  this 
style  are  known  (Kramrisch  1964,  p.  143;  Oriental  Art,  n.s.  XX 
[1974},  p.  457).  The  ivory  is  remarkably  similar  to  the  present 
example,  and  the  entire  group  reflects  a  strongly  Nepali  style, 
though  there  are  differences.  While  the  stylish  delineation  of 
the  sash  across  the  thighs  is  almost  a  hallmark  of  Nepali  repre- 
sentations of  bodhisattvas,  neither  the  distinctive  hairstyle  nor 


202 


Si3 

Bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara 


S14 

A  Bodhisattva 


203 


Si3 

A  Bodhisattva 


S16 

A  Sakyapa  Abbot 


the  design  of  the  crown  is  encountered  in  the  numerous  stone 
and  bronze  images  known  to  be  from  Nepal. 

Sl5 

A  Bodhisattva 

Central  Tibet,  16th  century 

Dark  bronze 

35/h  in.  (9.2  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 75. 4. 12 

Literature:  Pal,  1966,  p.  77,  no.  75. 


his  left  he  holds  the  stalk  of  a  lotus  on  which  is  a  circular  ob- 
ject. On  the  assumption  that  this  may  represent  a  wheel,  the 
figure  was  tentatively  identified  as  Bodhisattva  Samatabahadra 
in  a  previous  publication  {see  reference  above).  The  object  may 
well  be  a  flower,  however,  in  which  case  the  figure  depicts  some 
other  bodhisattva. 

The  style  of  the  figure  is  as  enigmatic  as  its  iconography. 
The  body  is  curiously  modeled,  with  the  chest  thrust  forward 
and  stomach  pulled  in.  The  flying  ends  of  the  scarf,  as  well  as 
the  stalk  of  the  lotus  and  its  leaves,  are  rendered  in  a  perfunc- 
tory manner.  The  face,  however,  is  nicely  executed,  its  gentle 
expression  enhanced  by  the  slight  trace  of  a  smile. 


Although  seated  in  a  yogic  posture,  this  bodhisattva 
seems  relaxed.  He  balances  himself  with  his  left  hand  on  a  seat 
formed  of  a  single  lotus  with  two  rows  of  petals,  both  of  which 
point  upward.  The  hair  is  matted  on  top  of  his  head  and  his 
tiara  is  modest.  Large  earrings,  a  simple  necklace,  and  plain 
bangles  constitute  his  other  ornaments.  He  wears  a  plain  dhoti 
and  a  scarf  hangs  loosely  around  the  arms.  A  fillet  is  tied  around 
the  head,  its  undulating  ends  almost  hidden  behind  his  ears,  and 
in  the  middle  of  his  forehead  is  a  raised  dot  marking  the  urna. 
The  attribute  in  his  right  hand  cannot  be  identified,  but  with 


S16 


A  Sakyapa  Abbot 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery), 

16th  century 

Gilt-bronze  repousse  with  paint 

5V2  in.  (14  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.  Pal  in  Memory  of 

Christian  Humann 

M.81.183.2 


204 


Si7 

Two  Flanges  from  a  Shrine  or  Throne 


A  Sakyapa  abbot  with  his  hait  painted  black  is  seated  in 
the  cross-legged  posture  on  a  lotus.  Both  his  undervest  and  his 
robe  are  decorated  with  incised  floral  designs.  His  hands  form 
the  gesture  of  turning  the  Wheel  of  Law.  The  figure  is  set  off  by 
an  aureole  adorned  with  two  pierced  lotuses,  foliage  on  the 
inside,  and  the  flame  motif  on  the  outside. 

The  small  but  handsome  repousse  plaque  may  have  en- 
cased a  terracotta  image  of  a  Sakyapa  abbot.  Shrines  and  altars 
containing  portraits  of  the  important  teachers  are  common  in 
most  Tibetan  monasteries,  and  such  statues  were  often  made 
from  clay  and  covered  with  gilt-bronze  repousse  plaques  such  as 
this.  Although  gilded,  the  plaque  was  originally  painted,  for 
traces  of  red  pigment  are  still  attached  to  the  crevices. 

SiT 

Two  Flanges  from  a  Shrine  or  Throne 

Central  Tibet,  i6th-iTth  century 

Gilt-copper  repousse 

Each:  8  x  6  in.  (20.3  x  15.2  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.  Pal 

M.T8.106.2-3 

These  two  flanges  probably  formed  parts  of  a  small  shrine 
or  a  throne  back.  Each  flange  shows  a  bodhisattva  standing, 


with  a  slight  thrust  of  the  hip,  on  a  lotus.  One  hand  of  each  is 
raised  to  the  chest  in  the  gesture  of  reassurance.  With  the  other 
hand,  one  holds  the  ascetic's  kundika  (water  pot)  and  the  other 
displays  the  gesture  of  charity.  Thus,  the  pot-holding  figure  is 
Maitreya  and  the  other  is  Avalokitesvara.  Both  bodhisattvas  are 
surrounded  by  flowering  stems  and  rich  foliage  that  rise  from 
the  lotus  on  which  they  stand.  The  frames  around  them  have  a 
bead-and-flame  border  on  one  side  and  a  band  incised  with  floral 
and  geometrical  patterns  on  the  other  three  sides. 

A  comparison  with  the  throne  back  (S18)  as  well  as  the 
Sakyapa  abbot  portrait  (S16)  makes  it  clear  that  these  flanges 
reflect  the  same  stylistic  tradition  and  may  even  have  originated 
in  the  same  workshop.  Similar  thrones  with  images  are  common 
in  Sakyapa  monasteries  of  central  Tibet,  as  may  be  seen  from 
photographs  of  altars  in  various  publications. 

S18 

Throne  Back 

Central  Tibet,  iTth— 18th  century 

Gilt-copper  repousse  with  paint 

12  x  9^2  in.  (30.5  x  24.1  cm.) 

Gift  of  Professor  and  Mrs.  Thomas 

Ballinger 

M.80.9T.2 


205 


Si8 
Throne  Back 


206 


This  richly  gilded  repousse  plaque  very  likely  once  served 
as  a  rhrone  back  for  an  image  of  a  bodhisattva.  The  figure  was 
probably  standing,  as  indicated  by  the  shape  of  the  aureole  with 
a  flame  border.  On  either  side  two  bodhisattvas  stand  awkwardly 
— each  on  a  lotus.  That  on  the  right  of  the  empty  aureole  is 
Manjusri,  who  holds  a  lotus  bearing  a  sword;  on  the  other  side 
Vajrapani  holds  the  thunderbolt  against  his  chest  with  his  right 
hand.  Each  bodhisattva  is  flanked  by  the  traditional  gajasimha 
motif,  in  which  a  lion  or  a  griffin  triumphs  over  an  elephant. 
At  the  base  of  the  arch  on  either  side  are  two  makaras,  and 
above  the  arch  is  the  combined  motif  of  a  garuda  triumphing 
over  two  serpents  and  two  jewel-carrying  flying  figures.  The  re- 
maining space  of  the  arch  is  occupied  by  the  foliate,  meandering 
tails  of  the  makaras.  A  narrow  border  around  the  arch  shows 
a  flowering  vine  rising  at  both  ends  from  two  auspicious  vases. 
Tiny  images  of  the  five  tathagatas  and  of  two  Tibetan  monks 
are  attached  to  the  vine.  The  outside  border  is  decorated  with 
flames  symbolizing  the  fire  of  knowledge,  and  at  the  summit 
is  a  tiny  figure  of  a  Buddha,  perhaps  Sakyamuni  himself.  The 
five  tathagatas  on  the  inside  border  appear  to  be  crowned;  thus, 
the  image  probably  was  used  for  a  Yogatantra  ritual. 

Such  pierced  and  repousse  metalwork  is  a  specialty  of  the 
Newari  artists  of  Nepal,  but  that  this  piece  was  meant  for  a 
Tibetan  patron  is  evident  from  the  two  lamas,  probably  of  the 
Sakyapa  sect,  included  in  the  inner  border  of  the  arch.  The  piece 
was  very  likely  made  by  a  Newari  or  Uray  craftsman  in  the 
Gyantse  region  for  a  Sakyapa  monastery.  The  exuberance  of  the 
design  has  been  made  less  powerful  by  cutting  away  the  spaces 
around  the  decorative  motifs.  As  a  result,  the  motifs  are  not 
only  better  articulated,  but  the  whole  object  also  appears  light 
and  lively. 

S19 

Cosmic  Form  of  Avalokitesvara 

Western  Nepal,  19th  century 

Silver,  cast,  and  repousse 

63/4  in.  (17. 1  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  Ronald  M.  Lawrence 

M.74.139.11 


S19 


Cosmic  Form  of  Avalokitesvara 


Avalokitesvara  is  represented  here  in  his  cosmic  manifes- 
tation, with  eleven  heads  and  one  thousand  arms.  The  basic  im- 
age is  of  the  eleven-headed  and  eight-armed  form  (see  P43);  this 
is  evident  from  the  fact  that  eight  of  the  arms  are  given  greater 
prominence  while  the  remaining  ones  are  distributed  on  either 
side  to  form  a  mandala.  These  arms  are  sometimes  marked  with 
eyes,  but  generally  they  hold  no  attributes.  The  eleventh  head 
at  the  summit  is  that  of  his  parent  tathagata,  Amitabha.  While 
the  tenth  head  is  terrifying,  all  the  others  are  placid  and  benign 
as  is  usual  in  such  images.  The  principal  pair  of  hands  is  held 
against  the  chest  in  the  gesture  of  adoration  while  the  two  upper- 
most hands  hold  the  rosary  and  the  lotus.  These  four  hands  thus 
represent  the  aspect  of  the  bodhisattva  known  as  Shadakshari 
(S20).  The  other  four  hands  display  the  jewel  and  the  gesture 
of  charity  on  the  right  and  the  pot  and  the  bow  and  arrow 
on  the  left.  His  dress  and  long  flowing  scarf  are  rendered  in  the 
Chinese  manner.  That  part  of  the  plaque's  surface  not  occupied 
by  the  figure  is  etched  with  a  flowering  plant  motif. 

Although  acquired  in  a  Lamaist  monastery  in  northwest- 
ern Nepal  near  the  Tibetan  border,  this  sculpture  is  very  likely 
of  Tibetan  origin.  Certainly  the  style  of  the  figure,  especially  of 
the  dress  and  the  exuberant  scarfs,  is  more  akin  to  nineteenth- 


207 


S20 


Shadakshari  Lokesvara 


century  bronzes  from  central  and  eastern  Tibet  than  to  those 
from  the  contemporary  Kathmandu  Valley.  The  plaque  was 
probably  meant  for  a  traveling  shrine. 


S20 


APW. 

J 

■ 

\        4 

^9 

*. 

=:.  —- - 

- 

r  ^  0 

^     -     * 

> 
1 

% 

"  > 

*        * 

'  \h  w  im 

^y> 

*    -t k 

mr  v — 

Shadakshari  Lokesvara 

Eastern  Tibet,  19th  century 

Bronze  with  polychrome 

63/4  in.  (17. 1  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Harry  Lenart 

M.76.70 

Iconographically,  this  bronze  is  similar  to  the  earlier 
example  from  western  Tibet  (Sio)  with  only  minor  differences. 
The  lotus,  originally  held  by  the  upper  left  hand,  is  now  miss- 
ing. The  principal  hands  hold  a  round  object  and  form  the  ges- 
ture of  adoration  ( namaskaramudra  or  kritanjalimudra) .  This 
object  may  well  symbolize  the  fruit  amalaka.  regarded  as  a  sym- 
bol of  knowledge.  The  design  of  the  crown,  the  swirling  scarf, 
and  the  subtle,  naturalistic  modeling  of  the  legs  indicate  an 
eastern  Tibetan  origin  for  the  bronze,  although  the  model  may 
have  been  a  Nepali  figure.  The  bronze  is  heavily  painted  with 
silver  and  other  colors,  and  although  not  very  distinguished,  it 
shows  how  brightly  such  bronzes  were  once  painted. 

S21 

Dorje  Phurpa 

Western  Tibet  (Nyingmapa  monastery), 

12th  century 

Brass  with  traces  of  paint 

i33/s  in.  (33.5  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.  70. 1.6 

Literature:  Dieux  et  demons,  pp.  183—84, 

no.  198. 


Dorje  Phurpa  is  literally  the  deification  of  the  ritual 
dagger,  or  phurpa  (R.6,  R7),  and  appears  to  be  a  creation  of 
Tibetan  Buddhism.  He  is  usually  represented  as  a  combination 
of  an  anthropomorphic  multiheaded  figure  and  the  blade  of  the 
phurpa,  but  he  also  has  a  special  form  in  which  the  lower  part  of 
the  body  does  not  consist  of  the  blade.  Instead,  as  in  this  sculp- 
ture, he  tramples  the  two  Rudras  (forms  of  Siva)  with  his  four 
legs.  His  cult  is  most  prevalent  among  the  Nyingmapas,  but  he 
is  also  worshiped  by  other  sects. 

According  to  the  Nyingmapa  tradition,  Dorje  Phurpa  is 
a  supramundane  deity  of  karma,  or  function,  and  is  also  known 
as  Vajrakumara,  or  the  "diamond  youth."  With  his  two  princi- 
pal hands  he  rolls  the  phurpa  between  his  palms — an  ancient  Ti- 
betan method  of  casting  a  curse  upon  an  enemy.  That  this  was 
very  likely  a  pre-Buddhist  practice  is  indicated  by  the  following 
mantra,  used  by  the  Kagyupas  in  some  of  their  religious 
ceremonies: 

this  with  a  willing  wind  and  avert, 
of  the  magicians 
roll  the  magic  d,  their  palms, 

•  lite  mustard  seed  as  magic. 

u  eapons .  u  ho  prepare 
[Beyer]. 


208 


S2I 

Dorje  Phurpa 


209 


S22 

Bodhisattva  Vajrapani 


front 


back 


The  upper  one  of  his  two  other  right  hands  holds  the 
nine-pronged  thunderbolt,  while  the  lower  holds  the  five- 
pronged  thunderbolt.  The  objects  held  by  the  analogous  left 
hands  are  now  missing.  Two  holes  on  two  of  the  arms  at  the 
back  indicate  that  wings,  characteristic  of  Dorje  Phurpa,  were 
once  separately  attached. 

An  animal  skin,  probably  of  a  tiger,  serves  as  Dorje 
Phurpa's  loincloth  in  this  piece,  while  another,  perhaps  that  of 
an  elephant,  once  served  as  his  cloak.  But  for  a  garland  of 
skulls,  all  his  ornaments  are  formed  with  snakes,  which  indeed 
are  his  most  prominent  attribute.  Each  of  his  four  faces  is  em- 
bellished with  rows  of  skulls  above  the  forehead  and,  although 
all  the  faces  are  terrifying,  only  the  one  in  front  is  given  fangs. 
The  third  eye  on  this  face  is  also  more  clearly  delineated  than 
those  in  the  others,  and  two  tridents  project  like  horns  from  the 
front  head  only.  Five  other  small,  squat,  militant  figures,  bran- 
dishing different  weapons  are  added  on  the  four  sides  of  the 
head  and  on  the  chignon  that  projects  like  a  crown  from  the  cen- 
ter of  the  cranium. 

As  frequently  occurs  in  western  Tibetan  bronzes,  the 
back  of  this  sculpture  has  been  crudely  rendered.  The  back  also 
appears  to  have  been  damaged  at  some  time.  Both  the  propor- 


tions of  the  figure  and  the  modeling  are  quite  distinctive  and 
represent  a  figurative  type  seen  neither  in  Indian  nor  Nepali 
sculptures.  The  contrived  way  the  arms  have  been  grafted  to  the 
shoulders  and  to  each  other  is  also  unusual.  Generally,  arms  are 
disposed  in  a  more  naturalistic  manner,  but  here  they  appear 
like  mechanical  appendages.  This  type  of  treatment  of  the  arms 
is  occasionally  encountered  in  other  bronzes  and  very  likely 
reflects  the  peculiarity  of  a  particular  atelier. 


S22 


Bodhisattva  Vajrapani 

Central  Tibet,  13th  century 

Gilt  bronze 

10  in.  (25.4  cm.) 

Gift  of  Marilyn  Walter  Grounds 

M. 81. 272. 1 

Literature:  P.  Pal,  "Indian  Art  from  the 

Paul  Walter  Collection,"  Allen  Memorial 

Art  Museum  Bulletin,  vol.  xxvm,  no.  2 

(1971),  pp.  100-101;  Pal,  1975,  pp.  44, 

77;  Dieux  et  demons,  pp.  120—21,  no.  93. 


210 


Bodhisattva  Vajrapani  (S7,  S12)  is  shown  here  in  one  of 
his  several  angry  manifestations.  In  such  forms  he  is  represented 
in  the  vajravidarana  body,  the  body  which  shatters  all  impedi- 
ments. The  Vajraviddrana-nama-dharani states  that  the  four  di- 
vine guardians  once  complained  to  the  Buddha  that  wickedness 
in  the  world  was  triumphing  over  good.  The  Buddha  requested 
Vajrapani  to  devise  a  means  to  protect  the  pure-minded,  and  it 
was  then  that  Vajrapani  assumed  his  impediment-shattering  body. 

Appropriately,  then,  the  bodhisattva  of  this  bronze 
stands  on  a  lotus  with  his  legs  set  widely,  belligerently,  apart. 
He  is  plump,  his  belly  overhanging  a  short  dhoti  marked  with 
swastikas.  His  scarf,  which  complements  the  center  folds  of  his 
dhoti,  sways  in  a  serpentine  manner  on  either  side  of  him,  en- 
hancing the  sense  of  action.  He  is  given  various  ornaments,  and 
his  chignon  spreads  like  a  fan  above  his  head  to  form  an  aureole 
for  Tathagata  Akshobhya,  to  whose  family  he  belongs.  Vajrapani 
is  given  a  third  eye,  and,  except  for  the  wrinkled  eyebrows,  his 
expression  is  not  so  mendacious  as  those  usually  given  to  other 
angry  deities.  With  his  left  hand  he  forms  the  gesture  of  ad- 
monition (tarjanimudra).  as  if  warning  the  wicked  that  he  will 
indeed  hurl  the  thunderbolt,  held  by  his  right  hand,  unless  the 
mischief  is  stopped. 

This  handsome  sculpture  is  a  good  example  with  which 
to  demonstrate  the  difficulty  of  suggesting  an  exact  provenance 
for  such  bronzes.  It  could  have  been  made  in  Nepal  or  in  Tibet. 
The  back  of  the  bronze  has  a  square  hole  into  which  some  relics 
were  inserted  at  the  time  it  was  created.  Since  this  practice  was 
more  customary  in  Tibet  than  in  Nepal,  this  can  be  considered  a 
Tibetan  bronze.  The  dark  brown  color  of  the  solidly  cast  bronze 
underneath  the  gilding  also  points  to  a  Tibetan  origin. 

S23 

Vajrapani  in  Yab-Yum 

Central  Tibet,  15th  century 

Gilt  bronze  with  paint 

11  in.  (27.9  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 82. 42. 6 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  pp.  99,  150. 

See  plate  38 


S23 


Vajrapani  in  Yab-Yum 
See  plate  38 


*  % 

\    -s^ 

'          •■••■• '^v*1' 

Jr  V 

The  male  represents  the  angry  form  of  Bodhisattva  Vajra- 
pani, who  is  shown  here  in  yab-yum  with  his  prajna.  He  stands 
militantly  with  his  legs  apart,  trampling  two  figures  symboliz- 
ing evil.  An  animal  skin  is  wrapped  around  his  waist,  but  his 
partner  is  naked.  Her  right  leg  is  stretched  parallel  to  his  left, 
and  her  other  leg  encircles  his  waist.  He  has  three  heads  and  six 
arms,  while  she  has  one  head  and  two  arms;  the  faces  of  both, 
however,  are  fierce,  have  the  third  eye,  and  are  made  more  ex- 
pressive with  cold  gold  paint  and  colors.  Two  of  his  hands  hold 
snakes,  which  attack  the  prostrate  figures  below,  and  a  third 
holds  the  thunderbolt.  The  remaining  hands  display  the  ges- 
tures of  reassurance,  admonition,  and  charity.  The  tiara  on  each 
of  his  four  heads  is  adorned  with  skulls,  and  the  hair,  painted 
red,  is  formed  into  a  common  chignon  crowned  with  the 
thunderbolt. 

Although  the  oval  lotus  base  is  not  completed  at  the 
back,  the  figures  are  modeled  in  the  round.  Both  figures  convey 
a  robust  sense  of  volume  with  thick,  solid  limbs  revealing  subtle 


211 


S24 

An  Unusual  Form  of  Mahakala  (?) 
See  plate  39 


S25 

Goddess  Nairatmya 
See  plate  40 


212 


transitions  from  one  area  of  the  body  to  another.  While  the 
sculptor's  principal  emphasis  was  on  expressing  a  sense  of  essen- 
tial massiveness  that  stands  resolutely  in  space,  he  was  equally 
interested  in  delineating  details.  The  fingers  of  the  hands  are 
delicately  rendered,  while  the  expressive  faces  exhibit  features 
that  are  precisely  articulated  and  modeled  with  sensitivity. 

S24 

An  Unusual  Form  of  Mahakala  (?) 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery), 

16th  century 

Silver  with  turquoises  and  paint 

6'/4  in.  (15.9  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by  the 

Jane  and  Justin  Dart  Foundation 

M.  81. 90. 19 

Literature:  Dieux  et  demons,  pp.  50,  183. 

See  plate  39 

Wearing  a  loincloth  and  a  shawl  across  his  shoulders,  an 
angry  ascetic  figure  is  seated  with  a  chopper  in  his  right  hand 
and  a  blood-filled  skullcup  in  his  left  hand.  He  is  adorned  with 
bangles  and  anklets  of  beads,  earrings  set  with  turquoises,  a  gar- 
land of  severed  heads,  and  the  crossed  belts  typical  of  ascetics 
and  mahasiddhas.  A  band  with  four  skulls  is  tied  above  his  head 
and  his  hair  is  matted  around  a  human  bone.  The  inside  of  his 
wide-open  mouth,  displaying  his  tongue  and  teeth,  is  painted 
red.  Large  rolling  eyes  and  long  strands  of  beard  enhance  his 
terrifying  appearance. 

In  a  previous  publication  (see  reference  above)  it  was  sug- 
gested that  the  figure  represents  a  particular  form  of  Mahakala 
known  as  Gur  kyang  rNgog  lugs.  The  worship  of  this  form  was 
introduced  by  the  monk-translator  Ngok  Lotsawa,  who  appears 
to  have  envisioned  the  god  in  a  human  guise.  As  Nebesky- 
Wojkowitz  (p.  52)  writes: 

His  angry  face  has  three  eyes.  Blood  drips  from  his  open 
mouth,  in  which  the  bare  fangs  are  visible.  His  attributes 
are  a  chopper  and  a  skullcup.  He  stands  on  a  corpse  and 
wears  the  usual  adornments  of  the  wrathful  dharmapalas. 

Although  a  number  of  the  above  features  are  present  in 
this  figure,  there  are  noteworthy  differences  as  well.  He  is  not 
shown  standing,  does  not  wear  the  usual  adornments  of  a  wrath- 
ful dharmapala,  and  his  hairstyle  is  that  of  an  ascetic.  However, 
the  third  eye  makes  this  figure  a  god  rather  than  a  human 
teacher  and  thus,  despite  the  differences,  the  identification  with 
Mahakala  must  for  the  present  be  accepted. 

Born  in  1059,  Ngok  Lotsawa  was  associated  with  the 
Sangphu  monastery,  founded  in  1073,  which  became  one  of  the 
principal  Kadampa  centers  for  the  study  of  the  Prajnaparamita. 
It  was  common  for  important  lamas  and  mystics  to  envision  par- 
ticular forms  of  deities  or  to  see  them  in  dreams,  and,  subse- 
quently, such  images  became  part  of  the  pantheon.  This 
particular  example  may  have  been  commissioned  by  a  lama  who 
considered  himself  an  emanation  of  the  lotsawa. 


gets  the  impression  that  he  has  just  taken  a  swig  of  blood  from 
his  skullcup.  The  slim,  taut  body  is  modeled  with  subtle  natu- 
ralism and  the  details,  of  both  the  face  and  the  ornaments,  are 
delineated  with  great  precision.  The  back  appears  to  have  been 
damaged  or  broken  open,  perhaps  in  search  of  relics,  but  the  re- 
pair seems  to  be  old.  The  closest  stylistic  parallels  for  this  sculp- 
ture may  be  seen  in  the  frescoes  of  the  main  temple  at  Gyantse; 
hence,  the  central  Tibetan  attribution.  Apart  from  the  fact  that 
in  terms  of  both  style  and  iconography  this  is  an  unusual  statue, 
it  is  also  one  of  the  finest  examples  of  Tibetan  metal  sculpture. 

S25 

Goddess  Nairatmya 

Central  Tibet,  16th  century 

Gilt  copper  inlaid  with  turquoise;  paint 

9I/4  in.  (23.5  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 70. 1.4 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  no.  61  and  p.  149; 

Pal,  1974,  p.  38,  fig.  15;  Dieux  et  demons , 

pp.  149-51,  no.  147;  von  Schroeder, 

p.  446,  no.  121F. 

See  plate  40 

The  goddess  is  seated  on  the  back  of  a  corpse  set  on  a 
fully  open  lotus.  Her  right  leg  is  folded  parallel  to  the  body,  but 
the  other  is  slightly  raised  and  placed  forward.  She  wears  an  ani- 
mal skin  and  is  profusely  ornamented  with  several  tiers  of  neck- 
laces, anklets,  armlets,  bracelets,  earrings,  and  a  tiara.  All  this 
jewelry  was  once  encrusted  with  stones  which  now,  except  for  a 
few  remaining  turquoises,  are  missing.  Her  forehead  is  marked 
with  a  third  eye  and  her  hair,  painted  red,  is  matted  in  a  pyra- 
midal fashion  and  crowned  with  a  thunderbolt.  Her  right  hand 
holds  a  chopper,  her  left  a  skullcup  filled  with  blood. 

These  attributes,  her  scowling  face,  and  the  third  eye 
lead  to  identification  as  Nairatmya,  or  Nairatma  (No-Soul), 
who  is  the  prajna,  or  partner,  of  Hevajra,  the  presiding  deity  of 
the  Hevajra tan tra,  one  of  the  most  important  texts  of  Vajrayana 
Buddhism.  However,  the  same  attributes  may  be  held  by  other 
goddesses.  Moreover,  Nairatmya  is  usually  shown  embracing  her 
partner,  or  when  alone,  as  a  dancing  figure  like  the  Vajravarahi 
in  the  collection  (S26).  Thus,  if  this  indeed  is  a  representation 
of  the  goddess,  it  remains  a  unique  example. 

Aesthetically,  as  well,  the  bronze  is  unusual  and  one  of 
the  finest  in  the  collection.  But  for  her  face  she  is  an  attractive 
and  elegant  figure.  Her  long  legs,  slim  torso,  and  long  face 
make  her  proportions  unique.  The  full,  firm  breasts  are  well 
formed,  and  curiously,  instead  of  the  nipple,  the  artist  has 
delineated  a  perforated  circle  reminiscent  of  the  heart  or  peri- 
carp of  a  lotus.  The  lotus  is  not  an  uncommon  metaphor  in  the 
Indo-Tibetan  literary  tradition  for  various  parts  of  the  female 
anatomy.  Although  she  sits  in  a  relaxed  posture — note  how  natu- 
ralistically  the  left  foot  rests  on  the  side  and  how  she  seems  to 
be  wiggling  the  big  toe — hers  is  a  stately  and  graceful  figure 
with  a  majestic  presence. 


It  is  difficult  to  determine  the  exact  age  and  provenance 
of  this  remarkably  powerful  and  expressive  image.  The  face 
seems  alive,  the  painted  mouth  so  realistically  rendered  that  one 


213 


S26 

Goddess  Vajravarahi 


214 


S27 

Mahakala 


215 


S26 


S28 


Goddess  Vajravarahi 
Central  Tibet,  17th  century 
Bronze  with  traces  of  gilding 
6V2  in.  (16.5  cm.) 
Gift  of  Paul  F.  Walter 
M. 74. 106. 1 

Vajravarahi,  or  the  Adamantine  Sow,  is  the  consort  of 
Cakrasamvara,  the  presiding  deity  of  the  Samvar at  antra.  Except 
for  the  sow's  head  projecting  as  an  excrescence  above  her  right 
ear,  she  is  no  different  from  the  goddess  Nairatmya,  Hevajra's 
spouse  (S25).  Vajravarahi  is  the  tutelary  goddess  of  the  nunnery 
of  Semding,  where  every  abbess  is  considered  to  be  her  ema- 
nation. She  is  also  a  very  important  goddess  for  the  Drukpas, 
a  subsect  of  the  Kagyupas,  who  perform  a  special  ritual  for  her 
every  year  on  the  twentieth  day  of  the  sixth  month. 

Her  left  foot  set  on  the  stomach  of  a  prostrate  male, 
Vajravarahi  dances  with  her  right  leg  raised.  Although  an  animal 
skin  wraps  her  hips  and  thighs,  she  appears  naked.  Apart  from 
various  jewelry  and  a  tiara,  she  wears  a  garland  of  severed  hu- 
man heads;  a  snake  encircles  her  body  and  rears  its  head  against 
her  ample  belly.  Two  chains,  one  with  a  bell  and  the  other,  pos- 
sibly with  an  animal  head,  come  down  her  thighs  like  two  ser- 
pents. Even  livelier  is  the  delineation  of  the  scarf  which  swirls 
on  either  side  of  her  body  and  forms  a  sort  of  halo  around  her 
head.  With  her  right  hand  she  brandishes  a  chopper  and  with 
her  left  a  skullcup.  A  khatvanga  (skull-crowned  magic  staff), 
also  sinewy  like  her  other  appendages,  is  held  against  her  body 
by  her  left  arm. 

S27 

Mahakala 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery), 

17th  century 

Copper  with  traces  of  gilt  and  paint 

4'/8  in.  (10.5  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dale  Crawford 

M. 79. 184 

Mahakala,  framed  by  a  ring  of  fire  representing  the 
cremation  ground,  as  well  as  the  phenomenal  world  that  is  his 
habitat,  stands,  knees  bent,  on  a  preta  (ghost)  stretched  on  a 
lotus  base.  Plump  and  dwarfish,  he  has  a  terrifying,  masklike 
face — dominated  by  his  third  eye — and  a  crown  of  flying  hair. 
He  wears  an  animal  skin  and  his  ornaments  include  a  garland  of 
skulls  and  several  snakes.  With  his  principal  hands,  he  holds  the 
chopper  and  the  skullcup;  he  cuts  up  all  disbelievers  with  the 
chopper,  then  drinks  their  blood  from  the  skullcup.  Across  his 
arms  rests  a  staff  crowned  with  a  severed  head,  a  representation 
particular  to  Tibet. 

The  patron  deity  of  the  Sakyapas,  Mahakala  is  the  Bud- 
dhist version  of  the  Hindus'  Bhairava,  the  angry  form  of  Siva.  In 
this  manifestation,  he  is  known  in  Tibet  as  Gur  gyi  mGon  po, 
or  Lord  of  the  Tent.  Apart  from  the  staff,  the  only  other  pecu- 
liarity of  Tibetan  representation  is  that  the  deity  is  always  de- 
picted with  his  knees  bent,  as  if  about  to  rise.  This  posture  is 
described  in  the  Sadhanamala;  Mahakala  is  said  to  be  rising 
from  the  body  of  the  ghost  (pretasanastham  utthitham)  on  which 
he  was  apparently  seated  in  yogic  meditation.  Evidently,  only 
Tibetan  artists  followed  this  prescription  literally,  for  in  Nepal 
and  India  he  is  always  shown  fully  erect. 


Vajrabhairava  in  Yab-Yum 

Central  Tibet  (Gelukpa  monastery), 

17th  century 

Dark  brown  bronze  with  paint 

9V2  in.  (24.1  cm.) 

Gift  of  Christian  Humann 

M. 76. 143 

Literature:  Fisher,  pp.  24,  43;  Pal,  1982 

A,  p.  37. 

See  plate  41 

One  of  the  most  powerful  yidams  (protective  deities), 
especially  of  the  Gelukpa  order,  Vajrabhairava  {see  P12)  is  shown 
here  in  physical  union  with  his  prajna.  While  he  has  multiple 
arms  and  heads  (one  of  the  latter  of  which  is  that  of  a  buffalo), 
she  is  depicted  with  only  one  head  and  two  arms.  Both,  how- 
ever, stand  belligerently,  their  legs  (only  one  of  hers)  trampling 
upon  gods,  humans,  animals,  and  birds.  Of  his  nine  heads, 
seven  of  which  are  shown  in  a  circle,  only  the  one  at  the  summit 
is  placid;  this  is  Manjusri,  whose  angry  emanation  Vajrabhairava 
represents.  Grinning  skulls  form  the  tiara  of  his  demonic  heads. 
His  thirty-four  arms,  spread  on  either  side  in  a  circle,  hold  a 
wide  range  of  weapons  and  attributes.  Holding  the  chopper  and 
a  skullcup,  his  prajna  flings  her  arms  on  either  side  of  his  faces 
as  she  looks  up  at  him  with  passionate  intensity. 

The  symbolism  of  the  various  limbs  and  attributes  of 
Vajrabhairava  is  lucidly  explained  by  Tsongkhapa: 

His  nine  faces  point  to  the  ninefold  classification  of  the 
scriptures;  his  two  horns  to  the  two  truths  (conventional 
and  ultimate);  his  thirty-four  arms  together  with  his 
spirituality,  communication  and  embodiment  in  tangible 
form  to  the  thirty-seven  facts  of  enlightenment;  his  six- 
teen legs  to  the  sixteen  kinds  of  no-thing-ness  ...  etc. 
[Tsong-ka-pa] 

Apart  from  such  doctrinaire  symbolism,  it  may  be  stressed  that 
Vajrabhairava  also  represents  the  cosmic  as  well  as  the  angry 
forms  of  Manjusri  (S9). 

Although  a  god  of  Indian  origin,  Vajrabhairava  has  ac- 
quired a  special  Tibetan  flavor.  During  the  New  Year  festivals 
the  god  is  evoked  and  propitiated  according  to  the  Sakyapa 
method  in  special  ceremonies  performed  jointly  by  both  the 
Sakyapas  and  Nyingmapas.  Such  festivities  are  a  curious  admix- 
ture of  pre-Buddhist  military  ceremonies,  shamanistic  dances  of 
exorcism,  and  Buddhist  rituals. 

This  is  a  fine  example  of  the  complexity  of  such  sculp- 
tural forms  and  of  the  exceptional  dexterity  of  Tibetan  sculptors. 
Cast  in  several  pieces,  the  bronze  was  skillfully  assembled  to 
form  a  coherent  and  rhythmic  composition.  The  faces  of  the 
figures,  too,  are  adroitly  painted  to  enhance  the  desired  effect. 


S29 

A  Terrifying  Deity 

Central  Tibet  (?),  18th  century 

Elephant  bone 

6  in.  (15.2  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M. 77.6. 2 


2I( 


Sa8 

Vajrabhairava  in  Yab-Yum 
See  plate  41 


S29 

A  Terrifying  Deity 


front 


back 


(i 

1 

J&f**t:    K 

hn&k^J&* 

H 

217 


S30 

Portrait  of  a  Monk 


218 


A  terrifying  deity  awkwardly  dances  on  a  lotus  against  a 
sea  of  flames.  His  scowling  face  is  made  more  menacing  by  his 
third  eye  and  flying  hair.  Clad  in  a  tiger  skin  and  sparsely  orna- 
mented, he  is  plump  and  heavyset  and  has  disproportionately 
large  feet.  With  his  right  hand  he  brandishes  a  chopper  and 
with  his  left  he  holds  a  noose.  He  is  one  of  a  host  of  such  ter- 
rifying deities  populating  the  Tibetan  pantheon;  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  be  certain  of  his  identification. 

Rather  freely  rendered  and  not  of  great  quality,  the 
image  is  nonetheless  a  forceful  example  of  a  bone  carving  of 
impressive  proportions.  Tibetan  bone  sculptures  are  generally 
much  smaller.  Despite  its  somewhat  crude  workmanship,  it 
provides  an  idea  of  the  appearance  of  sculptures  on  live  rock,  of- 
ten seen  in  Tibet,  but  rarely  encountered  outside  the  country. 

S30 

Portrait  of  a  Monk 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery), 

14th  century 

Gilt  bronze  with  paint 

3V4  in.  (8.2  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Frank  Neustatter 

M. 76. 93. 1 

Literature:  von  Schroeder,  p.  425,  no. 

hoc. 

A  monk  with  a  pleasant  face,  betraying  a  trace  of  a 
smile,  is  seated  in  a  yogic  posture  on  a  lotus  atop  an  unusual 
base.  Its  shape,  and  especially  its  decoration,  are  distinctive:  in 
the  middle  are  three  gems  seen  more  often  as  offerings  in  a 
thanka  than  in  a  bronze;  next  are  two  lively  lions  with  their 
heads  turned  inward;  finally,  each  of  the  front  corners  is  sup- 
ported by  a  naga  with  a  human  body  who  spreads  out  his  arms 
as  if  swimming  or  flying.  The  monk's  body  is  fully  covered  by 
his  robes,  and  his  hair  is  indicated  by  dots  of  black  paint,  as  if 
the  roots  on  his  shaven  head  are  about  to  sprout  again.  His  ears 
are  disproportionately  large.  A  circular  mark  on  the  forehead 
may  symbolize  his  divine  status.  While  his  left  hand  rests  on  his 
lap,  the  other  touches  the  cushion  on  which  he  sits.  Without  an 
inscription  it  is  impossible  to  identify  the  figure,  but  he  very 
likely  belonged  to  the  Sakyapa  order. 

Although  diminutive,  the  bronze  is  of  considerable  inter- 
est. The  unusual  facade  of  the  base,  with  its  lively  creatures,  is 
just  as  fascinating  as  the  distinctive  and  smiling  visage  of  the 
monk.  The  high  copper  content,  as  well  as  the  color  of  the 
metal  below  the  gilding,  are  reminiscent  of  early  Nepali 
bronzes,  as  is  the  feeling  of  gentle  elegance  the  monk  imparts. 
With  their  outstretched  arms,  the  nagas  at  the  corners  are  very 
much  like  the  garudas  that  carry  Vishnu  in  tenth-  to  thirteenth- 
century  Nepali  sculptures.  Thus,  a  fourteenth-century  date  for 
this  charming  little  bronze  is  not  improbable. 


S31 


Dampa  Sangye 
See  plate  42 


219 


S3i 


Dampa  Sangye 

Central  Tibet,  1350— 1400 

Bronze  with  inlaid  copper  and  silver 

8Ya  in.  (22.2  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M.70.1.5 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  pp.  no,  154; 

Dieux  et  demons .  pp.  155,  156. 

See  plate  42 

According  to  the  inscription  around  the  base  {see  Appen- 
dix), this  is  a  portrait  of  Dampa  Sangye,  whom  the  inscription 
exalts  as  "Fully  accomplished  in  the  two  spheres  miraculously 
perfected  in  two  bodies."  It  was  commissioned  as  a  memorial 
by  a  lady,  perhaps  an  aunt  (also  a  nun?)  of  a  lama  named  Palden. 
As  Richardson  suggests,  Palden  may  be  the  Palden  Sengge 
who  lived  in  the  fourteenth  century. 

Although  he  is  known  by  his  Tibetan  name,  Dampa 
Sangye  (also  called  Phadampa)  was  an  Indian  mystic  who  came 
to  Tibet  shortly  after  the  death  of  Atisa  in  the  second  half  of  the 
eleventh  century.  The  Blue  Annals  contains  brief  accounts  of  both 
his  legendary  and  historical  lives,  and  a  recently  published  arti- 
cle (see  Aziz,  pp.  19—37)  provides  us  with  the  various  legends 
preserved  about  him  in  Langkor,  where  he  is  a  folk  hero.  Appar- 
ently, he  settled  in  the  valley  of  Dingri  during  the  period  of  his 
religious  activity  in  Tibet,  although  he  did  travel  elsewhere  in 
the  country  and  to  China.  He  was  a  contemporary  of  Milarepa 
(S40)  and  the  two  are  said  to  have  had  a  magical  exchange  near 
the  sacred  hill  of  Langkor.  He  is  believed  to  have  introduced  the 
doctrine  of  Shiche  and  the  practice  of  the  chb  technique  {see 
introduction,  Ritual  Objects).  The  former  emphasizes  the  essence 
of  the  path  of  Prajnaparamita,  while  the  latter  is  a  meditative 
technique  that  leads  to  "spontaneous  detachment  from  ego." 


In  this  unusual  portrait,  the  eminent  teacher  is  seated  on 
his  haunches,  his  legs  completely  covered  by  a  lower  garment 
adorned  with  lightly  etched  floral  designs.  His  torso  is  bare,  but 
he  wears  simple  ornaments,  except  for  the  prominently  rendered 
spiral  earrings  with  a  spiral  design.  His  tiara  of  floral  wreaths  is 
also  unique,  and  his  hair,  beautifully  groomed  at  the  back,  rolls 
down  his  neck  and  spreads  out  in  neat  curls.  The  back  of  the 
bronze  is  modeled  and  chased  as  elegantly  as  the  front.  His 
hands  are  raised  to  chest  level  and  display  the  gesture  of  exposi- 
tion. The  silver  inlay  of  his  large,  staring  eyes  and  his  beard 
give  his  visage  an  intensity  that  is  characteristic,  like  the  large 
earrings,  of  portraits  of  great  yogis. 

It  would  appear  from  this  idealized  portrayal  that  Dampa 
Sangye  was  remembered  as  a  mahasiddha.  The  depiction  is 
closely  related  to  such  early  representations  of  the  mahasiddhas 
as  the  fifteenth-century  murals  of  Gyantse.  Because  of  its  simi- 
larity to  those  murals,  I  once  suggested  a  fifteenth-century  date 
for  this  bronze.  However,  if  the  person  in  whose  memory  this 
bronze  was  dedicated  is  indeed  the  Palden  Sengge  of  the  Saky- 
apas,  the  bronze  must  be  dated  soon  after  1342,  the  year  he 
died.  This  date  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  iconography,  style, 
or  quality  of  the  bronze.  The  iconography  follows  a  different 
tradition  than  that  seen  in  the  later  images  of  Dampa  Sangye, 
while  the  workmanship  seems  quite  typical  of  fourteenth-  to 


fifteenth-century  bronzes  made  in  central  Tibet  for  Sakyapa 
monasteries. 

S32 

Portrait  of  Karma  Dudtsi 

Eastern  Tibet  (Karmapa  monastery?), 

16th  century  or  earlier 

Gilt  bronze  with  paint 

n1/}  in.  (28.6  cm.) 

Gift  of  Christian  Humann 

M. 77.152 

Literature:  A  Decade  of  Collecting,  pp.  37, 

153-54- 

The  inscription  on  the  back  (see  Appendix)  states  that 
this  is  the  portrait  of  Karma  Dudtsi,  and  that  it  was  made  by 
his  devotees  posthumously.  He  is  styled  as  a  rinpoche,  an  honorific 
title  for  "reincarnated"  high  lamas.  According  to  the  inscription, 
the  hollow  bronze  once  contained  relics  of  wood,  but  these 
have  disappeared.  The  identification  of  the  lama  remains 
uncertain,  but  his  name  suggests  that  he  may  have  belonged 
to  the  Karmapa  lineage.  According  to  Richardson,  he  may 
be  the  disciple  of  the  eighth  Zwa  Nagpa  Lama  who  lived  in 
the  sixteenth  century.  However,  this  seems  unlikely  since  the 
bronze  appears  to  be  stylistically  earlier  than  that. 

The  lama  sits  firm  and  erect  in  the  meditating  posture  on 
a  base  consisting  of  two  cushions  covered  with  a  rug.  His  heavy 
robes  are  articulated  with  opulent  folds.  His  outstretched  right 
hand  rests  on  his  right  knee,  and  his  left  is  placed  in  his  lap  in 
the  gesture  of  meditation  (dhyanamudra). 

Although  the  portrait  is  hieratic  and  idealized,  the  face 
appears  to  be  realistically  rendered;  the  artist  may  well  have 
known  his  subject  personally.  The  features,  including  the  flaring 
nose,  sensitive  mouth,  and  kindly  eyes,  are  expressive  of  the 
lama's  personality  and  character.  The  naturalistic  treatment  of 
the  robes  imparts  a  sense  of  impressive  grandeur  to  the  figure 
and  makes  it  gently  animated.  His  hair  is  indicated  with  paint. 
A  similar  bronze  portrait — with  a  realistic  face  but  otherwise 
hieratically  presented — of  the  first  Karmapa  (1110-1193),  con- 
taining his  funerary  relics,  is  preserved  in  the  Rumtek  monas- 
tery in  Sikkim. 

It  would  be  unwise  to  suggest  a  specific  date  for  this 
bronze  until  the  figure  can  be  positively  identified.  In  general, 
however,  it  seems  to  relate  to  fourteenth-fifteenth-century  Ti- 
betan representations,  such  as  the  Sakyapa  portraits  (P13,  P15), 
rather  than  to  works  of  the  seventeenth  century  or  later.  No 
matter  when  it  was  made,  it  remains  one  of  the  most  impressive 
hieratic  portraits  created  in  Tibet. 


220 


S32 

Portrait  of  Karma  Dudtsi 


221 


S33 

A  Mahasiddha 
See  plate  43 


S33 

A  Mahasiddha 

Central  Tibet,  15th  century 

Bronze  with  polychrome 

7  in.  (17.8  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Museum  Associates  Purchase 

M. 73. 4. 14 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  pp.  104,  154. 

See  plate  43 

The  mahasiddha  is  seated  on  a  realistically  painted  tiger 
skin  spread  atop  a  lotus  base.  His  belly  overhangs  a  short  loin- 
cloth and  his  bare  torso  is  adorned  with  a  crossbelt  with  a  floral 
clasp  and  a  yogic  band  (yogapatta).  All  his  ornaments  simulate 
berries  or  beads.  His  hair  is  piled  high  in  an  ascetic's  chignon 
(jata),  of  a  kind  that  is  still  frequently  seen  on  the  heads  of 
wandering  yogis  in  India.  His  right  hand  holds  a  thunderbolt, 
and  a  skullcup  is  placed  in  his  left  hand. 

In  a  previous  publication  I  suggested  that  the  figure  rep- 
resents the  mahasiddha  Heruka,  also  known  as  Dombi-Heruka 
or  Dombipa.  The  suggestion  was  based  upon  similar  images 
painted  on  the  wall  of  the  Gyantse  kumbum  and  identified  by  an 
inscription  as  Heruka.  In  later  Tibetan  paintings,  however, 
Heruka  is  usually  shown  with  a  female  companion  and  riding  a 
tiger.  This  does  not  negate  the  identification  of  this  figure  as 
Mahasiddha  Heruka,  for  there  appears  to  be  a  distinct  difference 
between  the  early  representations  of  the  mahasiddhas  and  the 
later  pictorial  traditions.  Most  early  representations,  whether  at 
Gyantse  or  in  thankas,  portray  the  mahasiddhas  as  Indian  yogis, 
with  few  distinguishing  attributes. 

Stylistically,  as  well,  this  bronze  relates  closely  to  the 
Gyantse  murals  which  were  painted  in  the  fifteenth  century.  It 
may  also  be  pointed  out  that  the  design  of  the  lotus  base  is  un- 
usual; generally,  the  flower  is  shown  with  a  single  row  of  petals, 
or  when  with  two,  one  is  up  and  the  other  down.  Here,  both 
rows  point  down,  a  feature  not  usually  encountered  in  bronzes 
but  found  in  a  fragmentary  Tibetan  mural  now  in  Rome.  This 
mural  is  said  to  be  from  a  southern  Tibetan  monastery  and  is 
dated  to  the  fifteenth  century. 

Whatever  the  identification  or  date  of  the  bronze,  it  is  an 
excellent  example  of  a  Tibetan  polychromed  sculpture.  The 
artist  was  obviously  a  keen  observer,  for  he  has  not  only  painted 
the  tiger  skin  realistically  but  has  given  the  mahasiddha  a  life- 
like, expressive  face.  The  snub  nose,  the  trimmed  moustache  and 
goatee,  the  wrinkled  forehead,  and  the  pointed  eyes  impart  an 
individual  character  to  the  face — as  if  it  were  modeled  after  a 
living  yogi. 


222 


S34 

Mahasiddha  Virupa 


front 


back 


S34 


Mahasiddha  Virupa 
Central  Tibet,  15th  century 
Bronze  with  inlaid  silver 
87/8  in.  (22.5  cm.) 
Gift  of  Anna  C.  Walter 
M. 80. 230 

The  long  dedicatory  inscription  (see  Appendix)  on  the 
base  of  the  bronze  provides  the  usual  pious  wishes  but  only  the 
name  of  one  of  the  two  donors,  Lama  Namkha  Shenyen.  The 
other  donor,  the  lama's  uncle,  is  not  named.  Nothing  is  known 
about  this  lama.  He  may  have  belonged  to  the  Sakyapa  order 
because  the  mahasiddha  Virupa  is  regarded  as  their  human 
guru.  Thus,  it  is  likely  that  his  image  would  be  consecrated  by 
a  lama  of  the  Sakyapa  order. 

Virupa  was  born  in  Tripura  in  eastern  India,  but  his 
main  work  went  on  in  a  monastery  called  Somapuri  in  southern 
India.  A  man  of  unorthodox  habits,  Virupa  was  a  great  devotee 
of  Vajravarahi,  whose  cult  was  more  prevalent  in  the  east  than 
in  the  south.  He  is  noted  for  his  supernatural  powers  and  is  said 
to  have  stopped  the  sun  once  when  he  was  displeased  with  a  bar- 


223 


S35 

Arhat  Abheda 


224 


maid  in  a  tavern.  Another  story  tells  how  he  split  a  statue  of 
Siva  and  converted  the  Sivaites  to  Buddhism.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  virupa,  meaning  the  "ugly  eyed,"  is  one  of  the  epithets 
of  Siva. 


S36 


Arhat  Kalika 
See  plate  44 


In  this  bronze  Virupa  is  shown  as  a  plump  yogi,  seated 
on  the  typical  lotus  seat,  engaged  in  teaching.  Characteristic  of 
the  mahasiddhas,  he  wears  a  crossbelt  and  various  floral  orna- 
ments. His  diadem  is  made  of  flowers  as  is  that  of  Dampa  Sang- 
ye  (S31).  He  has  a  narrow,  rolled  beard  like  Abheda  (S35)  and  a 
goatee  and  moustache.  His  hair  is  matted  around  a  human 
bone,  as  is  Mahakala's  (S24),  and  his  open  mouth  displays  teeth 
inlaid  with  silver.  His  large  bulging  eyes  are  emphasized  with 
inlaid  silver  in  order  to  express  the  intensity  of  the  yogi's 
spiritual  powers  and  extraordinary  luster  (tapas).  As  is  typical  of 
other  Sakyapa  bronzes  of  this  period,  the  details  of  the  garment 
and  the  deerskin  on  which  he  sits  are  delicately  chased. 

S35 

Arhat  Abheda 

Central  Tibet,  15th— 16th  century 

Bronze  with  paint 

6V2  in.  (16.5  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.76.67 

The  bottom  of  the  lotus  base  on  which  this  arhat  sits 
consists  of  a  band  with  an  inscription  in  bold,  stylized  letters  in 
the  siddha  script.  The  text  of  the  inscription  is  the  typical  Bud- 
dhist formula  beginning  with  the  expression  ye  dharma.  Wear- 
ing a  robe  embroidered  with  floral  patterns,  Abheda  is  seated 
with  his  legs  completely  covered.  His  closely  cropped  hair  hugs 
his  head  like  a  shallow  cap  and  he  has  a  narrow,  rolled  beard. 
He  holds  a  small  stupa  against  his  chest.  The  stupa,  the  only 
distinctive  attribute  of  this  arhat,  is  said  to  have  been  given  to 
him  by  Sakyamuni  himself  so  that  its  magic  properties  would 
appease  the  yakshas  of  the  northern  countries  where  Abheda  was 
sent  to  preach. 

Stylistically,  the  bronze  is  closely  related  to  the  portrait 
of  the  Indian  tantric  master  Dampa  Sangye  (S31).  The  floral 
design  in  the  other  bronze,  however,  is  executed  with  greater 
finesse,  and  the  folds  of  the  garment  are  more  naturalistic.  In 
this  bronze  the  floral  patterns  appear  to  be  more  freely  etched 
and  have  a  bolder  and  livelier  quality.  Curiously,  the  sculptor 
has  filled  in  the  intervening  spaces  around  the  flowers  with  tiny 
dots  which  make  the  surface  rather  busy.  The  folds  and  lower 
edge  of  the  garment  are  rendered  more  perfunctorily  and  with  a 
greater  degree  of  stylization.  The  face  of  the  arhat,  however,  has 
an  individual  personality  and  appears  modeled  from  life. 

S36 

Arhat  Kalika 

Eastern  Tibet  or  China,  2nd  half  of  the 

15th  century 

Gilt  bronze 

6V2  in.  (16.5  cm.) 

From  the  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 

Collection 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by  the 

Jane  and  Justin  Dart  Foundation 

M.  81. 90. 18 

Literature:  Pal,  1969  A,  p.  55,  no.  87; 


Pal,  1975,  p.  35,  fig.  8;  Dieux  et  demons, 
pp.  107—08,  no.  70;  von  Schroeder, 
p.  596,  no.  155G. 
See  plate  44 

Arhat  Kalika  is  posed  on  a  rocky  seat,  his  right  leg 
folded  horizontally  and  his  left  leg  raised.  He  wears  garments 
with  a  wide  border  incised  with  a  floral  design;  a  sash  with  a 
clasp  near  his  left  shoulder  encircles  his  body  diagonally.  The 
lower  garment  is  pleated  just  below  his  bare  chest.  He  has  a 
shaven  head,  elongated  earlobes,  and  a  scowling  face.  The  two 
metal  bangles  he  holds  help  identify  him  as  Arhat  Kalika. 

Kalika  was  the  son  of  a  rich  brahmin  in  India.  Early  in 
his  life  he  was  found  by  the  Buddha  in  a  cremation  ground  and 
admitted  into  the  Buddhist  order.  The  Buddha  dispatched  him 
to  preach  to  the  divine  populace  of  Kamadhatu,  the  Realm  of 
Desire,  where  children  gave  him  various  ornaments,  such  as  the 
two  bangles,  to  show  their  appreciation.  Tradition  also  states 
that  he  resides  in  the  mythical  land  of  Zangling  along  with 
eleven  hundred  other  arhats. 

Although  this  bronze  may  have  come  from  Tibet,  it  was 
very  likely  made  by  a  Chinese  sculptor.  The  conceptualization  of 
the  rock  formation,  typically  Chinese,  is  rarely  encountered  in 
Tibetan  bronzes.  The  modeling  of  the  body,  the  delineation  of 
the  ribs  around  the  neck,  and  the  remarkably  expressive  face  are 
other  features  that  give  credence  to  a  Chinese  origin.  Notewor- 
thy is  the  very  naturalistic  manner  in  which  the  arhat  sits.  The 
body's  tilt  to  the  right  both  breaks  the  monotony  of  symmetry 


225 


S37 

Padmasambhava 


front 


back 


and  makes  the  figure  particularly  animated.  The  sculpture  con- 
tinues the  tradition  of  lively,  naturalistic  delineations  encoun- 
tered in  the  earlier  arhat  painting  in  this  collection  (P4)  and  in 
the  Yuan  and  early  Ming  representations  of  the  ascetic  Sakyamuni. 
Stylistically,  it  is  close  to  bronzes  dedicated  during  the  reign  of 
the  Ming  emperor  Chenghua  (Ch'eng-hua)  (r.  1465-87). 

S_37 ___ 

Padmasambhava 

Central  or  eastern  Tibet,  16th  century 

Copper  with  traces  of  gilt 

5V4  in.  (14.6  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.  Pal  in  Memory  of 

Christian  Humann 

M.81.183.1 

Although  a  voluminous  literature  has  evolved  around  the 
legendary  life  of  Padmasambhava,  as  a  historical  personage  he 
remains  a  shadowy  figure.  All  that  can  be  said  with  certainty  is 
that  he  was  an  inhabitant  of  Uddiyana  (identified  with  the  pres- 
ent-day Swat  Valley  in  Pakistan)  and  was  invited  to  Tibet  by 
King  Thisong  Detsen  (r.  756-97?).  Apparently,  Padmasam- 
bhava was  renowned  as  a  tantric  exorcist  and  was  invited 
specifically  to  tame  the  demons,  presumably  of  pre-Buddhist  re- 
ligions, who  were  obstructing  the  path  of  Buddhism.  Evidently, 


he  accomplished  this  task  and  returned  to  India,  but  there  is  no 
agreement  either  about  the  duration  of  his  sojourn  in  Tibet  or 
about  his  other  accomplishments.  Nevertheless,  he  has  remained 
the  most  colorful  figure  among  the  apotheosized  saints  of  the 
country  and  is  universally  venerated  as  guru  rinpoche.  He  is  the 
patron  saint  of  the  Nyingmapas,  regarded  by  them  as  the  "sec- 
ond Buddha." 

Characteristic  of  the  tantric  yogi,  Padmasambhava  sits  on 
a  lotus  with  his  legs  crossed,  holding  a  thunderbolt  in  his  right 
hand  and  a  scullcup  in  his  left.  Three  of  his  attributes  are  typi- 
cal of  exorcists:  the  magic  staff,  known  as  the  khatvanga.  which 
rests  in  the  crook  of  his  right  arm;  the  crown;  and  the  lotus 
cloak  which  is  oriented  to  the  four  directions,  thereby  empha- 
sizing his  pervasive  power.  This  type  of  idealized  portrait  of 
Padmasambhava,  therefore,  stresses  his  role  as  a  great  tantric 
master  and  destroyer  of  demons. 

Although  the  statue  is  hollow  cast,  it  is  unusually  heavy 
and  is  probably  filled  with  relics.  The  original  plate  at  the  bot- 
tom is  still  attached  and  does  not  appear  to  have  been  tampered 
with.  The  high  copper  content,  as  well  as  the  workmanship  — 
especially  of  the  floral  motif  on  the  borders  of  the  garments — 
indicate  that  the  sculpture  may  have  been  made  by  a  Newari 
craftsman.  The  khatvanga  is  very  well  rendered  and  the  head  of 


226 


S38 

Sonam  Tsemo 


227 


S39 


Yuthok  Yonten  Gonpo 


the  bodhisattva  above  the  vase  of  immortality  in  the  middle  of 
the  implement  reflects  the  fine,  sensitive  features  of  a  Nepali 
figure. 


S38 


Sonam  Tsemo 

Central  Tibet  (Sakyapa  monastery), 

16th  century 

Copper  alloy  with  paint 

7V4  in.  (18.4  cm.) 

Gift  of  Doris  and  Ed  Wiener 

M.72.108.3 

Literature:  Fishert  pp.  21,  40. 

The  inscription  along  the  base  of  this  work  identifies  the 
figure  as  Sonam  Tsemo  (1142— 1182),  who  was  the  great  Sakyapa 
scholar  and  exegete  responsible  for  organizing  the  vast  body  of 
tantric  literature.  A  forerunner  of  the  more  famous  Phakpa, 
Sonam  Tsemo  wrote  several  works  including  the  rGyd  sde  spyii 
mam  par  bzag,  a  general  analysis  of  the  tantra,  and  Chos  la  hjug 
pai  sgo  (Door  to  enter  into  law). 

The  hierarch  is  seated  on  a  lotus  in  the  characteristic  pos- 
ture, and  his  hands  form  the  gesture  of  turning  the  Wheel  of 
Law — most  appropriate  for  this  great  teacher.  As  in  other  such 
portraits,  his  elaborate  robes  are  decorated  with  incised  floral 
patterns.  It  is  interesting  to  compare  his  bronze  portrait  with 
two  painted  representations  in  the  collection  (PI 3,  P18).  The 
faces  differ  considerably,  as  do  certain  other  details;  however,  it 
is  noteworthy  that  in  all  three  representations  the  scholar  is 
given  long  black  hair  that  falls  down  over  his  shoulders.  This 
seems  to  be  a  characteristic  feature  of  Sonam  Tsemo,  for  most 
other  bareheaded  Sakyapa  monks  have  closely  cropped  hair.  The 
hair  in  this  bronze  is  painted  black  and  details  of  the  garments 
are  carefully  delineated  and  chased. 

S39 

Yuthok  Yonten  Gonpo 
Central  Tibet,  16th  century 
Reddish  brown  bronze  with  paint 
io'/s  in.  (25.7  cm.) 
Gift  of  Paul  F.  Walter 
M. 80. 231. 1 

The  name  of  the  figure  is  incised  on  the  back  of  the  lotus 
base.  Yuthok  Yonten  Gonpo  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  physi- 
cians of  Tibet  and  continues  to  be  worshiped  as  a  divine  figure. 
Although  Yuthok's  biography  does  not  identify  the  monarch  he 
served,  it  has  been  generally  believed  that  he  lived  in  the  eighth 
century  and  was  the  court  physician  to  King  Thisong  Detsen. 
Dargay,  however,  has  shown  from  other  textual  sources  that 
Yuthok  was  a  contemporary  of  the  famous  Sakya  Pandita  (1182- 
125 1)  and  is  said  to  have  spread  the  teachings  contained  in  the 
medical  treatise  rGyud  bzi.  The  biography  also  states  that 
the  physician  went  to  India  several  times  in  search  of  medical 
knowledge. 

His  portrait  follows  an  idealized  norm;  Yuthok  is  de- 
picted as  an  Indian  yogi  or  a  siddha  rather  than  as  a  Tibetan  doc- 
tor. He  is  seated  in  the  familiar  yogic  posture  on  an  open  lotus 
wearing  an  ascetic's  garments.  His  bare  body  displays  a  generous 
paunch  and  the  roll  of  flesh  characteristic  of  an  elderly  person. 
His  advanced  age  is  also  indicated  by  the  streaks  of  white  paint 
added  to  his  goatee,  moustache,  and  matted  hair,  as  well  as  by 


228 


S40 
Milarepa 


229 


the  rings  below  his  eyes.  Indeed,  notwithstanding  the  idealiza- 
tion, the  face  appears  to  be  rendered  realistically;  it  is  possible 
that  a  likeness  of  the  physician  was  taken  during  his  life  and 
served  as  a  model  for  subsequent  renderings.  His  earrings  are  the 
same  type  as  those  given  to  eminent  yogis  like  Milarepa  (Pl4). 

In  keeping  with  his  role,  he  holds  the  vase  of  immortal- 
ity in  his  left  hand.  The  right  hand  holds  a  small  ball  which 
must  represent  the  dried  astringent  fruit  amalaka  (myrobalan), 
which  is  the  distinctive  emblem  of  the  Healing  Buddha  (P8). 
Around  his  left  wrist  is  tied  a  rosary,  a  detail  not  normally  seen 
in  portraits  of  other  ascetic  figures,  that  may  well  have  been  one 
of  the  physician's  personal  belongings. 

S40 

Milarepa 

Central  Tibet,  17th  century 

Dark  brown  bronze  with  polychrome 

7  in.  (17.8  cm.) 

Gift  of  Ed  and  Doris  Wiener 

M.72.108.1 

Milarepa  is  seated  on  a  lotus  in  a  relaxed  posture,  with 
his  body  swinging  asymmetrically  to  the  left.  In  contrast  to  the 
painted  representation  of  him  in  this  collection  (P14),  Milarepa 
is  clad  here  in  the  single  piece  of  cotton  (ras)  that  gave  him  the 
sobriquet  Mi  la  Ras  pa,  the  cotton-clad  Mila.  His  slender,  well- 
formed  arms  and  legs  and  his  boyish  face  are  incongruously  jux- 
taposed with  the  flaccid  flesh  below  his  breasts  and  his  rotund 
belly.  Usually  his  right  hand  cups  his  ear,  but  here  it  is  simply 
raised  near  the  ear;  the  left  is  placed  naturalistically  in  his  lap. 
A  yogic  band  encircles  the  right  side  of  his  torso.  His  face  is 
painted  in  cold  gold  and  his  hair  in  black,  with  the  eyes  painted 
more  sensitively. 

This  bronze  is  not  simply  a  hieratic  portrait  of  the  most 
famous  saint  of  Tibet — it  has  a  narrative  intent.  It  encapsulates 
the  episode  of  the  yogi's  encounter  with  and  conversion  of  the 
hunter  that  is  described  elsewhere  (Pl4).  The  three  other  charac- 
ters of  the  drama — the  stag,  the  dog,  and  the  hunter — are 
added  to  the  base.  The  hunter  with  his  bow  kneels  in  front  of 
Milarepa,  his  back  turned  toward  the  viewer.  The  dog  and  the 
stag  sit  peacefully,  reassured,  in  the  presence  of  the  gentle  saint. 

The  most  intriguing  inconographic  feature  in  the  por- 
trayals of  Milarepa,  the  feature  which  indeed  is  his  hallmark,  is 
the  gesture  made  by  his  right  hand.  In  a  general  way  the  ges- 
ture is  appropriate  for  a  Buddhist  adept  who  is  a  sravaka,  or  lis- 
tener. More  specifically,  Milarepa  was  a  master  of  the  esoteric 
teachings  of  the  tantra  which  were  orally  transmitted  from  guru 
to  disciple.  The  gesture,  therefore,  may  symbolize  Milarepa's 
capacity  to  retain  those  teachings  and  doctrines  in  his  eat.  As  he 
himself  said,  "Unless  the  Secret  Teachings  be  retained  within 
one's  ear,  what  gain  is  it  to  suffer  sorrow?"  It  is  well  known  that 
classical  singers  in  India  often  cup  one  of  their  ears  while  they 
perform  in  order  to  hear  the  subtle  notes  better.  Perhaps  the 
gesture  indicates  that  Milarepa  is  singing  his  sermons,  as  history 
says  he  did. 


S41 


King  Songtsen  Gampo 

Central  Tibet,  17th  century 

Gilt  bronze 

6l/8  in.  (15.5  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Werner  Scharff 

M. 80. 229 

Literature:  Pal,  1981,  pp.  25-29, 

fig.  19. 

Songtsen  Gampo  (d.  649)  is  generally  regarded  as  the 
founder  of  the  first  royal  dynasty  in  Tibet.  A  powerful  monarch 
and  conqueror,  he  forged  central  Tibet  into  a  strong  political 
entity,  and  extended  the  newly  founded  kingdom's  influence  far 
beyond  the  geographical  boundaries  of  the  country.  He  is  said  to 
have  been  converted  to  Buddhism  by  his  two  wives,  who  were 
princesses  from  Nepal  and  China.  Apparently,  these  two  wives 
brought  the  first  Buddhist  images  into  Tibet  and  founded  its 
first  temples.  Tibetans  not  only  remember  Songtsen  Gampo 
with  pride,  but  have  deified  him,  adding  his  image  to  the  Bud- 
dhist pantheon.  Although  other  important  lay  personages  have 
been  apotheosized,  none  has  enjoyed  so  much  veneration  as  this 
first  monarch  of  the  country. 

This  gilt-bronze  sculpture  is  modeled  after  the  more 
famous  portraits  of  Songtsen  Gampo,  the  prized  possessions  of 
the  Jokhang  in  Lhasa.  The  images  in  the  Jokhang  are  thought  to 
have  been  made  soon  after  the  monarch's  death.  Whether  life- 
like or  not,  representations  of  him  are  certainly  idealized  and 
follow  the  general  pattern  of  portraiture  of  religious  figures.  The 
attire  the  king  wears  here  appears  to  reflect  the  period  during 
which  he  lived;  this  is  especially  true  of  the  peculiar,  distinc- 
tively tied  turban.  Indeed,  Chinese  paintings  of  the  Tang 
dynasty  depict  Tibetans  dressed  in  this  manner. 

The  monarch  is  seated  like  a  yogi  on  an  animal  skin 
thrown  across  a  cushion.  His  long  robe  is  held  together  by  a 
waistband.  He  has  a  scowling  face,  and  his  hair  flows  down  both 
shoulders  in  strands  and  curls.  His  right  hand  rests  against  his 
leg  and  forms  the  gesture  of  teaching — although  the  palm  is 
turned  toward  the  body.  The  left  hand  rests  on  his  lap  in  the 
gesture  of  meditation.  From  the  crest  of  his  turban  emerges  the 
head  of  Amitabha,  thereby  establishing  the  king's  identification 
with  the  bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara.  This  homology  is  further 
emphasized  by  the  fact  that  Songtsen  Gampo's  two  wives  are 
traditionally  identified  with  two  emanations  of  the  goddess 
Tara,  the  spiritual  consort  of  Avalokitesvara.  The  most  signifi- 
cant way  in  which  this  portrayal  differs  from  those  in  the 
Jokhang  is  the  scowling  facial  expression — a  characteristic  occa- 
sionally given  to  images  of  Padmasambhava. 

S42 

Mahakala 

Central  Tibet,  16th  century 

Terracotta  with  polychrome 

51/*  in.  (13.3  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.83.22 

The  guardian  deity  Mahakala  is  represented  in  this  terracotta 
sculpture  in  his  six-handed  form.  He  stands  militantly  upon  the 
prostrate  figure  of  the  elephant-headed  Hindu  god,  Ganesa,  who  is 


230 


S4I 

King  Songtsen  Gampo 


S42 
Mahakala 


front 


stretched  out  on  a  lotus.  The  nimbus  behind  him  is  adorned  with 
leaping  flames  which  are  painted  red.  With  his  principal  hands, 
Mahakala  holds  the  chopper  and  the  skullcup  in  his  characteristic 
fashion.  The  four  other  hands  hold  (on  his  right)  the  drum  and  the 
rosary;  and  (on  his  left)  the  rope  and  the  trident.  Against  his  hair 
is  represented  a  seated  Buddha  in  meditation. 

This  form  of  Mahakala  was  popular  both  with  the  Sakyapas  and 
the  Kagyupas,  but  especially  with  the  latter.  Stylistically,  the  rep- 
resentation reflects  the  strongly  Nepali  style  that  was  favored  by 
central  Tibetan  Sakyapas  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries. 
However,  there  is  no  way  to  determine  exactly  where  this  hand- 
some and  well-executed  sculpture  was  made,  for,  as  noted  in  the  in- 
troduction to  this  chapter,  clay  was  a  popular  medium  in  Tibet. 


back 


231 


Ritual  Objects 


Rites  and  rituals  are  an  essential  part  of  Tibetan  religion  and  reflect  its 
practical  side.1  Not  restricted  to  temples  alone,  they  are  performed  in  a  variety  of 
places  and  circumstances  for  a  myriad  of  purposes.  Daily  ceremonies  are  conducted 
in  temples,  although  they  are  perhaps  not  so  elaborate  as  those  that  take  place  in 
Hindu  temples  in  India  and  Nepal.  Throughout  the  year,  too,  special  rituals  are 
performed  to  propitiate  deities,  to  precipitate  rain,  to  avert  hailstorms,  diseases, 
and  death,  to  ensure  good  harvests,  to  exorcise  demons  and  evil  spirits,  and,  of 
course,  to  destroy  the  passions  of  the  mind  and,  ultimately,  the  ego.  All  these  prac- 
tices— whether  occult,  magical,  or  shamanistic — require  various  implements  which 
are  as  important  as  the  images  of  the  deities  in  whose  service  they  are  employed. 
Because  the  objects  are  for  sacred  rather  than  profane  purposes,  they  are  often  ren- 
dered in  precious  metals,  such  as  gold  or  silver,  and  are  sumptuously  encrusted  or 
inlaid  with  turquoise,  carnelians,  crystals,  and  agates  (RIO— R12).  In  addition,  each 
object  is  pregnant  with  symbolic  meaning  and  is  frequently  imbued  with  magical 
power  and  potency. 

How  some  of  the  implements  and  offerings  are  used  in  a  ritual  can  best  be 
grasped  by  looking  at  two  paintings  in  the  collection,  Mia  and  Mjb,  and  from  the 
following  description  of  a  rite  of  consecration  involving  a  mandala  from  a  Vajrayana 
Buddhist  text  written  by  Anangavajra,  a  tantric  master: 

Then  the  worthy  vajra-guru,  filled  with  sympathy  and  intent  on  good,  makes 
manifest  his  compassion  and  calls  the  pupil  into  the  mandala.  It  is  strewn  with 
the  five  kinds  of  delectable  things  resplendent  with  a  canopy  spread  above  [see 
Myb];  it  resounds  with  bells  and  cymbals,  and  is  pleasant  with  flowers  and 
incense  and  garlands  and  heavenly  perfumes;  it  is  the  most  wondrous  resort  of 
Vajrasattva  and  other  divine  beings  and  is  prepared  for  union  with  the  yogini. 
Then  joining  with  the  yogini  the  most  worthy  master  places  the  Thought  of 
Enlightenment  in  the  lotus-vessel,  which  is  the  abode  of  the  Buddhas.  Next  he 
consecrates  the  pupil,  now  joined  with  the  yogini,  with  chowries  and  umbrellas 
held  high  and  with  propitious  songs  and  verses.  Having  thus  bestowed  upon 
him  the  consecration,  that  excellent  gem,  he  should  give  him  the  fivefold  sacra- 
ment, delightful,  divine,  essentially  pure.  It  consists  of  the  precious  jewel,  with 
camphor,  red  sandal- wood  and  vajra- water,  and  as  fifth  component  the  empower- 
ing mantra.  "This  is  your  sacrament,  Beloved,  prescribed  by  former  Buddhas. 
Do  thou  protect  it  always,  and  harken  now  to  the  vow  you  must  keep.  Never 
must  you  take  life,  and  never  abandon  the  Three  Jewels,  and  never  abandon  your 
master.  This  is  the  vow  you  transgress  at  your  peril."2 

Rituals  are  performed  both  communally  and  individually  in  the  temple, 
the  home,  or  in  a  solitary  place  such  as  the  cremation  ground.  The  performances  of 
the  Kalacakra  initiation  in  recent  years  by  both  the  Dalai  Lama  and  the  Karmapa  in 

232 


India  and  in  the  United  States,  respectively,  are  instances  of  communal  spiritual 
practice  which,  according  to  the  present  Dalai  Lama,  is  the  greatest  pleasure  and 
"ultimate  in  nature."3  Whatever  the  merit  of  such  mass  empowerments  or  initiations, 
Vajrayana  generally  advocates  the  "direct  path"  for  the  individual,  which  leads  to 
enlightenment  in  this  life.  This  objective  can  only  be  achieved  by  the  individual 
with  the  help  of  a  guru.  The  importance  of  the  guru,  the  rituals  to  be  performed, 
and  the  use  of  certain  implements  are  exemplified  by  two  accounts  of  individualized 
rituals,  one  written  in  the  fourteenth  century  (though  not  by  an  eyewitness)  and  the 
other  by  a  twentieth-century  observer.  The  earlier  one,  found  in  The  Blue  Annals,4 
is  an  example  of  how  bizarre  a  tantric  rite  can  be.  Dampa  Sangye,  a  mystic  who 
was  especially  important  for  Lamaism  and  whose  portrait  is  in  the  collection  (S31), 
participated  in  this  rite. 

The  account  given  in  The  Blue  Annals  goes  as  follows.  A  great  female 
ascetic  known  as  Macig  (Ma  gcig)  was  born  in  the  year  1062;  all  the  auspicious  signs 
of  divinity  surrounded  her  birth.  She  was  married  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  but,  being 
spiritually  inclined  and  failing  to  persuade  her  husband  to  adopt  a  religious  life,  she 
abandoned  her  home  and  became  a  disciple  of  the  celebrated  guru  Ma  Lotsawa.  She 
learned  many  tantras  and  practices  from  him,  went  into  seclusion  for  four  years,  and, 
after  performing  further  rites,  obtained  the  four  miraculous  powers  (siddhi).  When 
Macig  was  twenty-eight  years  old,  Ma  Lotsawa  was  poisoned;  she  returned  from  her 
wanderings  to  perform  his  funeral  rites.  Beginning  in  her  thirty-first  year  and  for 
three  successive  years  she  was  struck  by  seven  calamities,  some  of  which  were  phys- 
ical and  others  spiritual.  Since  all  attempts  to  cure  herself  failed,  she  decided  to 
visit  Dingri,  where  the  well-known  Dampa  Sangye  was  then  residing. 

Dampa  Sangye,  of  course,  knew  of  her  afflictions  and  told  her  that  she  was 
suffering  because  she  had  transgressed  her  vow  in  respect  to  her  principal  teacher. 
Macig  protested,  but  Dampa  enumerated  her  transgressions,  which  were  seven  in 
number.  She  had,  Dampa  said,  acted  as  a  tantric  assistant  of  other  adepts  without 
her  guru's  permission;  partaken  of  food  in  the  company  of  persons  who  had  defiled 
their  vows;  become  filled  with  the  other  tantric  assistants'  envy  of  the  guru;  broken 
her  undertaking;  sat  on  her  guru's  mat;  not  offered  the  guru  remuneration  for  her 
initiation;  and  had  not  partaken  of  the  sacrificial  foods. 

A  distraught  Macig  asked  how  she  could  be  cured,  and  Dampa  told  her  to 
fetch  seven  objects:  an  egg  laid  by  a  black  hen,  a  right  front  leg  of  a  lamb,  a  skull- 
cup  filled  with  wine,  seven  young  girls  who  had  attained  puberty,  a  relic  of  the 
tathagata,  a  royal  mat,  and  a  piece  of  cloth  bearing  the  footprint  of  her  teacher. 
When  these  were  brought  the  following  remedy  was  suggested:  to  offer  the  mat  to 
Dampa,  to  act  as  a  tantric  assistant  equal  in  position  to  the  teacher  (presumably 
Dampa  himself),  to  wash  herself  and  circumambulate  the  relic  (perhaps  a  choten:  see 
Ri),  to  offer  the  seven  girls  to  the  teacher,  to  worship  the  mutton  and  the  wine,  and 
to  insert  the  egg  in  her  vagina.  The  meat  and  wine  were  served  to  ten  teachers  and 
their  retinue,  and  thereafter — apparently  under  hypnosis — Macig  confessed  her 
transgressions.  Having  thus  cleansed  her,  Dampa  instructed  her  to  look  after  the 
descendants  of  her  original  guru,  make  offerings  to  him,  whitewash  the  choten  con- 
taining his  relics,  and  to  light  lamps.  He  also  asked  her  to  remove  the  egg.  The  egg 
had  turned  black,  and  Dampa  asked  Macig  to  break  it.  When  it  was  broken,  Dampa 
told  her  how  her  misfortunes  were  due  to  the  malevolence  of  a  black  magician  but 
that  now  she  had  been  cured  through  the  rite  she  performed  with  the  master. 

The  purpose  of  the  rite  was  to  indicate  the  superiority  of  Buddhism.  The 
black  magician  Dampa  referred  to  was  a  Bonpo  whose  occult  powers,  which  had 
induced  Macig's  misfortunes,  were  no  match  for  the  superior  efficacy  of  Buddhist 

233 


rites,  although  these,  too,  were  magical  in  nature.  In  any  event,  Macig  lived  hap- 
pily thereafter,  became  a  great  saint,  and  died  at  the  age  of  eighty-eight  in  the  year 
1150.  She  was  a  contemporary  of  Milarepa  and  shared  with  him  as  a  disciple  the 
famous  Phagmotrupa. 

The  second,  more  recent  account  is  about  the  little-understood  and  myste- 
rious cho  rite,  which  was  introduced  by  Dampa  Sangye  and  has  remained  popular 
among  the  mystics  of  Tibet.  This  is  a  psychic  drama  enacted  by  an  individual,  pref- 
erably in  a  cemetery,  and  probably  carries  memories  of  a  shamanistic  rite  from  pre- 
Buddhist  days.  The  purpose  of  the  rite  is  to  destroy  the  demon  of  ego  that  lurks 
within  each  human  and  prevents  recognition  of  the  ultimate  truth — sunyata,  or 
nothingingess.  As  Tucci  writes,  the  practical  side  of  cho  "is  intended  to  cut  off  the 
discursive  process  at  the  root  and  so  directly  help  bring  about  the  insight  that  in 
reality  nothing  exists."3  In  addition  to  Tucci's  serious  discussion  of  this  rite,  there 
is  a  colorful  description  of  a  lama's  performance  of  it  by  an  eyewitness,  Alexandra 
David-Neel,  who  visited  Tibet  earlier  in  this  century. 

It  follows  that,  during  the  performance  of  chod,  which  I  have  compared  to  a 
drama  enacted  by  a  single  actor,  the  latter  may  happen  to  see  himself  suddenly 
surrounded  by  players  of  the  occult  worlds  who  begin  to  play  unexpected 
roles.  .  .  .  Like  any  other  actor,  the  man  who  wants  to  perform  chod  must  first 
learn  his  role  by  heart.  Then  he  must  practice  the  ritual  dance,  his  steps  forming 
geometrical  figures,  and  also  turning  on  one  foot,  stamping  and  leaping  while 
keeping  time  with  the  liturgical  recitation.  Finally,  he  must  learn  to  handle, 
according  to  rule,  the  bell,  the  dorjee,  and  the  magic  dagger  (phurba),  to  beat 
rhythmically  a  kind  of  small  drum  (damaru)  and  to  blow  a  trumpet  made  of  a 
human  femur  (kangling).  .  .  . 

David-Neel  goes  on  to  observe  that  in  a  secluded  spot  in  the  middle  of  the 
night  the  performer  summoned  the  demons  by  blowing  his  bone  trumpet.  He 
imagined  that  a  goddess,  or  dakini,  personifying  his  own  will,  had  emerged  from 
his  cranium  and  with  one  stroke  had  cut  off  his  head.  Ghouls  then  appeared  and 
devoured  him  bit  by  bit  until  the  last  drop  of  blood  was  lapped  up  and  the  last  bone 
thoroughly  chewed.  And  while  this  macabre  and  imaginary  feast  was  taking  place, 
the  performer  chanted  the  following  verse: 

For  ages,  in  the  course  of  renewed  births  I  have  borrowed  from  countless  living 
beings — at  the  cost  of  their  welfare  and  life — food,  clothing,  all  kinds  of  ser- 
vices to  sustain  my  body,  to  keep  it  joyful  in  comfort  and  to  defend  it  against 
death.  Today,  I  pay  my  debt,  offering  for  destruction  this  body  which  I  have 
held  so  dear.7 

However,  David-Neel's  vivid  account  of  the  performance  by  a  young  lama 
is  more  relevant  for  our  topic. 

The  kangling  in  his  left  hand,  the  damaru  lifted  high  in  the  right  and  beating  an 
aggressive  staccato,  the  man  stood  in  a  challenging  attitude,  as  if  defying  some 
invisible  enemy.  .  .  .  Then  he  began  the  ritual  dance,  turning  successively  towards 
the  four  quarters,  reciting  "I  trample  down  the  demon  of  pride,  the  demon  of 
anger,  the  demon  of  lust,  the  demon  of  stupidity.  .  .  ."  He  rearranged  his  toga, 
which  trailed  on  the  ground,  and  having  put  aside  his  damaru  and  the  bone 
trumpet,  he  spread  the  tent,  seized  a  peg  in  one  hand,  a  stone  in  the  other  one, 
and  drove  home  the  pegs  while  chanting  the  liturgy.8 

The  cho  was  very  likely  a  pre-Buddhist  rite  of  shamanistic  import  that  was 
adopted  by  Dampa  Sangye  for  Buddhist  usage.  The  use  of  a  tent  and  pegs  implies 
that  it  was  a  ceremony  associated  with  the  nomads.  It  was  also  practiced  near  a 

234 


corpse  or  in  a  cemetery.  Tibetans  normally  dispose  of  their  dead  by  chopping  up  the 
body  so  that  it  cannot  be  repossessed  by  spirits  or  demons — another  practice  ante- 
dating Buddhism.  Significantly,  when  an  epidemic  disease  breaks  out,  the  chb 
adepts  are  summoned  to  transport  corpses  to  the  cemetery  and  to  chop  up  the 
bodies  and  crush  the  bones.  They  also  perform  a  ceremony,  me  zhags,  to  avert  an 
epidemic  and  another,  gshed  dur,  to  exorcise  the  demon  who  obstructs  a  dead  per- 
son's path  to  paradise.9 

This  ritual  is  an  excellent  example  for  demonstrating  how  Tibetan  Bud- 
dhism evolved  by  accepting  earlier  religious  theories  and  practices  and  elevating 
some  of  the  rites  by  giving  them  a  lofty  and  philosophically  acceptable  interpretation. 
In  the  chb,  an  external  rite  of  shamanistic  exorcism  and  occult  magic  was  internal- 
ized and  given  a  yogic  gloss,  and  became  a  ritual  to  eliminate  the  ego.  The  chb  rite, 
perhaps  unconsciously  echoing  more  primitive  ideas,  also  symbolizes  the  sacrifice 
of  the  self  whereby  one  attains  a  homology  with  the  primal  sacrifice  of  the  creator. 

David-Neel's  observations  further  help  us  to  understand  the  origin  of  one 
of  the  most  important  ritual  implements  of  Tibetan  Buddhism — the  phurpa  or 
phurbu  (R6,  R7).  The  word  phurpa  and  its  Sanskrit  equivalent,  kila,  literally  mean 
"peg,"  and  a  glance  at  either  illustrated  example  will  reveal  that  its  blade  is  really 
not  a  dagger  but  a  peg,  precisely  the  kind  of  peg  used  to  secure  tents.  To  this  basic 
form  of  the  peg,  the  Tibetan  Buddhists  may  have  added  the  dorje  (thunderbolt)  not 
only  to  symbolize  the  religion  but  also  to  make  it  a  more  potent  weapon  because  of 
the  indestructible  nature  of  the  symbol.  The  motif  of  skulls  which  is  sometimes 
attached  to  the  phurpa  may  have  survived  from  earlier  times. 

It  is  significant  that  although  the  words  kila  and  vajrakila  occur  in 
Sanskrit  Buddhist  texts,  not  a  single  implement  remotely  similar  to  the  phurpa  has 
been  discovered  in  India  or  even  in  Nepal.10  Quantities  of  vajras  and  bells  have  been 
discovered  in  Java,  but  not  a  single  phurpa  has  been  found.  Similarly,  in  Japan, 
where  tantric  Buddhism  is  a  living  tradition,  most  other  implements  of  Tibetan 
Buddhist  ritual  are  familiar,  but  not  the  phurpa.  And  in  China,  in  the  numerous 
Buddhist  paintings  discovered  in  Dunhuang  and  other  Central  Asian  sites,  the  vajra 
and  the  chopper  (R8)  are  predominant  ritual  weapons,  but  the  phurpa  does  not 
appear.  Only  later  on,  during  the  Yuan  dynasty,  after  Tibetans  came  to  dominate 
the  Chinese  religious  scene,  do  we  find  the  phurpa  used  in  temples.  It  seems  evident, 
therefore,  that  while  in  tantric  Buddhism  the  vajra  is  generally  the  most  important 
ritual  weapon,  in  Tibet  it  was  replaced,  if  not  superseded,  by  the  native  phurpa. 

The  importance  of  the  phurpa  in  Tibetan  ritual  is  demonstrated  by  the  spe- 
cial immovable  phurpa  found  in  many  Chinese  as  well  as  Tibetan  monasteries.  It  is 
often  of  gigantic  size  (four  to  five  feet  high),  made  of  iron,  and  believed  to  be  the 
source  of  potency  for  all  smaller  phurpas  used  in  actual  ceremonies.  One  of  the  most 
famous  examples  of  such  a  powerful  phurpa  is  that  preserved  in  the  Sera  monastery.11 
The  claim  that  it  arrived  from  India  like  a  missile  probably  reflects  a  pious  wish, 
but  it  may  disguise  archaic  shamanistic  ritual  involving  the  imaginary  flight  of  the 
shaman's  arrow.12  Touching  the  object  is  considered  a  protection  against  evil  spirits, 
and  once  a  year,  after  the  Dalai  Lama  has  done  so,  the  public  is  allowed  to  touch  it. 
Indeed,  so  important  and  potent  is  this  implement  in  Tibetan  ritual  that,  ultimately, 
the  phurpa  itself  was  personified  as  a  deity  (S21). 

The  dorje,  the  chopper,  the  cot's  leg  (khatvanga),  and  the  sword  are  also 
important  weapons,  employed  in  various  rituals  and  exorcism  ceremonies  and  fre- 
quently carried  by  the  deities  as  well.  All  these  instruments  are  considered  means 
of  removing  ignorance  which,  in  Buddhist  parlance,  is  "discriminating  thought." 

235 


But  every  image  and  every  object  has  several  levels  of  meaning,  and  while  the  phurpa 
may  literally  be  used  to  exorcise  demons,  both  internal  and  external,  Mahakala 
(S24,  S27)  uses  his  chopper  to  cut  up  nonbelievers  and  Manjusri's  sword  (S9)  is 
the  sword  of  knowledge  (jnanakbadga)  which  symbolically  cuts  through  the  fog 
of  ignorance.  Each  is  a  weapon  of  destruction  but  also  an  instrument  of  salvation, 
and  each  may  further  embody  the  axis  mundi  symbolism. 

The  drum  and  the  human  bone  trumpet  are  essential  elements  of  the  cho 
rite,  and  both  probably  reflect  an  ancient  shamanistic  tradition.  The  drum  was,  and 
may  still  be,  the  instrument  par  excellence  of  shamanistic  ritual  involving  both 
"magical  music"  and  the  "music  of  noise."13  The  former  is  the  music  that  signifies, 
in  the  case  of  the  shamans,  a  celestial  journey  through  an  ecstatic  experience;  the 
latter  is  the  music  that  drives  away  evil  spirits.  Music  in  one  form  or  another  accom- 
panies all  rituals,  whether  Hindu  or  Buddhist,  and  Tibetan  religious  ceremonies 
are  not  exceptions.  Music  is  considered  to  be  similar  to  a  mantra,  and  whether  vocal 
— such  as  chants  and  recitations  of  the  proper  liturgy — or  instrumental — such  as 
that  provided  by  drums,  trumpets,  the  bell,  or  the  conch  shell  (Rll) — sound  is  of 
fundamental  significance  in  the  performance  of  all  ritual.  The  muttering  of  the 
mantra  om  mani  padme  hum  is  considered  the  surest  and  quickest  way  to  achieve  one's 
spiritual  goal;  the  syllable  om  is  the  primal  sound  symbolizing  the  Absolute,  or 
Universal  Consciousness,  in  Indian  thought.  Seed  (vija)  mantras,  such  as  brim,  hum, 
and  lam,  are  syllables  or  elemental  sounds  that  constitute  the  basis  of  all  Hindu  and 
Vajrayana  Buddhist  liturgy. 

Various  instruments  have  different  levels  of  usage  and  meaning.  The  most 
common  and  indispensable  musical  instrument  in  tantric  Buddhist  ritual  is  the 
bell.  Gods  and  apotheosized  lamas  alike  hold  this  popular  symbol,  along  with  the 
thunderbolt,  in  their  hands.  During  a  ritual  the  priest  or  lama  grasps  the  thunder- 
bolt with  his  right  hand  and  the  bell  with  his  left;  the  two  together  symbolize  the 
bodhicitta,  or  mind  of  enlightenment.  The  thunderbolt  signifies  the  means  (upaya) 
or  fitness  of  action,  while  the  bell  symbolizes  wisdom;  the  former  is  polarized  as 
male  and  the  latter  as  female.  Their  union  is  expressed  in  the  gesture  of  two  hands, 
holding  the  attributes,  crossed  against  the  chest  (P5).  The  bell  has  an  elemental 
function  and  its  sound,  like  those  made  by  the  trumpet  and  the  drum,  is  regarded 
as  auspicious;  it  is  said  to  drive  away  evil  spirits.  Like  the  church  bell,  the  Buddhist 
hand  bell  sends  the  message  to  the  evil  spirits  that  they  must  stay  away  from  the 
consecrated  area  where  the  ritual  is  being  performed. 

The  conch  shell  is  another  instrument  with  multiple  meanings  and  uses. 
In  India  it  is  used  more  frequently  than  the  bell  to  mark  all  auspicious  occasions, 
whether  sacred  or  secular.  How  old  the  custom  is  and  whence  it  originated  are  not 
known,  but  it  probably  started  near  the  seacoast,  where  the  shell  is  found.  Trans- 
planted to  Tibet  with  Buddhist  rituals,  it  is  used  multifariously.  Eleanor  Olson 
summarizes  those  uses  admirably  in  the  following  passage: 

The  conch  is  but  one  of  many  trumpets  which  play  a  part  in  Tibet's  unique 
temple  music.  As  a  natural  trumpet  which  comes  from  watery  regions,  the  conch 
is  believed  to  have  magical  power  over  rain.  Thus,  its  flange  is  often  decorated 
with  dragons  and  clouds.  To  stop  the  hail  which  is  a  frequent  menace  to  Tibetan 
crops,  the  monks  stand  on  the  temple  roofs  and  blow  the  conch  in  all  directions, 
taking  turns  at  breathing  so  that  the  sound  is  prolonged  in  a  succession  of  great 
heaving  waves.  The  conch  also  serves  as  an  offering  vessel.  Filled  with  curds,  it 
is  one  of  the  Offerings  of  the  Five  Senses,  the  others  being  a  stringed  musical 
instrument  (hearing),  flowers  (smell),  mirror  (sight),  and  cloth  (touch).14 


236 


Water  plays  an  essential  role  in  Tibet's  spiritual  life  in  general  and  in 
ritual  in  particular.  Every  lake  in  Tibet  is  regarded  as  sacred  and  is  the  habitat  of 
spirits  known  as  lu.  Aquatic  creatures  and  plants,  such  as  the  lotus,  are  generally 
present  in  both  Hindu  and  Buddhist  iconography,  and  water  is  an  indispensable 
ingredient  in  most  religious  rituals.  It  is  essential  for  initiation  (abhisbeka),  which 
is  as  basic  to  esoteric  Buddhism  as  baptism  is  to  Christianity.  A  full  vase  is  an  auspi- 
cious emblem  for  all  occasions  in  India,  and  is  regarded  there  as  a  symbol  of  the 
womb  as  well  as  of  the  universe.  In  Tibet,  vessels  or  pots  (kalasa)  are  also  fit  recep- 
tacles for  the  deities  themselves,  and  most  offerings  are  made  to  the  vessel  rather 
than  to  the  deity  directly.  Various  kinds  of  water  containers  are  used  by  the  lamas 
for  their  own  ablutions,  for  purifying  virtually  anything  and  everything,  and  for 
initiation.  Made  of  silver  or  gold  and  encrusted  with  semiprecious  stones  (R12) 
whenever  the  lamas  or  monasteries  are  wealthy  enough,  such  water  containers  are 
always  present  on  altars. 

Once  such  vase  is  the  tshe  bum  which  is  held  by  Amitayus,  the  tathagata  of 
eternal  life  (PI).  It  is  used  for  all  life-prolonging  ceremonies  (tshe  wang)  and  is  asso- 
ciated with  the  goddesses  Tara  and  Ushnishavijaya.  In  the  ceremony,  the  consecrated 
water  becomes  transformed  into  an  elixir  or  nectar.  The  vase  held  by  Amitayus  is 
connected  by  a  cord  to  the  heart  of  the  officiating  priest  or  monk;  through  this  cord 
the  life  power  passes  from  the  divine  source  to  the  mortal  body.  In  other  instances  a 
vase  may  be  held  over  the  recipient's  head.  The  chanted  liturgy  describes  the  process 
of  transfer: 


All  these  dissolve  into  the  flask  in  his  hands,  and  from  their  dissolving  it  over- 
flows with  wavelets  of  white  nectar,  which  enters  into  me  through  the  hole  of 
Brahma  in  the  top  of  my  head;  it  in  turn  dissolves  into  the  wheel  in  my  heart, 
with  its  seed  and  garland  of  the  mantra;  from  this  there  falls  a  stream  of  nectar 
which  fills  up  the  entire  inside  of  my  body  and  washes  its  entire  outside,  so  that 
it  cleanses  and  makes  pure  all  the  sins,  obscurations,  diseases,  and  impediments 
to  life  which  I  have  accumulated  from  beginningless  time;  it  restores  my  life  and 
merit  and  renews  the  vows  and  pledges  I  have  broken,  and  I  gain  the  magical  at- 
tainment of  deathless  life.13 

Apart  from  water,  both  beer  and  blood  are  appropriate  libations  for  the 
gods  as  well  as  for  the  participants  in  a  ritual.  While  blood  is  offered  and  imbibed 
in  esoteric  rituals,  it  is  more  common  to  use  either  water  or  beer  as  a  substitute. 
The  liquid  is  usually  offered  in  a  real  skullcup  made  of  the  cranium  of  a  human,  or 
in  a  simulated  one  (R5)  which  may  once  have  been  lined  with  a  genuine  skull. 

Human  bones  play  an  extremely  important  role  in  Tibetan  ritual.  We  have 
already  mentioned  the  kangling  (a  trumpet  made  from  a  femur)  and  the  skull.  An 
apron  made  of  human  bones  is  worn  by  terrifying  deities  (S29)  and  by  tantric 
priests  during  the  performance  of  certain  esoteric  rites.  Sometimes  the  bones  of  a 
dead  lama  are  gathered  and  inserted  in  a  chbten  or  an  image.  In  certain  rituals  bones 
may  also  be  crushed  to  powder  and  eaten  as  a  sacrament.  Among  other  human 
organs  used  ritually  are  the  eyes,  the  tongue,  and  the  heart,  all  of  which  are  shown 
as  symbolic  offerings  in  two  paintings  in  the  collection  (P30,  P31).  The  use  of 
bones  and  other  organs  is  not  unknown  in  Indian  tantric  rituals,  but  the  use  of  human 
bone  seems  to  be  more  pervasive  and  intense  in  the  Tibetan  religious  experience. 

Tibetans  also  sacrifice  flesh,  real  and  symbolic,  to  their  deities.  It  may  be 
recalled  that  among  the  objects  Macig  had  to  bring  to  Dampa  were  a  leg  of  lamb 
and  wine.  The  five  kinds  of  flesh  offered  to  the  deities  are  that  of  cattle,  dog,  horse, 
elephant,  and  man.  In  Indian  tantric  rites  the  dog  and  the  elephant  are  excluded. 
However,  in  most  Tibetan  ceremonies  such  flesh  is  offered  symbolically,  either  as  a 


237 


permanent  offering  in  painted  banners  (P30,  P31)  or  in  the  form  of  torma  (gtor  ma). 
A  torma  is  an  effigy,  modeled  or  molded  of  flour  and/or  yak's  butter,  that  is  offered 
as  a  substitute,  since  an  actual  sacrifice  would  necessitate  killing.  Colorfully 
painted,  such  tormas  may  be  faithful  copies  of  natural  creatures  or  may  take  abstract, 
imaginative  forms.  The  mold  from  which  the  dough  substitutes  are  made  is  called  a 
zan  par  (R17)  and  is  usually  of  wood;  the  figures  are  varied,  charming,  and  lively.16 

The  highest  sacrifice  one  can  make,  however,  is  of  one's  own  body.  The 
imaginary  sacrifice  of  the  body,  which  can  symbolize  both  a  personal  act  of  compas- 
sion (by  feeding  hungry  beings)  and  the  reenactment  of  the  cosmic  drama  of  primal 
sacrifice,  as  performed  in  the  cho  rite,  is  not  an  isolated  occult  act.  It  embodies  an 
idea  that  is  far  more  ancient.  The  entire  bodhisattva  concept  is  based  on  the  idea  of 
self-sacrifice  as  a  supreme  act  of  altruism,  and  it  was  out  of  despair  at  the  misery  of 
the  world  that  the  bodhisattva  Avalokitesvara's  head  was  split  asunder  (S3).17  This 
self-sacrifice  forms  the  central  theme  in  the  ancient  cycle  of  birth  stories  of  the 
Buddha  known  as  the  jataka. 

Most  ritual  objects  in  the  collection,  with  the  exception  of  the  butter 
lamps  (Rl4),  were  and  are  used  in  temples  by  initiated  lamas  who  alone  have  the 
right  and  duty  to  perform  the  various  rituals.  In  this  and  in  many  other  ways  the 
customs  are  not  different  from  those  of  Judaism  and  Christianity,  in  which  the  rabbi 
or  priest  performs  most  acts  of  worship.  The  Tibetan  layman's  participation  in  the 
religious  experience  is  limited  to  visiting  temples,  contributing  funds  for  the  per- 
formance of  the  rites,  praying,  repeating  the  formula  om  mani  padme  bum  and  rotat- 
ing the  wheel  as  he  circumambulates  a  choten,  lighting  butter  lamps,  and  witnessing 
the  public  ceremonies  performed  by  the  lamas  during  special  religious  festivals.  On 
such  occasions  masked  ceremonial  dances  are  done  to  conquer  the  evil  spirits,  and 
large  embroidered  or  appliqued  thankas  are  hung  from  the  walls  of  the  monasteries 
to  be  worshiped  and  admired. 

A  layman,  especially  a  traveler,  may  worship  the  mountain  and  nature 
spirits  at  every  pass  and  crossroad  by  planting  a  banner,  placing  another  stone  on  an 
existing  heap,  or  by  burning  juniper  or  other  aromatic  herbs  or  woods.  The  devout 
traveler  always  carries  a  portable  shrine  (R15),  known  as  a  gau,  containing  the  image 
of  his  tutelary  deity  (yidam)  and  will,  of  course,  visit  every  monastery,  temple,  or 
choten  in  his  path.  Thus,  just  as  the  modern  Western  businessman  may  mix  business 
with  pleasure,  Tibetan  merchants  mixed,  and  presumably  still  do,  business  with 
religion — and  sometimes  with  pleasure  as  well. 


Almost  every  Tibetan  house  has  a  chapel  or  at  least  an  altar  in  a  corner 
where  the  householder  worships  his  personal  deities.  Even  the  humble  tent  of  the 
nomad  is  not  without  such  an  altar.  Thankas  may  hang  behind  the  altar,  which  is 
furnished  with  images  of  bronze,  wood,  or  silver.  Butter  lamps  and  little  lidded 
cups  are  invariably  placed  in  front  of  these  images.  Every  morning  the  head  of  the 
household  or  its  most  senior  member  fills  the  cups  with  water  (yon  chab).  Lamps  are 
lighted  continually,  and  incense  is  burned  early  in  the  morning.  The  latter  is 
perhaps  the  most  important  domestic  ritual  act  performed  by  a  layman  and  is 
known  as  sang  (bsangs)}8  Burning  aromatic  herbs  for  the  purpose  of  ritual  fumiga- 
tion clears  the  air  of  evil  spirits,  and  is  not  an  indulgence  in  psychedelic  fantasy. 
The  sang  is  accompanied  by  prayers  and  invocations. 

Another  act  closely  associated  with  the  sang  is  the  ngan  (brngan),  an  offer- 
ing to  the  nebulous  powers  that  lurk  in  space,  such  as  "the  powers  of  the  ground 
and  the  earth  on  which  the  maker  of  offerings  lives.  .  .and  also  the  various  lha  the 
deity  of  the  house,  of  the  herd,  of  the  stove,  room.  .  .etc.19  Here,  indeed,  the  gods 

238 


and  goddesses  are  no  longer  illusions,  regardless  of  what  the  texts  and  the  mystics 
may  say.  These  domestic  rituals  are  both  elemental  and  instinctive,  and  no  matter 
how  disguised  by  any  cloak  of  sophisticated  symbolism  or  religious  profundity,  they 
constitute  the  substance  of  religious  practice. 

Tibetan  ritual  objects  were  crafted  from  a  wide  variety  of  materials  and 
reveal  diverse  and  visually  exciting  shapes  and  forms.  Since  such  objects  were  used 
for  the  service  of  the  gods,  they  were  often  made  as  sumptuous  as  possible  with  rich 
encrustations  of  gems  and  semiprecious  stones.  As  already  mentioned,  Tibetans 
were  inordinately  fond  of  enriching  the  surfaces  of  their  metal  objects  with  gilding 
and  with  stone  inlay;  these  ritual  implements  provided  them  with  the  opportunity 
to  indulge  their  taste  in  a  lavish  manner.  Gilt  bronze,  silver,  crystals,  and  tur- 
quoises figure  prominently  among  the  broad  array  of  ritual  objects  in  the  Museum's 
collection.  Aesthetically  appealing  and  visually  resplendent  as  these  objects  are,  it  is 
not  always  easy  to  determine  their  provenance  and  exact  dates;  thus,  the  attribu- 
tions made  in  this  catalogue  must  be  regarded  as  tentative.  Nevertheless,  the  imple- 
ments are  fascinating  as  much  for  their  exquisite  craftsmanship  as  for  their  rich 
forms  and  symbolism. 


Notes 


i .    For  a  brief  and  general  review  of  Tibetan 
rituals,  see  E.  Olson's  essay  in  Pal,  1969 
A;  for  a  more  elaborate  account  of  some 
of  the  important  rituals  and  oracles  in 
Tibetan  Buddhism,  see  Nebesky- 
Wojkowitz,  Part  II;  for  a  detailed  de- 
scription of  the  cult  and  ritual  of  the 
goddess  Tara  as  practiced  by  the  Kagy- 
upas,  see  Beyer. 

2.  Conze,  p.  245. 

3.  As  quoted  by  Olson  (Pal,  1969  A,  p.  40) 
from  My  Land  and  My  People  by  the  Dalai 
Lama  (New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1962). 

4.  See  Roerich,  1979,  pp.  220-26,  for  the 
entire  account. 

5.  Tucci,  1980,  p.  87.  On  this  and  the  fol- 
lowing pages  Tucci  succinctly  explains 
this  particular  rite  and  its  symbolic 
importance. 

6.  David-Neel,  1971,  pp.  149-5°-  For  an 
amusing  story  regarding  the  performance 
of  ch'6,  see  Beyer,  p.  282. 

7.  David-Neel,  1971,  pp.  I5°-5I- 

8.  Ibid.,  p.  158. 

9.  Tucci,  1980,  p.  92 

10.    For  instance,  vajrakila  is  mentioned  in 
the  Guhyasamajatantra  (B.  Bhat- 


tacharyya,  ed.,  Guhyasamajatantra, 
Baroda,  India,  1967,  pp.  67,  68,  91-92, 
165)  as  an  implement  used  mainly  in  de- 
structive magic  (abhicara).  Although  it  is 
not  described,  it  appears  to  have  been 
made  of  human  bone  and  was  a  few 
inches  in  size  ( indnuskasthimayam  kilain 
ashtdngidapramanatahl ').  The  kila  used  by 
Nepali  tantrics  (see  Huntington,  1975, 
pp.  48-56)  may  have  been  influenced  by 
the  phurpa  and  probably  does  not  follow 
an  Indian  prototype. 

11.  Ferrari,  pp.  42,  100-101. 

12.  Meredith,  pp.  238-39. 

13.  See  Eliade,  pp.  i68ff. 

14.  Olson  in  Pal,  1969  A,  p.  43. 

15.  Beyer,  p.  381. 

16.  See  Tucci,  1980  and  Beyer  for  elaborate 
discussions  of  the  use  of  torma  in  Tibetan 
ritual. 

17.  See  Pal,  1982  A,  for  a  discussion  of  the 
symbolism  behind  this  fascinating 
iconography. 

18.  See  Tucci,  1980,  pp.  I99ff,  for  a  detailed 
explanation  of  this  domestic  ritual  act. 

19.  Ibid.,  p.  200. 


230 


Ri 


Chbten 


Ri 


Chbten 

Central  Tibet,  12th  century 

Dark  brown  bronze 

h:  6V2  in.  (16.5  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M. 76. 130 

The  chbten  (the  word  is  Tibetan  for  stupa,  literally  mean- 
ing heap  or  mound),  is  the  most  prominent  and  ubiquitous 
symbol  of  Buddhism.  It  can  have  many  different  shapes  and 
various  symbolic  meanings.  In  Tibetan  Buddhism  it  usually 
symbolizes  the  mind  of  the  Buddha.  Small  chotens  such  as  this 
one  generally  served  as  reliquaries  for  important  personages, 
both  lay  and  monk,  and  often  the  hollow  interior  was  stuffed 
with  relics  and  charms.  This  one  has  yielded  rolls  of  cotton, 
sand,  some  grains,  and  bits  of  paper  with  faint  drawings  of 
scarcely  recognizable  figures.  A  recent  article  convincingly  dem- 
onstrates that  chotens  of  this  shape  and  material  were  probably 
made  for  the  use  of  monks  of  the  Kadampa  order  {see  Hatt). 

The  base  of  this  chbten  has  an  open  lotus  form,  from 
which  rises  a  squarish  drum  with  two  simple  moldings  encir- 
cling it  in  the  middle.  Above  the  drum  is  a  square  section  with 
moldings  and  lintels  that  appear  to  represent  gateways  facing 
each  of  the  cardinal  directions.  This  square  section  is  known  in 
Sanskrit  as  the  harmika.  Above  it  rises  a  pyramidal  arrangement 
often  or  thirteen  rings  known  as  chatravali  (each  ring  being 
called  a  chatra,  or  parasol),  which  symbolize  the  stages  {bhumi)  of 
enlightenment,  usually  ten  or  thirteen  in  number.  This  spire  of 
chatras  is  shaded  by  a  wider  parasol  with  lotus  leaves  on  the  out- 


240 


side;  the  crowning  element  is  a  closed  lotus.  All  these  elements 
make  the  stupa  or  chbten  an  object  of  simple  but  elegant  design 
and  a  potent  cosmic  symbol  as  well. 

R2 

Two  Plaques  from  a  Ritual  Diadem 

Western  or  central  Tibet,  13th— 14th 

century 

Wood  with  traces  of  gilding  and  lacquer 

h.  of  each:  12V2  in.  (31.7  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.  Pal 

M.79.151.1-2 

These  two  deeply  carved  wooden  plaques  were  once 
panels  of  a  ritual  diadem  worn  by  a  priest  or  monk  during  par- 
ticular initiation  ceremonies  {see  R3).  Except  for  minor  varia- 
tions, both  plaques  are  identical  in  design.  The  central  figure 
seated  on  an  elaborate  throne  is  the  transcendental  Buddha.  The 
one  with  both  hands  on  his  lap  in  the  meditation  gesture  (dhy- 
anamudra)  is  Amitabha;  the  other,  with  the  right  hand  raised 
forming  the  gesture  of  reassurance  (abhayamudra),  is  Amogha- 
siddhi.  Both  Buddhas  are  bejeweled  and  crowned.  The  five 
lobes  of  the  crown  are  of  the  same  shape  as  the  two  plaques. 
The  thrones  of  both  are  of  identical  design,  with  lotus,  over- 
hanging carpet,  personified  nagas  supporting  the  seat,  lions 
trampling  elephants  (gajasimha),  heralding  makaras,  roundels  with 
symbols,  two  more  nagas,  and  a  kyung  at  the  summit. 

The  differences  between  the  two  plaques  are  purely  icon- 
ographic.  Below  Amitabha's  seat  are  two  peacocks — the  peacock 
being  his  vehicle — while  Amoghasiddhi  is  attended  by  two 
garudas.  The  two  symbols  above  Amitabha's  head  are  the  conch 
shell  and  the  lotus,  while  those  above  Amoghasiddhi  are  the 
bell  and  the  wheel.  A  tree  is  placed  at  the  apex  of  the  Amitabha 
plaque  and  a  dorje  at  the  apex  of  the  other. 

These  two  plaques  are  not  only  extremely  rare  examples 
of  wooden  diadems,  but  also  exemplify  the  best  Tibetan  wood- 
carving.  The  elaborate  design  of  the  throne  is  derived  ultimately 
from  Pala  prototypes.  Stylistically,  they  are  related  to  the  brass 
Manjusri  (S9)  and  to  the  two  early  Kadampa  thankas  (PI,  P2). 
The  animals  and  nagas  are  particularly  lively,  and  the  empty, 
cut-away  areas  accentuate  their  forms  with  great  clarity. 

R3 

Ritual  Diadem 

Northern  Nepal,  19th  century 

Silver,  gold,  and  paint 

h.  of  each  panel:  7V2  in.  (19  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  Ronald  M.  Lawrence 

M.  74.139.15 

Such  crowns  or  diadems  are  used  by  priests  and  monks 
during  religious  ceremonies,  such  as  abhisheka  (initiation),  and 
are  usually  embellished  with  images  of  the  five  transcendental 
Buddhas  or  their  mystic  syllables  (vijamantra).  While  wearing 
it,  the  monk  or  priest  himself  becomes  homologized  with  the 
divine  essence  and  a  fitting  receptacle  tor  cosmic  forces.  In 
Tibet,  groups  of  monks,  especially  among  the  Kagyupas,  may 
wear  them  during  both  solitary  and  collective  initiations.  {See 
Beyer,  pp.  399ff  for  a  detailed  description  of  the  various  initia- 
tions in  connection  with  the  cult  of  Tara.) 


R2 

Two  Plaques  from  a  Ritual  Diadem 


241 


R3 

Ritual  Diadem 


R4 

Thunderbolt  (Dorje) 


The  five  Buddhas,  from  the  viewer's  left,  are  Amitabha, 
Vairocana,  Akshobhya,  Ratnasambhava,  and  Amoghasiddhi, 
who  are  the  five  transcendental  Buddhas  of  Vajrayana  Bud- 
dhism. Below  each  is  a  polychromed  kirttimukha  (face  of  glory), 
acting  as  a  guardian.  The  remaining  space  in  each  panel  is  filled 
with  curling  vines  or  tendrils  whose  meandering  shapes  form 
striking  contrasts  against  the  blue  cloth. 

This  diadem  was  acquired  in  northern  Nepal,  where 
Lamaism  is  the  principal  religion.  It  may  have  been  made 
locally  or  imported  from  Tibet. 

R4 

Thunderbolt  (Dorje) 

Eastern  Tibet,  18th  century 

Gilt  bronze,  once  inlaid  with  stones 

1:  6  in.  (15.2  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.81.4 

The  thunderbolt  is  possibly  the  most  important  symbol 
of  Vajrayana  Buddhism.  Not  only  is  it  responsible  for  the  name 
of  this  form  of  Buddhism,  but  it  is  also  the  very  symbol  of 
bodhtcitta,  or  enlightenment.  Apart  from  symbolizing  the  faith, 
the  thunderbolt  is  an  important  instrument  in  rituals,  especially 
for  exorcising  evil  spirits,  and  is  a  frequent  attribute  of  gods 
and  lamas. 

The  implement  is  designed  with  a  central  shaft  that  is 
pointed  at  each  end.  The  middle  section  consists  of  two  lotuses 
from  which  spring,  at  each  end,  the  four  prongs  of  the  dorje.  To- 


242 


gcther  with  the  projecting  and  pointed  central  shaft,  each  end 
becomes  five-pronged.  Each  of  the  outside  four  prongs  is  de- 
signed as  the  head  and  snout  of  the  mythical  makara;  thus  the 
central  shaft  may  represent  the  tongue  of  the  animal  as  well  as 
symbolizing  tongues  of  flame,  although  the  aquatic  significance 
of  the  makara  cannot  be  ignored.  Like  the  chbten,  the  dorje  is  a 
cosmic  symbol;  its  shaft  may  also  represent  the  cosmic  pillar. 

R5 

Skullcup  with  Lid 

Eastern  Tibet  (Derge)  or  China, 

18th  century 

Gilt  silver 

6V2  x  8  in.  (16.5  x  20.3  cm.) 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by 

Anna  Bing  Arnold 

M. 79. 243. 4 

Literature:  "Skullcup  with  Lid,"  Los 

Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art  Bulletin, 

vol.  xxvi,  1980,  p.  52. 

This  cup  is  shaped  like  a  human  skull,  with  deep  eye 
sockets  and  prominently  displayed  teeth  made  of  silver.  One 
row  of  teeth  is  attached  to  the  cup  and  the  other  to  the  lid.  The 
gilding  and  the  silver  contrast  effectively  to  make  the  imagery 
both  vivid  and  macabre.  The  three  supports  for  the  cup  consist 
of  two  skulls  in  the  front  and  a  placid  human  or  divine  head  at 
the  back. 


R5 


Skullcup  with  Lid 


In  contrast  to  the  cup,  the  lid  is  sumptuously  adorned 
with  lively  representations  of  natural  and  cosmic  symbols.  A 
peonylike  lotus  with  foliage  springs  from  stylized  waters  in  the 
protruding  area  of  the  lid  that  extends  over  what  would  be  the 
jaw  of  the  skull.  The  principal  portion  of  the  lid  is  decorated 
with  a  mandala  of  two  receding  circles.  The  outer  circle  shows  a 
conceptually  rendered  mountain;  in  the  larger  space  of  the  inner 
circle  there  is  a  four-pronged  dorje  known  as  the  visva-vajra.  or 
cosmic  thunderbolt.  A  fifth  dorje.  separately  cast,  is  attached  to 
the  center  of  the  visva-vajra.  Functionally,  it  served  as  the  handle 
for  the  lid,  but  symbolically,  it  represents  the  religion  itself. 
It  is  given  further  cosmic  significance  by  the  addition  of  motifs 
representing  water,  the  lotus,  and  Mt.  Meru,  the  cosmic  axis. 

Skullcups,  which  serve  as  emblems  of  terrifying  deities, 
are  an  essential  element  of  tantric  ritual.  Lamas  and  mahasid- 
dhas  are  often  shown  holding  skullcups  (S33,  S37),  from  which 
they  drink  consecrated  liquor  or  beer  during  the  performance  of 
esoteric  rites.  Actual  blood  may  be  imbibed  on  occasions;  in 
such  a  ritual,  a  lama  probably  symbolizes  one  of  the  gods  drink- 
ing the  blood  of  his  victim. 

Though  skullcups  are  frequently  formed  from  an  actual 
human  cranium  lined  with  metal,  this  example  is  made  entirely 
of  metal.  It  has  been  made  particularly  expressive  by  its  depic- 
tion of  the  row  of  teeth  and  the  deep  eye  sockets.  Moreover,  the 
elaborate  and  rich  design  of  the  lid,  with  its  cosmic  symbolism, 
makes  this  an  unusual  example.  Its  style,  especially  the  use  of 
natural  motifs,  is  borrowed  from  the  imperial  Chinese  robes  and 
brocades  often  presented  to  important  Tibetan  monasteries  by 
the  emperors.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  be  certain  whether  this 
beautiful  skullcup  was  made  in  China  or  in  eastern  Tibet. 


243 


R6 


Ritual  Dagger  (Phurpa) 


R6 


Ritual  Dagger  {Phurpa) 

Western  Tibet,  16th  century 

Wood  with  polychrome 

1:  19  in.  (48.3  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.78.45 

The  phurpa,  or  phurbu,  is  perhaps  the  most  distinctive 
and  enigmatic  of  all  Tibetan  ritual  objects.  The  word  is  vari- 
ously rendered  in  English  as  "magic  dagger,"  "enchanting  dag- 
ger," "peg,"  or  "nail,"  and  in  French  as  arme.  Though  many  articles 
and  even  a  book  have  been  devoted  to  this  implement,  its  sym- 
bolism and  origin  remain  elusive.  It  has  been  compared  by  one 
scholar  with  the  divination  arrow  of  the  shamans  (Meredith); 
another  (Stein  1977,  p.  62)  sees  in  it  diverse  connotations  of 
"vajra.  arme  terrible,  langue  qui  absorbe  et  goute,  et  phallus." 


The  component  phur  in  the  words  phurpa  and  phurbu  is  a 
Tibetan  rendering  of  the  Sanskrit  word  kila.  meaning  peg  or 
nail.  As  was  recently  shown,  the  phurpa  is  an  implement  that 
nails  down  as  well  as  binds  (Wayman  1981).  It  was  thus  by  stab- 
bing a  phurpa  into  the  earth,  and  thereby  nailing  and  binding 
the  evil  spirits,  that  Padmasambhava,  regarded  as  the  inventor 
of  the  implement,  consecrated  the  ground  on  which  the  Samye 
monastery  was  established  in  the  eighth  century.  Whatever  the 
original  shape  of  an  Indian  kila  may  have  been — none  has  sur- 
vived— it  seems  very  likely  that  in  Tibet  the  form  of  the  phurpa. 
with  its  three-sided  blade,  was  suggested  by  the  pegs  that 
were  driven  into  the  earth  to  hold  the  rope  stays  of  the  tent. 
Padmasambhava  may  well  have  picked  up  one  such  peg  from 
a  tent  of  a  nonbeliver  and  used  it  dramatically  to  exorcise  the 
so-called  "malevolent"  spirits  of  pre-Buddhist  religion  in  Tibet. 

This  unusually  large  and  handsome  phurpa  is  a  fine  ex- 
ample of  those  which  were  carved  in  wood  and  painted.  Charac- 
teristically, a  snake  descends  down  each  face  of  the  three-sided 
blade.  The  long  handle  is  carved  with  a  makara  at  the  hilt;  un- 
derneath, the  dorje  is  sandwiched  between  two  knots  of  immuta- 
bility; it  is  crowned  with  the  three  terrifying  and  grinning  faces 
of  Dorje  Phurpa,  the  personified  deity  of  the  implement  (S21). 
The  knot  of  immutability  may  have  been  added  because  of  the 
"binding"  or  "fastening"  symbolism  of  the  instrument.  All 
this  formal  and  symbolic  enrichment  of  the  phurpa  must  have 
been  done  in  Tibet. 

Neither  the  date  nor  the  exact  provenance  of  such  phurpas 
is  easy  to  establish.  This  work's  condition  suggests  that  it  has 
some  age;  the  style  of  the  faces,  which  provides  the  only  clue,  is 
closely  related  to  others  which  have  been  assigned  to  the  six- 
teenth century  (Huntington  1975,  figs.  18,  48). 

R7 

Ritual  Dagger  (Phurpa) 

Eastern  Tibet  (?),  17th  century 

Ivory,  silver,  and  carnelian 

1:  8'/2  in.  (21.6  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mrs.  J.  LeRoy  Davidson 

in  Memory  of  Dr.  J.  Leroy  Davidson 

M.82.27 

Literature:  Huntington,  1975,  pp.  34— 

35,  figs.  42—44;  Pal,  Elephants  and  Ivories 

in  South  Asia.  Los  Angeles  County  Museum 

of  Art,  1981,  p.  100. 

See  plate  45 

Entwined  coils  of  snakes  and  the  makara  embellish  the 
three-sided  blade  of  the  dagger.  The  lower  section  of  the  handle 
consists  of  two  rows,  each  with  grinning  skulls,  trefoil  motif, 
and  lotus  petals.  The  wider  upper  section  is  carved  with  the 
three  heads  of  Dorje  Phurpa  (S21).  Each  terrifying  head  has  a 
grinning,  fanged  mouth,  a  third  eye,  a  skull  diadem,  and  flying 
hair.  At  the  summit  of  the  phurpa  is  a  narrow  cap  of  silver,  sur- 
mounted by  a  circular  piece  of  polished  carnelian.  According  to 
Huntington,  this  thin  sliver  of  stone  is  a  substitute  for  the 
diamond  (vajra)  and  is  said  to  have  the  same  symbolic  value. 

This  is  a  particularly  fine  and  relatively  old  example  of  an 
ivory  phurpa.  Articulately  carved,  the  faces  of  the  deity  are  more 
stylized  and  masklike  than  those  in  the  wooden  example  in  the 
collection  (R6).  This  stylization,  as  well  as  the  attempts  at  mod- 
eling the  faces,  may  show  some  Chinese  influence;  hence,  the 


244 


R7 

Ritual  Dagger  (Phurpa) 
See  plate  45 


R8 

Chopp* 


er 


suggestion  that  the  dagger  may  have  been  carved  in  an  eastern 
Tibetan  workshop.  The  skulls  on  this  dagger  are  especially  at- 
tractive and  amusing.  Hardly  frightening,  they  are  reminiscent 
of  the  smiling  faces  on  Halloween  pumpkins. 

R8 

Chopper 

Eastern  Tibet,  17th  century  (?) 

Iron 

1:  8V2  in.  (21.6  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.78.32 

Both  the  shape  and  design  of  this  chopper  are  visually 
arresting.  Stylized  lotuses  showing  Chinese  influence  decorate 
the  base  and  neck  of  the  handle.  The  lower  edge  of  the  blade, 
including  the  entire  portion  that  is  attached  to  the  handle,  is 


adorned  with  the  ornate  and  busy  form  of  a  makara,  its  jaws 
wide  open  and  its  tongue  sticking  out  of  its  mouth. 

The  chopper  is  one  of  the  most  prominent  weapons  used 
by  Buddhism's  angry  deities,  both  male  and  female.  Continu- 
ously brandished  by  them  or  simply  carried  in  their  hands,  its 
purpose  is  to  chop  up  disbelievers.  Just  as  the  thunderbolt  is 
typically  paired  with  the  bell,  so  do  the  chopper  and  skullcup 
generally  accompany  each  other  (S25,  S26).  The  symbolism  of 
the  two  may  be  the  same.  Since  the  chopper  is  the  instrument 
for  cutting  through  the  fog  of  ignorance,  it  may  signify  the 
upaya,  or  means,  while  the  blood  in  the  cup  symbolizes  wisdom. 
In  many  ways,  the  chopper  serves  the  same  purpose  as  the  dorje 
or  the  phurpa  and  is  employed  in  rituals  of  exorcism  by  priests 
and  shamans.  This  particularly  handsome  example  may  have 
been  created  in  Kham  in  eastern  Tibet,  or  possibly  even  in  China. 


245 


R9 

Set  of  Three  Ritual  Weapons 


246 


R9 


Rio 


Set  of  Three  Ritual  Weapons 

Eastern  Tibet  (Derge?),  17th  century  or 

earlier 

Gilt  bronze  and  crystal 

1.  of  chopper:  8V2  in.  (21.6  cm.) 

1.  of  phurpa:  8  in.  (20.3  cm.) 

1.  of  axe:  8/8  in.  (22.5  cm.) 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by 

Anna  Bing  Arnold 

M. 79. 243. 1-3. 

Literature:  "Chopper,  Phur-bu,  Axe," 

Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art  Bulletin, 

vol.  xxvi,  1980,  pp.  60-61. 

One  rarely  comes  across  so  completely  or  finely  crafted  a 
set  of  ritual  implements  made  of  crystal  as  this  one.  The  imple- 
ments were  very  likely  used  in  ritual  ceremonies  by  a  high  lama 
who  may  have  received  the  set  as  a  gift  from  a  princely  patron. 

The  crystal  blade  of  the  chopper  is  attached  to  the  gilt- 
bronze  handle  with  a  clasp  decorated  with  grinning  skulls.  The 
handle  consists  of  a  makara.  a  lotus,  and  half  a  dorje  (R4).  The 
combination  of  the  makara  head  and  the  row  of  skulls  is  re- 
peated at  the  base  of  the  hilt  of  the  phurpa,  which  has  a  three- 
sided  crystal  blade.  Supported  on  the  makara's  head,  the  handle 
of  the  phurpa  is  in  the  form  of  two  lotuses  sandwiched  between 
two  knots  of  immutability.  The  crowning  element  is  a  knob 
that  may  represent  a  closed  lotus  bud.  A  similar  knob,  but  of 
crystal,  at  the  bottom  of  the  axe  handle  (parasu)  is  separated 
from  the  crystal  handle  by  two  clasps  with  rows  of  grinning 
skulls.  Another  clasp  with  skulls  joins  the  handle  to  the  axe 
head,  which  consists  of  a  crystal  blade  and  two  halves  of  a  dorje 
joined  at  right  angles  to  each  other. 

Both  the  crystals  and  the  metal  handles  reflect  the  excel- 
lent workmanship  for  which  Derge  was  famous.  The  contrast 
between  the  clarity  of  the  translucent  crystals  and  the  richness 
of  the  gilt  handles  makes  these  ritual  weapons  especially  attrac- 
tive. Because  the  forms  of  such  implements  changed  so  little 
over  the  years,  it  is  difficult  to  suggest  an  exact  date  for  this  set. 
The  quality  of  the  craftsmanship  suggests  that  they  may  have 
been  gifts  sent  to  the  Tibetan  lamas  by  the  Ming  emperors 
of  China. 


Rio 

Sword 

Central  Tibet,  18th  century 

Steel  blade,  jade  handle;  silver  sheath 

inlaid  with  coral  and  turquoise 

1:  21V2  in.  (54.6  cm.) 

The  Michael  J.  Connell  Fund  Purchase 

M.77.111.1 

See  plate  46 

This  sword  was  probably  made  in  the  same  workshop  as 
the  conch  shell  (Rll),  for  the  metalwork  and  inlay  in  both  are 
identical  and  of  the  same  excellent  quality.  The  jade  handle  of 
the  sword,  carved  with  a  beautiful  floral  design,  is  similar  to  the 
handles  seen  in  Mughal  daggers  of  the  seventeenth  and  eigh- 
teenth centuries.  Trade  between  India  and  Tibet  during  the 


Sword 

See  plate  46 


247 


Rn 


Conch  Shell 
See  plate  47 


Mughal  period  continued  unabated,  and  thus  there  is  nothing 
surprising  about  a  Mughal-style  dagger  handle  finding  its  way 
to  that  country.  (Apparently,  exquisite  Mughal  carpets  may  still 
be  seen  in  the  Potala  in  Lhasa.)  However,  there  is  also  reason  to 
believe  that  some  of  the  so-called  Mughal  jades  were  actually 
carved  in  China  and  exported  to  the  Indian  market.  The  handle 
of  this  sword  may  well  be  one  such  export  jade. 

The  sheath  of  the  sword  is  an  excellent  example  of  the 
sort  of  metalwork  for  which  craftsmen  of  eastern  Tibet  were 
famous.  The  central  panel  of  the  sheath  has  four  sacred  syllables 
rendered  in  high-relief  in  a  bold  and  clear  Sanskrit  script.  The 
rest  of  the  surface  is  decorated  with  exquisitely  inlaid  turquoise 
flowers  and  scroll  designs  formed  with  fine  silver  wires.  As  with 
Rll,  tassels  are  attached  to  the  sword.  The  sacred  syllables,  as 
well  as  the  sword's  association  with  the  conch  shell,  leave  no 
doubt  that  it  was  used  in  religious  rather  than  civil  ceremonies. 
Like  the  phurpa,  the  sword  is  brandished  by  monks  and  priests 
during  exorcism  ceremonies. 

Rn 

Conch  Shell 

Central  Tibet,  18th  century 

Silver,  coral,  jade,  and  turquoise 

1:  15  Vi  in.  (39.4  cm.) 

The  Michael  J.  Connell  Fund  Purchase 

M. 77. in. 2 

See  plate  47 


A  conch  shell  is  an  essential  implement  in  both  Hindu 
and  Buddhist  ritual.  Some  shells  in  their  natural  condition  are 
used  as  containers  for  consecrated  water  and  often  placed  on  top 
of  a  water  pot  on  an  altar.  Others,  such  as  this  example,  are 
used  as  trumpets.  Hindus  in  India  believe  that  the  sound  of  a 
conch  shell  drives  away  evil  spirits,  and  not  only  is  it  blown 
during  ritual  and  all  auspicious  ceremonies,  but,  in  many  parts 
of  the  country,  it  is  also  blown  three  times  daily  as  dusk  de- 
sends.  Presumably  the  Buddhists  also  adopted  the  same  practice 
for  their  rituals,  and  hence  the  custom  is  prevalent  in  Tibet. 

Often  the  natural  conch  shell  is  decorated  wth  metal 
around  the  mouth  and  flanges.  The  inlay  in  this  sumptuous  ex- 
ample is  particularly  fine,  showing  the  Tibetan  craftsman  at  his 
best.  Apart  from  meandering  tendrils,  rosettes,  and  dense  foliage, 
the  decorative  patterns  include  a  conch  shell  and  a  flying  bird. 
Colorful  tassels  are  attached  to  the  end  of  the  shell,  which  prob- 
ably comes  from  the  same  worship  as  the  sword  (RIO). 

R12 

Water  Pot 

Central  Tibet  (Gyantse?),  18th  century 

Silver,  crystal,  turquoise,  and  opal 

h:  11V2  in.  (29.2  cm.) 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by  The 

Ahmanson  Foundation 

M.75.10 

Water  is  perhaps  the  most  important  element  in  both 
Hindu  and  Buddhist  ritual  and  is  always  present  on  the  altar, 
either  in  a  sumptuous  pot  such  as  this  or  in  some  other  con- 
tainer. (A  wide  variety  of  water  pots  are  used  and  are  known  by 
different  names,  depending  upon  their  function.)  During  vari- 
ous ceremonies,  the  priest  or  monk  sprinkles  water  as  he  mut- 


248 


Rl2 

Water  Pot 


249 


Ri3 

Teapot 


R14 

Pair  of  Butter  Lamps 
See  plate  48 


ters  mantras  on  the  deity,  himself,  and  the  congregation.  This 
action  symbolizes  genetal  cleansing  and  is  essential  in  any  cere- 
mony or  initiation  rite.  As  a  Tibetan  tantric  master  has  said: 
"By  initiation  with  water,  if  one  contemplates  the  path  based 
thereon,  one  is  able  to  wash  away  the  defilements  which  block 
the  way  to  Buddhahood"  (Beyer,  p.  410). 

Each  side  of  this  piece  is  inlaid  with  turquoises  and  opals 
set  in  granulated  silver  and  is  decorated  with  an  impressively 
carved  crystal  kirttimukha.  or  face  of  glory.  An  auspicious  motif 
in  Indo-Tibetan  culture,  the  face  of  glory  is  a  masklike,  stylized 
lion's  face  similar  to  the  tao-tieh  mask  of  China.  Here,  the  face  is 
made  more  expressive  by  the  use  of  opals  for  the  eyes.  The  neck 
of  the  pot  is  a  fluted  and  hollowed  crystal  that  flares  at  the  top. 
The  lid  is  encrusted  with  small  stones  and  there  is  a  crystal 
knob  in  the  shape  of  a  lotus  bud  at  the  summit.  The  slender 
silver  spout  rises  from  the  mouth  of  a  makara  while  the  serpen- 
tine handle  is  embellished  with  a  dragon's  head  and  an  inlaid, 
foliated  tail.  The  crystals,  opals,  and  the  diverse  shapes  and 
colors  of  the  turquoise  help  create  a  richly  variegated  surface. 
Despite  the  sumptuousness  of  this  decoration,  the  outline  of  the 
pot  remains  simple  and  elegant. 

The  form  of  such  water  pots  may  ultimately  derive  from 
Central  Asia.  This  elaborate  specimen  is  a  superb  example  of  the 
carving  and  inlay  work  for  which  Newari  craftsmen  from  Nepal 
were  especially  admired.  Possibly  this  pot  was  made  by  a  Newar 
in  the  Gyantse  region. 


R13 


Teapot 

Northern  Nepal,  18th— 19th  century 

Copper  and  silver 

h:  12  in.  (30.5  cm.) 

Gift  of  Dr.  Ronald  M.  Lawrence 

M-74.139.13 

This  teapot,  unlike  the  sumptuous  water  pot  for  ritual 
use  (R12),  is  of  a  type  meant  for  daily  use.  The  two  pots  differ 
in  their  decorative  designs,  as  well  as  in  their  shapes.  The  fea- 
tures they  share  in  common  are  a  makara  spout  and  a  serpentine 
handle,  but  here  a  makara  head  also  appears  on  the  handle.  This 
pot  is  broad  and  squat,  and  its  decoration  consists  of  silver  work 
that  contrasts  effectively  with  its  copper  body.  In  addition  to  the 
mythical  and  auspicious  creatures,  plant  motifs — especially  the 
lotus — are  used  as  decorative  elements.  All  these  animal  and 
vegetable  motifs  are  associated  with  water,  and  as  ancient  aquatic 
symbols  of  abundance  and  fertility,  they  are  especially  appro- 
priate for  a  pot,  whether  it  was  made  to  dispense  consecrated 
water  or  hot  tea. 

The  pot  was  acquired  by  the  donor  in  northern  Nepal 
and  may  have  been  locally  manufactured. 


250 


Ri4 

Pair  of  Butter  Lamps 

Eastern  Tibet  (Derge),  18th  century 

Silver,  gilt,  and  inlaid  stones 

h.  of  each:  n  in.  (28  cm.) 

Purchased  with  Funds  Provided  by 

Anna  Bing  Arnold 

M.78.23a-b 

Literature:  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of 

Art  Bulletin,  vol.  xxvi,  1980,  p.  71. 

See  plate  48 

Shaped  like  chalices,  from  which  their  forms  may  have 
been  derived,  butter  lamps  such  as  these  are  typically  Tibetan, 
and  are  part  of  the  essential  equipment  on  altars  in  temples  and 
domestic  shrines.  Usually  made  of  silver  and  enriched  with 
gilding,  they  are  among  the  finest  examples  of  Tibetan  metal- 
work.  Although  they  were  also  manufactured  in  other  places, 
the  most  important  center  for  this  kind  of  work  was  Derge. 

Each  lamp  is  made  in  three  separate  sections  that  are 
joined  together.  The  base  is  decorated  with  a  narrow  band  of 
stylized  vegetable  design  at  the  bottom;  two  rows  of  lotus  petals 
of  different  design  are  at  the  top.  The  lower  row  has  longer  pet- 
als with  fluted  surfaces  and  flaring  tips.  The  middle  section  is  a 
pot  which  takes  the  same  form  as  the  vase  of  immortality  held 
by  Amitayus  (PI).  It  is  also  adorned  with  lotus  petals.  The  cup 
holds  yak's  butter,  which  is  used  as  the  combustible  substance, 
and  is  beautifully  enlivened  with  lotuses  and  sinuous  plant 
motifs.  The  flowers  in  the  cartouches  are  rendered  more  natural- 
istically  than  the  forms  used  below. 

R15 

Portable  Shrine  (Gau) 

Eastern  Tibet  (Derge),  18th  century 

Silver  with  partial  gilding 

8Vk  x  6I/4  in.  (21.2  x  15.9  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.80.48 


Ri5 

Portable  Shrine  (Gau) 


Although  portable  shrines  or  amulet  containers  are  famil- 
iar in  India  (for  example  those  of  the  Lingayat  Saivas),  nothing 
quite  like  the  Tibetan  gau  is  known  to  have  been  used  by  Indian 
Buddhists.  It  may  be  pointed  out,  however,  that  in  Thailand  a 
devout  Buddhist  may  hang  a  miniature  shrine  containing  an 
image  of  the  Buddha  around  his  neck. 

At  home  the  gau  is  kept  on  an  altar,  but  when  traveling, 
a  Tibetan  fastens  it  to  his  crossbelt.  Generally,  the  gau  has  a 
trefoil-shaped  top  and  a  window  in  the  middle  through  which 
one  can  see  an  image  of  the  owner's  personal  deity  (ishtadevata) 
wrapped  in  silks.  It  is  made  of  two  parts  which  fit  together  to 
form  a  box.  The  back  is  usually  left  plain  and  the  richly  deco- 
rated front  is  always  visible  through  the  opening  in  the  cloth 
case  in  which  a  gau  is  usually  kept. 

This  gau  is  an  especially  fine  example  of  ornamental 
metalwork.  The  central  portion  around  the  opening,  the  nine 
auspicious  symbols,  the  flying  kinnaras,  and  the  bowl  of  offer- 
ings at  the  bottom  are  all  gilded  to  create  an  effective  contrast 
with  the  silver  work.  The  background  design  consists  of  a 
deeply  carved  and  smoothly  chased  flowering  vine  that  meanders 


251 


Ri6 

Set  of  Votive  Plaques  (Tsha  Tsha) 
(above) 


Mold  for  Dough  Images  (Zan  Par) 
(below) 


252 


over  the  surface.  The  central  panel  weaves  together  animals, 
birds,  a  warrior,  dragons,  and  a  khyung  with  a  reticulated  flower- 
ing-vine motif.  The  windowsill  has  the  combined  motif  of  a 
wheel  flanked  by  two  animals.  Usually,  these  are  a  pair  of  an- 
telope, but  here  the  artist  appears  to  have  depicted  an  antelope 
and  a  stylized  lion.  Although  natural  enemies,  this  pair  sym- 
bolizes peace  and  harmony  and  is  an  ancient  motif  in  India.  The 
other  fauna  in  the  central  panel  include  lions,  an  elephant,  an 
antelope,  a  crane,  a  monkey,  and  a  rabbit. 


R16 

Set  of  Votive  Plaques  (Tsha  Tsha) 

China,  18th  century 

Gilded  and  painted  terracotta 

h.  of  each:  3  in.  (7.6  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  J.  Klejman  of 

New  York 

M. 71. 26. 1-37 

Small  votive  plaques  such  as  these,  generally  made  from 
molds,  are  known  in  Tibetan  as  tsha  tsha.  Large  numbers  of 
them  have  been  found  in  ancient  Buddhist  sites  in  India  as  well 
as  in  Central  Asia.  They  were  made  to  serve  as  pilgrims' 
souvenirs,  portable  shrines,  and  to  be  inserted  into  large  stupas 
and  images  to  increase  the  containers'  potency.  Such  plaques 
were  evidently  mass  produced.  Each  plaque  has  on  its  back  in- 
scriptions identifying  the  deities  in  four  languages — Chinese, 
Mongolian,  Manchurian,  and  Tibetan.  (For  a  transcription  of 
the  Tibetan  names,  see  Appendix.) 

Although  incomplete,  this  set  once  belonged  to  Baron  A. 
von  Stael-Holstein,  who  acquired  them  in  Beijing  (Peking)  in 
the  last  century.  The  baron  also  found  a  large  number  of  the 
bronze  molds  from  which  these  plaques  were  made,  and  clearly 
established  that  the  molds  originated  during  the  reign  of  Em- 
peror Qianlong  (Chien-lung)  (r.  1736—95).  They  may  be  com- 
pared with  similar  pantheons  published  by  Walter  Eugene  Clark 
(1965,  p.  x  and  pis.  1-222,  225ff).  Because  each  deity  is 
identified  on  the  back,  these  plaques  are  of  considerable  histor- 
ical and  iconographic  interest.  Both  their  good  condition  and 
the  sharp  delineation  of  the  figures  make  them  useful  sources  for 
the  study  of  Vajrayana  Buddhist  iconography. 

Ri7 

Mold  for  Dough  Images  (Zan  Par) 

Provenance  unknown,  19th  century  (?) 

Wood 

h:  3  in.  (7.6  cm.);  w:  16  in.  (40.6  cm.); 

d:  1  in.  (2.5  cm.) 

Gift  of  Mrs.  Ann  Rohrer 

M.76.23 

Since  live  sacrifice  is  forbidden  in  Buddhism,  the  Tibetans 
contrived  different  methods  of  offering  substitutes.  We  have 
already  seen  the  rgyan  tshogs  (P30,  P31),  which  are  painted 
substitutes.  Another  kind  is  known  as  torma;  it  is  made  from 
dough  stamped  into  special  carved  wooden  molds  such  as  this 
one.  A  wide  variety  of  figures,  including  humans,  animals, 
birds,  aquatic  creatures,  insects,  and  inanimate  objects  such  as 
household  goods,  are  portrayed  in  these  substitute  offerings. 
They  are  placed  in  rows  on  an  altar  and  the  evil  spirits  are 
coerced  into  accepting  them  instead  of  the  real  thing.  (For  a  de- 


R18 


A  Ritual  Object  with  Unicorns 


tailed  description  of  this  ritual  in  connection  with  the  cult  of 
Tara,  see  Beyer,  pp.  324ff.) 

Since  the  use  of  substitutes  is  widespread  in  Tibetan 
sacrifice  rituals,  it  is  difficult  to  determine  the  exact  provenance 
of  such  molds.  What  is  clear,  however,  is  that  the  designs  here 
and  on  other  examples  are  freely  rendered  in  an  abstract,  linear 
style  which  may  reflect  an  ancient  "animal  style"  that  has  not 
changed  through  the  ages.  Although  abstract,  the  representa- 
tions are  typically  lively  and  imaginative. 

R18 

A  Ritual  Object  with  Unicorns 

Central  or  eastern  Tibet,  16th  century 

or  earlier 

Brass 

4V2  x  2V2  in.  (11. 4  x  6.4  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.82.74 

A  unicorn  and  its  foal  stand  on  an  uneven  base  of 
pierced,  stylized  foliage.  In  its  mouth  the  unicorn  carries  the 
stem  of  a  flower,  presumably  a  lotus,  which  supports  a  flaming 
jewel,  symbolizing  the  Buddhist  religion.  Three  holes  on  the 
body  of  the  unicorn,  one  in  front  and  two  at  the  back,  indicate 


253 


Ri9 


Pouch 


that  the  object  may  once  have  been  used  as  an  incense  burner 

The  unicorn  is  a  familiar  motif  in  Tibetan  art;  a  pair  of 
them  often  flanks  the  Wheel  of  Law  on  the  roofs  of  Tibetan 
monasteries.  Originally,  the  animal  represented  was  a  deer 
rather  than  a  unicorn.  The  combined  motif  of  the  Wheel  and  a 
pair  of  deer  symbolizes  the  first  sermon  of  Buddha  Sakyamuni  in 
the  Deer  Park  at  Sarnath.  Exactly  when  the  deer  was  replaced  by 
a  unicorn  is  uncertain,  although  the  latter  animal  appears  in 
very  early  Indian  mythology  as  a  fertility  symbol.  This  transfor- 
mation, however,  appears  to  have  occurred  in  Tibet,  where  the 
motif  of  the  unicorn  alone  or  with  its  foal,  as  in  this  example, 
became  a  favorite;  ritual  objects  employing  it  were  frequently 
placed  on  altars. 

Although  we  are  uncertain  exactly  where  and  when  this 
piece  was  made,  it  is  a  charming  and  lively  animal  sculpture. 


R19 

Pouch 

Central  or  eastern  Tibet,  19th  century 

Leather,  gilt  silver,  turquoise,  and 

carnelian 

h:  12V4  in.  (32.4  cm.);  w:  6V2  in. 

(16.5  cm.);  d:  2  in.  (5.1  cm.) 

Gift  of  The  Louis  and  Erma  Zalk 

Foundation 

M.82.21 


Pouches  or  purses  such  as  this  one,  made  for  carrying 
flint,  are  worn  suspended  from  belts  or  sashes,  and  are  a  com- 
mon feature  of  Tibetan  attire.  This  pouch,  however,  is  uncom- 
monly sumptuous  and  handsome.  Most  likely,  it  once  belonged 
to  a  wealthy  patron.  The  leather  purse  is  encased  in  fine  silver 
work,  gilded  and  encrusted  with  semiprecious  stones.  The  silver 
work  is  both  engraved  and  cast  so  that  the  surface  has  an  inter- 
esting and  varied  texture.  The  ornamental  motifs  used,  lotus 
and  other  vegetal  designs,  are  characteristic  of  this  sort  of 
pouch;  they  are  rendered  with  finesse  and  precision. 


R20 

Brooch  and  Pair  of  Earrings 
Central  Tibet,  19th  century 
Turquoise  and  silver 
1.  of  earrings:  43/4  in.  (12. 1  cm.) 
diam.  of  brooch:  4!^  in.  (10.4  cm.) 
Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 
M.8i.3.ia,b  and  2 


This  lotus-form  brooch  and  earrings,  made  with  tur- 
quoise, the  favorite  stone  of  Tibetan  women,  are  fine  examples 
of  Tibetan  jewelry.  These  pieces  are  said  to  have  been  brought 
out  of  Tibet  by  Sir  Francis  Younghusband,  who  undertook  a 
punitive  expedition  into  that  country  on  behalf  of  the  British- 
Indian  government  in  1904. 


254 


R.20 


R.2I 


Brooch  and  Pair  of  Earrings 
(above) 


Set  of  Chopsticks  and  Knife 
(below) 


Set  of  Chopsticks  and  Knife 

Eastern  Tibet,  c.  1900 

Wood,  ivory,  and  silver  inlaid  with  coral 

and  turquoise 

1:  13  in.  (33  cm.) 

Indian  Art  Special  Purposes  Fund 

M.8o.i25a-d 

Richly  encrusted  with  coral  and  turquoise,  this  hand- 
some set  of  chopsticks  and  knife  was  probably  intended  for  use 
by  a  wealthy  man.  Such  sets  were  carried  as  personal  cutlery  by 
Tibetans  while  traveling.  The  use  of  chopsticks  by  Tibetans  to 
eat  their  food  is  a  contribution  of  Chinese  culture. 


255 


R.22 

Ceremonial  Sword 


R22 


Ceremonial  Sword 

Eastern  Tibet,  18th  century 

Silver,  steel,  leather,  jade,  and  coral 

1:  20V2  in.  (52  cm.) 

Herbert  R.  Cole  Bequest 

TR. 6481. 17a, b 

Except  for  the  differences  in  their  sizes  and  shapes,  this  sword  is  so 
similar,  both  in  quality  and  workmanship,  to  RIO  that  it  seems 
very  likely  they  are  from  the  same  workshop.  The  principal  differ- 
ence in  this  piece  may  be  noted  in  the  absence  of  the  letters  on 
the  sheath. 

As  is  the  case  with  the  other  sword,  the  lower  and  upper  sec- 
tions, as  well  as  the  narrow  sides,  of  the  sheath  are  decorated  with 
raised  floral  designs  made  with  silver  wires. The  flowers  are  filled 
in  with  turquoise  and  coral.  The  handle  of  the  sheath  is  a  finely 
executed  dragon,  while  the  handle  of  the  dagger  is  carved  jade. 
The  floral  design  of  the  handle  is  less  naturalistically  rendered  than 
that  on  RIO,  but  three  of  the  flowers  are  inlaid  with  jade  and 
coral  petals. 


256 


Appendix 


Text  and  Translation  of  Selected  Inscriptions 
on  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Museums  Collection 


H.  E.  Richardson 


[This  appendix  is  by  no  means  exhaustive;  it  only  includes  reasonably  legible 
inscriptions.  In  the  bronzes  the  inscriptions  generally  occur  along  the  base,  but 
occasionally  on  the  back  as  well.  Dedicatory  inscriptions  on  thankas  are  usually 
added  at  the  bottom .  The  reader  may  assume  that  when  the  translations  are  not 
given  for  a  particular  object,  the  inscription  is  either  a  mantra  or  the  name  of  a 
deity.  Letters  or  words  in  parentheses  denote  possible  reconstructions ,  and  an  'x' 
signifies  an  illegible  letter.  Notes  have  been  added  only  ivhere  it  teas  felt  they  were 
necessary  to  elucidate  a  particular  point  in  the  inscription. 

P.P.] 


The  majority  of  inscriptions  on  the  thankas  in  the  Museum's  collection 
simply  identify  the  deities  or  other  personages  depicted.  Some  describe  scenes  from 
the  life  of  the  subject.  In  a  few  instances,  an  inscription  at  the  bottom  of  the  paint- 
ing names  the  donor  and  sometimes  the  painter.  Some  high  lamas  were  famous 
artists,  but  their  work  is  rare;  most  thankas  were  painted  by  professional  artists 
(I ha  bris  pa),  whose  standards  of  literacy  were  not  particularly  high;  thus,  even 
well-known  names  may  be  wrongly  written.  The  orthography,  therefore,  is  gen- 
erally variable. 

Inscriptions  on  the  backs  of  thankas  are  for  the  most  part  mantras,  reli- 
gious sayings  such  as  the  Ye  dharma  hetu  prabhava  dictum  (either  in  Sanskrit  or  in  its 
Tibetan  translation),  invocations  of  the  deity  represented  on  the  front,  and  so  on. 
There  is  considerable  unevenness  in  the  calligraphy  as  well  as  in  the  orthography  of 
these,  even  though  they  quite  often  appear  to  have  been  written  by  educated  monks 
— the  donor  or  someone  writing  on  his  behalf — rather  than  by  the  painter.  Some 
are  in  fine  classical  Tibetan  dbu  med  or  dbu  can  script,  others  in  cursive  writing. 
Other  inscriptions  include  prayers  by  the  donor  for  the  welfare  of  a  teacher  or  parents 
as  well  as  for  all  sentient  beings.  It  is  rare  that  persons  named  in  such  dedications 
can  be  identified. 

Inscriptions  on  bronzes,  where  space  is  usually  restricted,  name  the  figure 
represented  and  sometimes  include  a  brief  invocation.  Occasionally,  a  donor  or  per- 
son for  whose  spiritual  benefit  the  image  is  dedicated  may  be  named;  but  here,  too, 
identification  is  elusive. 

Thankas  in  the  collection  in  which  inscriptions  provide  valuable  art  histor- 
ical information  are:  P5,  in  which  the  artist  is  named;  P13,  a  portrait  of  two  Sakyapa 
lamas  known  to  have  been  active  in  the  mid-fifteenth  century;  and  P20,  a  portrait 
with  scenes  from  the  life  of  Kunga  Tashi  (Kun  dga'  bKra  shis),  the  thirty-second 
abbot  of  Sakya  (1349— 1425).  In  several  other  thankas  the  donor  is  named  but  is  not 
identifiable.  The  most  interesting  of  these  is  PI,  the  magnificent  painting  that  is, 
without  question,  the  oldest  in  the  collection.  The  donor  is  not  known,  and 
the  orthography  is  so  bad  that  its  origin  is  open  to  wide  conjecture;  however,  the 
orthography  may  mean  the  painting  came  from  Tsang.  The  donor,  incidentally, 
draws  attention  to  the  remarkable  size  of  the  painting,  which  measures  a  full 
102  inches  long. 

258  / 


Items  of  iconographic  interest,  other  than  thankas,  are  illuminated  pages 
from  an  early  Prajnaparamita  manuscript  (Ml)  and  a  set  of  gilded  clay  tsha  tsha 
(R16)  with  the  names  of  the  deities  and  other  personages  given  in  four  languages. 
Among  the  inscribed  bronzes,  an  interesting  figure  (S31)  of  Dampa  Sangye  (Dam  pa 
Sangs  rgyas)  was  dedicated  in  memory  of  Lama  Palden  Sengge  (dPal  ldan  Seng  ge), 
who  may  be  identified  as  having  died  in  1342.  The  inscription  on  S32,  the 
exceptionally  fine  image  of  a  lama  named  Karma  Dudtsi  (bDud  rtsi),  is  obscure,  and 
the  lama  is  not  yet  identified.  There  is  an  even  more  obscure  inscription  on  an 
image  of  an  eleven-headed  deity  (S3). 


Mi 

b) 

Mi 

c) 

Mi 

d) 

Mi 

e) 

Mi 

f) 

Mi 

h) 

Mi 

i) 

Mi      Twelve  Illuminated  Folios  from  a 
Prajnaparamita  Manuscript 


Stong  pa  ny  id  stong  pa  n)  id 
Shes  rab  kyi  pha  void  tu  phyind 
pa 

Dad  pa' i  stabs 

Sbyin  ba'i  pha  void  tu  phyind  pa 
stong  phrag  brgya  pa  las 
Dus  ma  by  as  stong  pa  nyid 
Don  dam  pa  stong  pa  ny  id 
Sangs  rgyas  rin  cen  'byung  ldan 


Notes: 

The  inscriptions  on  seven  of  the  twelve 
folios  of  this  manuscript  are  labels  which 
appear  at  the  bottom  of  the  illustrations 
on  folios  b— f  and  h— i.  Evidently,  they 
are  the  titles  of  the  deities  represented. 


M4     Two  Illuminated  Pages  from  a  Dharani 
Manuscript 

M4  a)      This  is  the  second  page  of  a  tan- 
trie  work  beginning  with  invo- 
cations to  Narasimha,  Mahesvara, 
and  others.  There  are  small  let- 
ter notes  mentioning  "Ra  lugs" 
(the  tradition  of  Ra  Lotsawa) 
and  the  tantra  of  sbyor  drug 
(six  preliminary  practices). 

The  figures  are  identified  as:  (on 
the  left)  'Phags  pa  Klu  grub 
(Nagarjuna);  and  (on  the  right) 
Bu  ston  Rinpoche  (Buton  rin- 
poche)  (1290-1364). 

M4  b)      This  is  the  second  page  of  a  text 
beginning  with  invocations  to 
Buddhas,  bodhisattvas,  and  god- 
desses. It  appears  to  be  a  dharani 
(charms)  manuscript. 

The  figures  are:  (on  the  left)  dPal 
gsang  ba  'dus  pa  (Guhyasamaja); 
and  (on  the  right)  gShin  rje 
gshed  (Raktayamari). 


Pi      Tathagata  Amitayus  and  Acolytes 

Apart  from  the  dedicatory  inscription, 
which  is  camouflaged  in  the  lotus  petals 
below  the  central  figure,  various  other 
shorter  inscriptions,  in  curious  orthog- 
raphy, identify  the  other  figures.  The  six 
figures  at  the  top  of  the  painting  have 
their  names  written  in  their  halos.  Of  the 
five  figures  along  the  bottom  only  four 
bear  inscriptions  below  each  figure;  the 
figure  in  the  middle  has  no  label.  The 
calligraphy  of  the  dedicatory  inscription 
is  bad,  so  it  is  not  always  certain  whether 
d.  or  an  ng,  or  even  an  r  is  intended  in 
some  words. 

Figures  along  the  top  row  only 
(from  left  to  right):  'Ga  ba;  Men 
grung  (?)  pa;  Sem  pa;  Gyang  can 
ma;  Rna  ra  (ru?)  ba  tha  yas;  Shas 
(Shes)  rig  bu  CO 

Figures  along  the  bottom  (from 
left  to  right ):  Bstam  grin;  Bcas 
ras  zig;  no  inscription;  Phyag 
bdor;  Mi  gyo  ba. 

Inscription: 

Om  bsva  sti  Ba  yul  gcang  rag  nag  ga  du 
bkyang  gon  bio  bzang  mchos  dgyan  gyis 
mtshes  'grub  mdzad  pa  sya'  bkobs  mthug 
bstam  rten'  la  gnang  nyan  'di  msyan  (?) 
gyis  mdzad  nas  mdom  'dzal  che  ba  yin 
bkra  shis.3 

1 .  pa  sya  is  perhaps  pa  yi. 

2.  rten  must  be  intended,  though 
the  letter  is  hen. 

3.  The  Tibetan  letter  in  the  word 

shis  at  the  end  of  the  text  (bkra  shis)  is 
much  more  like  the  Sanskrit  s  than 
Tibetan. 

Translation: 

Om  Swasti .  .  .  On  the  occasion  of  the  life- 
attainment  ceremony  by  the  Lama  Chos 
kyi  rgyal  mtshan  at  Gcang  rag  nag  ga  in 
Ba  yul  this  picture  made  in  fulfillment 
of  his  vow  by  Chos  rgyan  measures  a  full 
fathom  in  size.  Good  Fortune! 


Notes: 

This  translation  assumes  many  errors  in 
orthography:  bkyang  'gon  for  skyabs  mgon; 
mtshes  'grub  for  tshe  'grub:  mthug  bstam  for 
thugs  dam:  gnang  nyan  for  snang  brnyan: 
'dzal  for  'jal.  These,  and  the  spellings  of 
some  of  the  names  of  the  figures,  are  so 
gross  that  it  can  hardly  be  believed  that 
the  painter  had  before  him  an  example 
written  by  a  lama.  They  also  make  the 
identification  of  the  place  names  conjec- 
tural; but  Ba  yul.  which  occurs  twice  in 
the  The  Blue  Annals,  appears  to  have  been 
a  high  region  south  or  west  of  Lha  rgya  ri 
in  E  (gYe)  yul.  gCang  rag  nag  ga  is  not 
identified  as  yet.  If  bkyang  'gon  is  a  name 
and  not  merely  an  error  for  skyabs  mgon.  it 
could  refer  to  a  monastery. 


P5     Mandalas  of  Hevajra  and  Other  Deities 

Dedicatory  incription  at  the  bottom 
of  the  painting: 

bla  ma  kun  mkhyen  'jam  dbyangs  kyi 
I  I  thugs  dam  bzhengs'  phro  'di  dang 
ni  I  I  brgyud  ris  bde  dgyes  dus  'khor 
dang  I  I  'jigs  byed  rdo  rje  phyag 
dang  x  x  un  I  I  bla  ma  nyi  kyi 
nang  rten  du  I  I  btsun  pa  (rgyal) 
mtshan  x  gyis  bzhengs  I  I  lha  bzo 
gzhan  las  by  as  I  phas  ( ? )  rgyal  po 
dpal  seng  yin  I  de  Itas  nas  I  bla 
dgong  su  yongs  rdzogs  nas  I  I  kun 
gyis  byang  chub  thob  par  shog  I  I 
dge'o  I  I 

Translation: 

This  [thanka]  which  proceeds  from 
the  vow  of  the  all-knowing  Lama  'Jam 
dbyangs  and  the  circle  of  the  tantra  of  bde 
dgyes  and  'Jigs  byed  rdo  rje,  [was]  set 
up  as  an  inner  spiritual  support  for  the 
lama  himself  by  the  monk  rGyal-mtshan. 
Of  the  other  craftsmen  who  did  the  work 
[the  head]  was  rGyal  po  dpal  seng.  By 
seeing  this .  .  .when  the  lama  attains  com- 
plete fulfillment,  may  all  creatures 
[also]  win  enlightenment.  May  it  be 
for  merit. 


259 


Notes: 

Because  the  dedicatory  inscription  is 
badly  effaced  the  transcription  may  not  be 
wholly  accurate.  The  person  who  com- 
missioned the  painting  was  a  monk  (btsun 
pa)  whose  name  was  rGyal  mTshan. 

The  painting,  however,  was  dedicated  in 
honor  of  the  lama  Jamyang  ('Jam  dbyangs). 
The  importance  of  the  inscription  lies 
in  the  fact  that  the  painter  (lha  bzo)  is  also 
named.  His  name  is  given  as  Gyalpo 
Palseng  (rGyal  po  dPal  seng). 

Pi 3      Sakyapa  Lineage 
The  figures  in  this  thanka  are  shown  in 
the  order  indicated  by  the  arrangement  of 
numbers  below. 

123456789       10 
11       12      13      14      15      16      17      18      19 

20  26 

21  27 

22  32        33        28 

23  29 

24  30 

25  31 

Listed  below  are  the  transcriptions  of  the 
names  of  the  figures,  given  in  faint  in- 
scriptions, as  they  correspond  to  the 
numbers  as  arranged  above. 


I 

rDo  rje  'chang 

2 

bDag  med  ma 

3 

Bir  wa  pa 

4 

Nag  po  pa 

5 

Na  ro  pa 

6 

A  wa  du  ti  pa 

7 

Ga  ya  da  ra 

8 

bLa  chen  (mchog?) 

9 

Se  ston  (?) 

10 

Zhung  b'en  (?) 

1 1 

Sa  pan 

12 

bSod  nams  rtse  mo 

13 

Mus  chen  la  na  mo 

14 

Illegible 

15 

No  inscription 

16 

Chos  kyi  kun  dga'  bzang  po  la  na  mo 

17 

Chos  rje  mu  sa  pha  chen  po  la  na  mo 

18 

rje  btsun  la  na  mo 

19 

Tsho  bsgom 

20 

'Phags  pa 

21 

Zhang  dkon  dpal 

22 

Brag  phug  pa 

23 

bLa  ma  Dam  pa 

24 

dPal  Idan  tshul  khrim 

25 

dPal  Idan  rdo  rje  pa 

26 

(?)  chen  pa 

27 

dKar  po  brag  pa 

28 

Ri  khrod  pa 

29 

Buddha  sri 

30 

'Jam  dbyangs  shes  rab  rgya  mtsho 

3i 

bLa  ma  bSod  nams  dbang  phyug 

32 

rje  btsun  dam  pa  Kun  dga'  dbang 

phyug 

33- 

rje  btsun  dam  pa  bSod  nams  seng  ge 

Notes: 

Of  the  central  figures,  Kun  dga'  dBang 
phyug  (Kunga  Wangchuk)  (1418— 1462) 
may  be  identified  with  sLob  dpon  Kun 
dga'  dBang  phyug  of  the  bZhi  thog 
branch  of  the  Sakya.  bSod  nams  Seng  ge 
(Sonam  Senge)  was  a  teacher  of  the  Rin 
spungs  prince  Kun  bzang  po,  who,  with 
the  teacher  Sangs  rgyas  'phel,  founded  the 
monastery  'Bras  yul.  The  thanka  might, 
therefore,  date  from  the  fifteenth  century. 

P14      The  Life  of Milarepa 

Inscriptions: 

Small  seated  figure  on  the  right  of 

Milarepa's  head: 

bSod  nams  lha'i  dbang  po 

Similar  figure  on  the  left  of  his  head: 
Dus  zhab  pa  bio  gros  (Dus  zhabs?) 

The  row  of  twelve  seated  figures  above 
Milarepa  (from  left  to  right)  are  identified 
as  follows: 

Rin  chen  (?chos  rgyal)  dpal  bzang  po 

(dBon?)  dPon  rin  bSod  nam(s)  grags 

Phag  mo  gru  pa 

Mar  pa 

Te  lo  pa 

rDo  rje  'chang 

Stod  pa  sangs  rgyas 

Na  ro  pa 

sGam  po  pa 

'Jig  rten  mgon  po 

Cung  Rin  po  che 

dBon  Rin  po  che 

Notes: 

The  panels  all  around  the  central  figure 
depict  scenes  from  the  life  of  Milarepa. 
Most  of  the  text  is  badly  damaged,  as  are 
the  names  of  many  of  the  figures.  Some  of 
the  scenes  can  be  identified  from  the  in- 
scriptions, but  some  of  the  writing  is 
effaced.  At  the  bottom  is  a  damaged 
inscription  in  cursive  Tibetan  script 
which  is  illegible. 

P16      Three  Mandalas 
The  inscription  below  this  painting  is 
considerably  effaced.  Possible  reconstruc- 
tions are  shown  in  parenthesis: 

I  I  dkyil  x  x  bcuis'  dge  bai  (lugs)  chos  kyi  rje 
n  tshul  (gyi)  'od  zer  gyi  thug 
c  pa  x  x  x  (don  du)  yongs  su 
\  de  gi  thug  rje  dang  by  in 
) 1  pha  ma  7 
i  sdig  sgrib  dag  nas  sangs 
tho  par  \alam  I  I 

1 .  Abbreviation  for  bcu  gnyis 

2.  Abbreviation  for  rten  nas 

3.  This  is  written  in  abbreviated  form; 
it  should  be  'od  zer. 


Translation: 

This  mandala,  one  of  a  series,  was  dedi- 
cated by  rGyal  mtshan  Ore'  [i.e.  'Od  zer] 
for  the  cleansing  of  his  sins,  those  of  his 
father  and  mother,  and  all  creatures. 

It  prays  that  the  learned  Lama  Tshul 
gyi  'Od  zer  [Tshulgyi  Ozer]  may  attain 
fulfillment  of  his  wishes. 

Note: 

For  another  reading  and  translation  of 

this  inscription,  see  Tucci  1949,  p.  600. 

P18      Sonam  Tsemo  and  His  Lineage 

Inscription  at  the  back  on  the  top  mount: 
g-h  yas  drug  pa  bsod  nams  rtse  mo 

Translation: 

bSod  nams  rTse  mo,  6th  on  right. 

Dedicatory  inscription  at  bottom  on  the 

red  border: 

bsod  nams  dpag  med  las  grub  ting 
mkhyen  pa'i  ye  shes  rab  rgyas  pa  I  I  ,1 
ba'i  rtsa  lag  mchog  gyur pa  bsod  nams 
rtse  mo  la  phyag  'tshal  I  I  smon  lam 
mtsho  skyes  lugs  kyi  skye  rdo  rje  I  bla  ma 
brgyud pa  la  sogs  pa'i  lha  tshogs  mams 
la  phyag  '  tshal  zhing  I  I  skyab  su  mchi'o 
I  dus  tham  du  rjes  su  gzung  du  gsol  I  I 

Translation: 

Reverence  to  bSod  nams  rTse  mo  who 
achieves  immeasurable  virtue,  extends 
knowledge  and  wisdom,  and  is  an  excel- 
lent friend  to  all  creatures.  Doing  rever- 
ence to  the  assembly  of  deities  of  the 
Lama  Brgyud  pa's  of  the  (tradition  of) 
mTsho  skyes  rdo  rje  (?),  I  take  refuge  in 
them  and  pray  at  all  times  to  follow  their 
teaching[.] 

The  figures  surrounding  Sonam  Tsemo  are 
shown  in  the  order  indicated  by  the  ar- 
rangement of  numbers  below. 

1       23456789 
10    11     12  13     14    15 

16    17        18  19     20    21 

22  28 

23  29 

24  30 

25  31 

26  32 

27  33 

34    35    36       37    38    39    4©    41  42 


Listed  below  are  the  transcriptions  of  the 
names  of  the  figures  as  they  correspond  to 
the  numbers  as  arranged  above. 

1.  No  inscription 

2.  xx  dpal  'dzin  lha  lcam 

3.  mTsho  skyes  rdo  rje 

4.  Bi  la  sya  va  jra 


260 


/ 


6 

7 
8 

9 

io 

1 1 

12 

13 
14 
15 
l6 

17 
18 

19 

20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 
32 

33 

34 
35 
36 

37 

38 
39 

40 

4i 
42 


No  inscription  but  figure  represents 
Vajradhara 

Yan  lag  med  pa'i  rdo  rje 
Indra  Bhu  di 
Nag  po  spyod  pa 
Ga  ya  dha  ra 
Brog  mi 

gSer  bzad  dri  med 

No  inscription 

No  inscription 

Mya  ngan  med  mchog  dpal 

Se  ston 

Zar  ston 

No  inscription 

No  inscription 

No  inscription 

No  inscription 

Sa  chen 

Rin  chen  don  grub 

Chu  bo'i  pa  na 

Brag  phug  pa 

xx  Tshul  khrims 

Mus  chen 

Sangs  rgyas  bstan  pa  rin  chen 

phyogs  bcur  spel 

Chos  rje  rgyal  grags 

dKon  mchog  dpal 

Bio  gros  brtan  pa 

Kun  dga'  bzang  po 

bSod  nams  seng  ge 

dKon  mchog  lhun  grub  rgyal  ba'i 

'phrin  les  pa 

x  x  stods  pa  chen 

Mus  chen 

rDo  rje  gnags  ri 

rGyal  mtshan  rtse  mo'i  dbur 

brgyan 

Phag  mo  x  x  gcig  ma 

Gur  mgon 

'Phags  ma  gzhan  gyis  mi  thub 

'Phags  ma  lcags  sgrogs  ma 

gDugs  dkar  mo  can 


Notes: 

The  central  figure  in  the  thanka,  Sonam 
Tsemo  (bSod  nams  rTse  mo)  was  the  fa- 
mous Sakyapa  teacher  who  lived  from 
1 142  to  1 182.  He  is  surrounded  by  other 
members  of  the  Sakyapa  lineage,  both  hu- 
man and  divine. 

Most  of  the  names  end  with  the  ex- 
pression la  na  mo  which  is  an  expression  of 
salutation.  On  the  back  of  the  thanka  are 
copious  mantras  and  religious  apothegms. 


P19      Mabasiddas  in  Landscape 
The  single  figure  shown  on  side  a  is  in- 
scribed Seng  ge  pa  (Sengepa)  on  the  lower 
left-hand  side  of  the  picture.  The  writing 
on  the  right  appears  to  be  the  number  don 
drug,  or  76.  In  the  drawing  of  two  figures 
(side  b),  that  on  the  left  is  Bainapa 
(Vinapa)  and  is  numbered  43.  That  on 


the  right,  numbered  44,  is  Su  na  lo  ki. 
The  drawings  are  presumably  from  an 
artist's  book  of  models.  The  words  which 
begin  the  inscription  apparently  say 
something  about  his  activities  but  are  in- 
distinct; perhaps  bsten  gzugs  for  bzhugs 
meaning  "firmly  established."  The  other 
is  not  clear  and  there  are  not  enough  ex- 
amples of  the  artist's  writing  to  make 
conjecture  easy. 

P20      Kunga  Tashi  and  Incidents  from 
His  Life 


20. 


21. 


22. 


Mdzod  pa  spel  skya  bas  gzigs  rtog 

phul  tshul 

Mdzod  pa  nas  bzo  par  bka'  khyab 

par  tshul 

Kun  bkras  kyi  zhabs  lha  zhangs  pa 

mdzad  tshul 


3 

4 

6 

2 
1 

7 

5 

14 

8 

9 

10 

20 

19 

15 

16 

21 

17 

18 

22 

n 

12 

13 

Listed  below  are  the  transcriptions  of  the 
names  of  the  figures  as  they  correspond  to 
the  numbers  as  arranged  above. 


1. 

2 

3 
4 

5 
6 


9 

10 
1 1 

12 
13 
14 

15 
16 

17- 


19. 


Drin  can  rtsa  bai  bla  ma  kun  dga' 

bkra  shis  la  na  mo 

unnamed 

unnamed 

gSer   or  gSeng   Chos  'jam  nag 

la  na  mo 

rje-btsun  sgrol-ma  la  na  mo 

sByin  pa'i  bdag  po  tshe  bsam  rjes 

su  bzung  tu  gsol 

bDag  shes  rab  rjes  su  bzung   gsol 

'Dod  khams  ma  la  na  mo 

Gur  gyi  mgon  po  la  na  mo 

dMag  zor  ma  la  na  mo 

sByin  bdag  po  tshe  ring  bsam  'grub 

la  na  mo 

Shes  rab  gal 

Gnyer  bstan  phun  la  na  mo 

Kun  bkras  nas  lha  chen  pa  drug  la 

nyams  gso  mdzad 

Phun  tshogs  yang  rtse 

Kun  bkras  nas  bsam  brling  dgon  pa 

nyams  gso  mdzad    tshul 

Kun  bkras  zhabs  dring  pa  dang 

bcas  pa  lha  mchod  yang  rtser  phebs 

tshul 

Chos  khrir  kun  bkras  rab  byams  pa 

mang  po  la  sgrogs  gleng  mdzad 

tshul 

Kun  bkras  mdzod  pa  spel  skya  bar 

gser  sku  bzhengs  dgos  bka'  bsgyur 

ba 


Notes: 

The  first  thirteen  inscriptions  identify  the 
various  Sakyapa  lamas,  deities,  and 
donors.  Nos.  14  through  22  identify 
scenes  from  the  life  of  Kun  dga'  bKra  shis 
(Kunga  Tashi).  Some  of  these  inscriptions 
are  on  cartouches,  as  indicated  in  the  key 
given  above;  others  are  written  on  the 
surface  in  the  usual  fashion. 

No.  14  shows  him  repairing  a  temple,  ap- 
parently the  Lhakhang  Chenmo  of  Sakya. 

No.  15  shows  the  temple  of  Phun  Tshogs 
yang-rtse. 

No.  16  shows  the  lama  repairing  Bsam 
brling  dgon  pa,  another  temple. 

No.  17  pictures  him  attended  by  ser- 
vants, on  his  way  to  perform  ceremonies 
at  Yang  rtse. 

No.  18  shows  him  on  his  throne,  preach- 
ing to  monks. 

No.  19  pictures  him  ordering  his  trea- 
surer to  make  a  golden  image. 

No.  20  has  the  treasurer  presenting  the 
image  for  inspection. 

No.  21  shows  the  treasurer  giving  in- 
structions to  workmen. 

No.  22  Kun  dga'  bKra  shis  makes  images 
of  the  gods  (or  performs  ceremonies  to 
the  gods?). 

Tucci  (1949,  pp.  372—89)  read  the  in- 
scriptions on  the  painting,  but  he  did  not 
name  the  person  depicted.  The  person  can 
now  be  identified  as  Kun  dga'  bKra  shis 
rgyal  mtshan,  the  thirty-second  abbot  of 
Sakya,  who  lived  from  1349  to  1425;  cf. 
Karmay  1975,  pp.  55,  67,  79-80,  101 
(n.  73),  where  he  is  known  by  the  ab- 
breviation Kun  bKras  pa.  The  figure 
above  his  head  may  be  his  father,  Chos 
kyi  rGyal  mtshan  (Chokyi  Gyaltsen) 
(Roerich  1979,  p.  215).  The  principal 
donor  is  Tshe  bsam  (Tshe  dbang  bsam 
bstan?)  (no.  6).  Another  monk  donor, 
Shes  rab  (no.  7),  prays  to  follow  as  a  dis- 
ciple of  the  lama.  The  principal  lay  donor 
is  Tshe  ring  bsam'  grub,  shown  in  the 
dress  of  a  high  official  (no.  11). 

There  is  no  suggestion  in  the  thanka  that 
Kunga  Tashi  was  dead  when  it  was 


261 


painted;  and  it  is  unlikely  that  this  sort 
of  painting  would  have  been  undertaken 
very  long  after  the  death  of  the  person  de- 
picted. The  thanka  may,  therefore,  date 
from  as  early  as  the  fifteenth  century. 

P21       Mahakala  and  Companions 

Inscriptions  identify  the  figures  seated  in 
the  clouds  in  the  order  indicated  by  the 
arrangement  of  numbers  below. 


1         2 
12 

20 
21 


3    4    5 
13    14 


15 


9    10    11 
16    17    18 
22    23 
24 


Inscriptions: 

1 .  rTse  mo 

2.  illegible 

3.  Lo  chen  Rin  bzang 

4.  bDe  ba'i  rdo  rje 

5.  mKha'  'gro  ma 

6.  rDo  rje  'chang 

7.  Bram  ze  mchog  snd 

8.  Dad  byed  go  cha 

9.  Brag  stengs  pa 

10.  Sa  (or  Pa)  chen  pa 

1 1 .  Grags  pa 

12.  dPal  ldan  bla  ma 

13.  dKon  mchog  dpal 

14.  Sa  pan 

15.  'Phags  pa 

16.  Brag  phug  pa 

19.  Sher chen 

20.  Sa  Skya  chen  po  (?) 

2 1 .  bDag  chen  bio  gros  pa 

22.  dKon  mchog  tshul  khrims 

23.  dGe  legs  shes 

24.  Shar  bdagi 

Dedicatory  inscription  at  the  bottom: 

bos 

thos  tshi  n  po  ink  1 

am 
tng 
des 
hi  thob  pi 

I  I 

Translation: 

With  the  aid  of  Thub  dbang  rdo  rje 
chang  and  other  protectors  of  religion, 
mDo  khams  Ga  zi  ba,  as  one  who  listens 
to  teaching,  has  set  up  this  picture  so 
that  all  creatures  under  the  sky,  headed 
by  the  father  and  grandfather  of  On  po 
mkhyen  rab,  may  be  purged  of  the  two 
sins  and  attain  fulfillment  in  the  two 
spheres.  By  its  merit  may  they  soon  win 
complete  knowledge. 


Ewam  chos-rje  performed  the  consecra- 
tion of  the  image.  The  rdzong  of  xx  'dzin 
bkra  shis  wishes  good  fortune.  Blessing 
for  all. 

P25      Portrait  of  the  Fifth  Karmapa 

The  inscriptions  identify  the  figures 
shown  as  follows: 

Upper  rou 

Left:  rNam  grol  sde 
Center:  Kye  rdo  rje 
Right:  Grol  sde 

Center  of  thanka 

Sa  skyong  gtsug  rgyan  chos  rje  De  bzhin 

gshegs  pa 

Lower  row 

Left:  Chos  'phel  ye  shes  [wearing  red  hat] 

Right:  on  higher  level:  Bya  yul  pa 

on  lower  level:  gTsug  rum  pa 

Inscription  on  back 

gyon  bdun  bDe  bzhin  gshegs  pa 

Notes: 

The  central  figure,  wearing  the  black  hat, 
is  De  bzhin  gshegs  pa  (Dezhin  Shegpa) 
the  fifth  Karmapa  (1384— 1415).  The 
figure  wearing  the  red  hat  is  Chos  dpal 
Yeshe  (Chospal  Yeshe,  1406— 1452),  the 
third  member  of  the  Shamar  lineage.  The 
Shamarpas  are  a  subsect  of  the  Karmapas. 

P31      A  Symbolic  Banquet 

Inscription: 

shing  mo  sbrul  lo  gung  ru  byang  'dren 
zur  pa  bio  bzang  bsam  bstan  nas  dad  pas 
phul  I  I 

Translation: 

Given  as  an  act  of  faith  by  Bio  bzang 
bSam  gtan  (Lobsang  Samten),  the  retired 
Byang  dren  of  Gung  ru  in  the  female 
wood-snake  year. 

Notes: 

Byang  'dren  is  another  name  for  the  dbu 
mdzad,  the  monk  who  leads  the  prayers  in 
the  assembly.  The  name  of  the  monastery 
or  college  is  unfortunately  indistinct.  It 
could  be  Mung  ru,  Gung  ru,  or  Phung 
ru.  The  first  is  not  traceable;  but  there 
are  places  called  Gung  thang  and  Phung 
mkhar.  The  date  referred  to  may  be  either 
1725  or  1785. 

P45       Temple  Hanging 

Inscription: 

hi  ba  lung  rt 

rims 


pa' 1  nor' bt/i  gling  mdzes  byed  bzang 
gos  dra  ba  dra  phyed  'di  gra  tshang  'bid 
bla  p'a  ra  dge  bshes  m  I  bio  bzang  dba 
phyug  ngo  g-yog  nas  phul  ba'i  I  'brel 
thogs  'das  gson  bshes  gnyen  ded  dpon  la  I 
brten  nas  'khor  ba'i  rgya  mtsho  las  b> 
te  skit  gsum  rin  chen  gling  du  son  gy  ur 
..•  I  I  ska  I  bzai 
2 .       na  mo  gu  ru  bhya  rab  byung  bat  drug 
pa' 1  Icags  'brug  lo  dra  phed gsar  bskrun 
jkabs  rje  rin  po  che'i  sku  dar  rje  btsun 
chos  rgyan  gyi  skit  be  as  bzhengs  rgyu 
'dul  ba  'dzin  gra  nas  bsdus  chud  yan 
slob  gnyer  ba  mams  nas  zhal  'debs  phul 
ba  sdom  dngul  srang  bzhi  brgya  srang 
ho  gang  tarn  dkar  bat  bzhi  gzhan 
u  byur  bcas  byung  ba'i  dge  ba 
mams  rgyal  bstan  dar  dang  'gro  mams 
rdzogs  byung  thob  pa' 1  rgyur  gyur  cig  I  I 

Translation: 

1 .  Svasti  This  wave  of  the  liberating 
peaceful  ocean,  the  Jewel  Park  that 
reaches  the  peak  of  existence,  this 
beautifully  made  network  hanging  of 
fine  silk,  an  excellent  gift  to  the 
monastery  is  offered  by  Pha  ra  Dge 
bshes  Bio  bzang  dbang  phyug 
[geshe  Lobsang  Bangphyug],  the 
master,  and  his  pupils.  May  they,  re- 
lying on  the  guidance  of  a  succession 
of  religious  teachers  past  and  pres- 
ent, cross  over  the  ocean  of  worldly 
existence  and  enter  the  sphere  of  the 
three  precious  lives. 

[written  by?]  Skal  bzang 

2.  Reverence  to  the  Guru.  At  the  time 
of  making  this  new  network  hanging 
in  the  Iron  dragon  year  of  the  16th 
rab  byung  [1940]  in  order  to  set  up  a 
picture  of  the  Rje  Rinpoche  in  silk 
and  a  picture  of  Rje  btsun  Chos 
rgyan,  having  made  a  collection 
from  the  whole  vinaya  college,  con- 
tributions from  the  students 
amounted  to  four  hundred  srangs  of 
silver,  one  zho  and  fourteen  white 
[silver]  tarn  ka  together  with  tur- 
quoises and  coral.  May  this  cause  the 
doctrine  of  the  Buddha  to  spread  and 
all  creatures  to  attain  enlightenment. 

Notes: 

The  name  of  the  monastery  is  Byang  rtse 
Norbu'i  gling  (Norbulinga).  The  figures 
of  the  rje  Rin  po  che  (Tsongkhapa)  and 
Chos  rgyan  (Chos  kyi  rGyal  mtshan,  or 
Chokyi  Gyaltsen,  the  First  Panchen 
Lama)  are  in  the  center  of  the  hanging. 

S3      Eleven-Headed  Avalokitesvara 

Inscription: 
Hrogs  nn  ny, 

chang  lha  rog  gi  g-yar  dam  tit  (du?)  bzhengs 

ba 


262 


/ 


Prot  isional  translation: 
Pleased  to  set  this  up  at  Htogs  tri  as  a 
vow  (in  return  for)  help  from  Nya'a 
(Nyag)  Chang  Lha. 

Notes: 

Line  i  is  in  a  strange  "mystic"  lettering, 
and  the  transcription  may  be  inaccurate. 
Lines  2  and  3  are  scantily  punctuated. 
The  j  of  bzhengs  is  written  at  the  begin- 
ning of  line  3. 

S3 1       Dampa  Sangye 

Inscription: 

I  I  dPal  dan  bla  ma'i  thugs  dgon 
rdzogs phyir  du  I  daw  pa' 1  skit  'dra  dad 
Idan  gsol  'debs  sten  I  a  nes  tso  byas  bu 
slob  mams  kyi  zbengs  I  dge  bas  '  gro  kun 
sangs  rgyas  thob  par  shog  \  bkra  shis  \ 
dge  '0  I  I 

I  I  Om  sidha  I  tshogs  gnyis  rab  rdzogs  sku 
gnyis  Ihun  grub  pa  1  I  'jam  bu  gling  du 
stan pa' 1  sgron  me  sbar  I  kbyad par  kha 
ba  can  du  smin  sgrol  'dzad  I  dam  pa' 1 
sangs  rgyas  zhabs  la  pb)ag  '  tshalo  I  ska 
cad  thar  phy  in  'od  gsal  fmngon)  du  gy  ur, 
thabs  la  snga  snyes  'kha '  gro  dbang  du 
'dus  I  'gros  ba  7  don  la  sgrub  pa  7  rgyal 
'tshan  rtsugs  I  I  dpal  Ida*  abs 

la  phyag  'tshalo  I 

Translation: 

Headed  by  his  aunt  (or  "the  nun")  the 
disciples  have  set  up  this  holy  image  as  a 
support  for  faithful  prayers  for  the  memo- 
rial service  of  the  glorious  lama  (or  dPal 
ldan  Bla  ma).  By  its  merit  may  all  crea- 
tures attain  Buddhahood.  Good  luck 
good  fortune. 

Om  sidha,  Homage  to  the  feet  of  Dam- 
pa'i  Sangs  rgyas!  Fully  accomplished  in 
the  two  spheres,  miraculously  perfected 
in  two  bodies,  who  lights  the  lamp  of 
faith  in  the  world  and  especially  in  the 
land  of  snow  has  brought  about  salvation, 
who  has  become  a  master  of  the  scriptures 
and  has  attained  liberation  and  become 
clear  light.  Relying  on  his  mastery  of 
means  he  brings  under  his  power  all  that 
go  in  the  sky  and  has  planted  the  banner 
of  victory  for  the  accomplishment  of  the 
purpose  of  living  beings.  Homage  to  the 
feet  of  dPal  ldan  seng  ge. 

Notes: 

The  image  is  of  Dam  pa  Sangs  rgyas 
(Dampa  Sangye),  the  eleventh-century  In- 
dian mystic  who  was  the  subject  of  many 
legendary  stories.  He  was  the  initiator  of 
the  Zhi  byed  (Shiche)  school  in  the 
eleventh  century.  The  image  is  dedicated 


in  memory  of  the  lama  dPal  ldan  Seng  ge 
(Palden  Sengge).  A  person  of  that  name, 
who  died  in  1342,  is  mentioned  several 
times  in  The  Blue  Annals,  whose  author, 
'Gos  Lotsawa,  belonged  to  the  same 
lineage  of  teachers  as  Palden  Sengge 
(Roerich  1979,  pp.  330,  374,  384, 
785,  1052).  The  image  may  therefore 
date  from  the  fourteenth  century. 

S3  2      Portrait  of  Karma  Dudtsi 


bde  bar  gshegs  pa  bla  ma  rin  por  che 
karma  bdud  rtsi:  bzims  mal  sku  'dra  sku 

Ijon  la  grub  pa  7  bzud  bzhugs  la  yabs 
sras  kyi  by  in  rlabi  iang 

gzhan  yang  ri  I  por  che  la  sogs  pa'i 
khyadu  pags  pa  bzhugs. 

Translation: 

A  portrait  image  for  the  bedroom  of  the 
late  Lama  Rinpoche  Karma  bdud  rtsi. 
May  the  image  and  the  relics,  made  of 
wood  and  placed  inside,  be  a  blessing  and 
a  way  of  perfection  for  father  and  son,  and 
may  it  be  a  holy  object  especially  for 
other  rinpoches  and  so  on. 

Notes: 

A  Karmapa  lama  named  Karma  bDud  rtsi 
(Karma  Dudtsi)  is  recorded  as  having 
lived  in  the  sixteenth  century.  The  "father 
and  son"  referred  to  in  the  inscription 
may  be  the  donors,  or  may  be  the  late 
lama  and  his  disciple. 

Several  orthographical  irregularities  occur 
here.  Sja  sjags  must  be  in  error  for  Su 
rdzogs.  Khyadu  in  last  line  is  not  quite 
clear. 

S34      Mahasiddha  Virupa 

Inscription: 

Om  svasti  I  sku  gsung  thugs  yon  tan 
'phrin  las  cig  tu  sdus  pa'i  ngo  bo  nyid  I 
bla  ma  mams  dang  dpaldan  wir  wa  pa 
gnyis  n  med  la  dag  no  sky  abs  11  mchi  I  dge 
slong  namkha'  gshes  gnyen  khu  mtshan 
gnyis  kyis  I  tshe  'das  gyi  don  du  gzhengs 
pa'i  bsod  nams  /  kun  sangs  rgyas 

myur  thob  shog  I  I 

Translation: 

Om  swasti!  I  take  refuge  in  the  lamas  and 
the  glorious  Virvapa,  who  are  as  one,  and 
whose  nature  combines  together  body, 
speech,  thought,  wisdom,  and  action. 
Through  the  merit  of  setting  up  [this  im- 
age] by  the  monk  Nam  kha'  gShes  gnyen 
(bShes  gNyen)  and  his  uncle,  for  the  sake 
of  the  dead  may  the  two  [donors]  and  all 
beings  swiftly  attain  Buddhahood. 


S38      Sonam  Tsemo 

Inscription: 

rje  btsun  bSod  nams  rtse  mo  la  na 
mo:  mangalam  I 

Translation: 

Veneration  to  the  reverend  bSod  nams 

rTse  mo  [Sonam  Tsemo].  Good 

fortune! 

R16     Set  of  Votive  Plaques  (Tsha  Tsha) 

The  back  of  each  tsha  tsha  is  inscribed 
in  Chinese,  Mongolian,  Manchurian, 
and  Tibetan.  The  inscriptions  iden- 
tify the  figures  and  the  Tibetan  names 
are  as  follows: 

1 .  Spyan  ras  gzigs  rdo  rje  chos 

2.  'Jig  rten  dbang  phyug  ha  la  ha 
la 

3.  rDo-rje  rgyu 

4.  Kshe  tra  pa'la 

5.  'Od  zer    can  phyag  gnyis  ma 

6.  Sher  byin  phyag  gnyis  ma 

7.  gTsug  tor  rnam  rgyal  ma 

8.  kLu  dbang  gi  rgyal  po 

9.  Lha  mo  ral  gcig  ma  phyag  nyi 
shu  rtsa  bzhi  ma 

10.  Dus  kyi    'khor  lo 

1 1 .  gSang  'dus  mi  bskyod  rdo  rje 

12.  Sangs  rgyas  rjes  su  skyong  ba 

13.  rNal  'byor  nam  mkhar 

14.  rDo  rje  rin  chen 

15.  Pi  lwang  dbyangs  can  ma 

16.  dGon  gyi  Lha  mo 

17.  rGyal  chen 'dugs  skya  ser 

18.  sGrol  ma  nor  sbyin  ma 

19.  Lo  ma  gyon  ma  phyag  drug  ma 

20.  bTsong  kha  pa   chen  po 
2  1 .  sRid  med  kyi  bu 

22.  sNying  po  kye  rdo  rje 

23.  Lha  mo  tsunda  phyag  bzhi  ma 

24.  rDo  rje  bsrung  ba 

25.  Dombi  pa 

26.  gSang  sngags  rjes  'dzin 

27.  Lo  ma  gyon  ma  phyag  drug 

ma  (duplicate  of  no.  19) 

28.  Phyag  rdor  gtum  chung 
(?chud) 

29.  bDug  nag  sel  ba'l  sgrol  ma 

30.  sBed  byed 

3 1 .  'Thags  ma  gdugs  dkar  po  can 

32.  'Jam  dbyangs  gsang    sgrub 

33.  brTsad  dmar  can  (?) 

34.  Sher  phyin  phyag  gnyis  ma 
(duplicate  of  no.  6) 

35.  sGrol  ma  gser  mdog  ma 

36.  rDo  rje    rgyal  po 


263 


Tibetan  Pronunciation  Key 


The  Tibetan  words  in  this  catalogue  are  spelled  phonetically. 
What  follows  is  a  concordance  of  the  phonetic  renderings  of  those 
words  which  appear  frequently  in  the  text  with  their  correct 
Tibetan  transliterations.  Words  whose  phonetic  renderings  and 
transliterations  are  equivalent  have  been  omitted  from  this  list. 


Buton 

Chamdo 

cho 

Chodrag  Gyatsho 

Chogyal 

Chokyi  Gyaltsen 

chokyong 

Chospal  Yeshe 

choten 

Dampa  Sangye 

Dezhin  Shegpa 

Dolma 

Drepung 

Drigungpa 

Dromton 

Drukpa 

Ganden 

Gelukpa 

Gyalpo  Palseng 

Gyeltsabje 

Gyeltsen  Ozer 

Jamyang 

Kadampa 

Kagyupa 

Kanjur 

Karma  Dudtsi 

Karma  Pakshi 

Kham 

Khedubje 

Khuton 

kumbum 

Kunga  Dorje 

Kunga  Wangchuk 

Kunga  Sangpo 

Kunga  Tashi 

Kunlek 

Langdarma 

Legden  Nagpo 

Lobsang  Samten 


Bu  ston 

Chab  mdo 

gcod 

Chos  grags  rGya  mtso 

Chos  rgyal 

Chos  kyi  rGyal  mtshan 

chos  skyong 

Chos  dpal  Yeshe 

mchod  rten 

Dam  pa  Sangs  rgyas 

De  bzin  gshegs  pa 

sGrol  ma 

'Bras  spungs 

'Bri  gung  pa 

Brom  ston 

'Brug  pa 

dGa'  ldan 

dGe  lugs  pa 

rGyal  po  dPal  seng 

rGyal  tshab  rje 

rGyal  mtshan  'Od  zer 

'Jam  dbyangs 

bka'  gdams  pa 

bka'  brgyud  pa 

bka'  'gyur 

Karma  bDud  rtsi 

Ka  rma  Pak  shi 

Khams 

mKhas  grub  rje 

Khu  ston 

sku  'bum 

Kun  dga'  rDo  rje 

Kun  dga'  dBang  phyug 

Kun  dga'  bZang  po 

Kun  dga'  bKra  shis 

Kun  legs 

Glang  dar  ma 

Legs  ldan  Nag  po 

Bio  bzang  bSam  gtan 


lu 

Milarepa 

Mikyo  Dorje 

Narthang 

Ngok 

Ngokton 

Nyingmapa 

Phagmotrupa 

Phakpa 

Reting 

Rinchen  Sangpo 

Rolpe  Dorje 

Sakyapa 

Samye 

Senge  Namgyal 

Shalu 

Shamarpa 

Shiche 

Shinje 

Sonam  Gyatso 

Sonam  Senge 

Sonam  Tsemo 

Songtsen  Gampo 

Talungpa 

Tanjur 

Tashilumpo 

Tashipal 

Thisong  Detsen 

Thubten  Namgyal 

Trophu 

Tsang 

Tshelpa 

Tshewang  Namgyal 

Tshulgyi  Ozer 

Tshurphu 

tulku 

Yeshe  6 

Yuthok  Yonten  Gonpo 


klu 

Mi  la  Ras  pa 
Mi  'gyo  rDo  rje 
sNar  thang 
rNgog 
rNgog  ston 
rNying  ma  pa 
Phag  mo  gru  pa 
Phags  pa 
Rva  sgreng 
Rin  chen  bZang  po 
Rol  pa'i  rDo  rje 
Sa  skya  pa 
Bsam  yas 

Seng  ge  rNam  rgyal 
Zhva  lu 
Zhva  mar  pa 
Zhi  byed 
gShin  rje 

bSod  nams  rGya  mtsho 
bSod  nams  Seng  ge 
bSod  nams  rTse  mo 
Srong  brtsan  sGam  po 
sTag  lung  pa 
bsTan  gyur 
bKra  shis  lhum  po 
bkra  shis  dpal 
Khri  srong  IDe  brtsan 
Thub  bstan  rNam  rgyal 
Khro  phu 
gTsang 
Tshal  pa 

Tshe  dbang  rNam  rgyal 
Tshul  gyi  'Od  zer 
mTshur  phu 
sprul  sku 
Yeshes  Od 
Yu  thog  Yon  tan  mGon  po 


264 


Glossaries  of  Selected  Sanskrit  and  Tibetan  Terms 


Included  here  are  significant  Sanskrit  and  Tibetan  terms  used  in 
this  catalogue.  Definitions  have  been  limited  to  those  meanings 
most  relevant  to  Tibetan  art  and  thought.  Spellings  of  words  in  the 
Sanskrit  glossary  contain  all  appropriate  diacritical  marks,  which 
have  been  omitted  in  the  rest  of  the  catalogue  to  facilitate  reading. 


Sanskrit  Terms 


abhayamudra 
abhicara 

Abhirati 

abhisheka 

Adibuddha 

Akshobhya 

amalaka 

Amitabha 

Amitayus 
Amoghasiddhi 

Ananda 

anatma 

Aryamarijusrinamasanglti 
Ashtamandalaksiitra 


gesture  of  reassurance 

tantric  rite  performed  to  destroy  the 
enemy 

heaven  of  Akshobhya 

religious  initiation  ceremony 

primordial  Buddha  in  Vajrayana 
Buddhism 

"imperturbable";  one  of  the  five 
transcendental  Buddhas  of  the 
Vajrayana  pantheon 

myrobalan,  a  medicinal  fruit;  sym- 
bol of  Bhaishajyaguru,  the  Healing 
Buddha 

Buddha  of  endless  life;  one  of  the 
five  transcendental  Buddhas  of  the 
Vajrayana  pantheon 

Buddha  of  endless  life;  a  form  of 
Amitabha 

"unfailing  perfection";  one  of  the 
five  transcendental  Buddhas  of  the 
Vajrayana  pantheon 

one  of  Buddha  Sakyamuni's  principal 
disciples 

no-soul;  a  technical  term  in 
Buddhist  philosophy 

litany  of  epithets  extolling  Manjusrl 

a  Mahayana  scripture 

265 


Ashtasabasrika 
P  raj  nap  a  ra  m  it  a 


Atlsa  Dipahkara  Srijnana 

atma 
avadana 

Avalokitesvara 

B  haga  vadglta 

B  haishajyagu  rusutra 

Bhaishajyaraja 
Bhlmaratha 

bhumi 

bhumisparsamudra 

bodhi 

bodhicitta 


the  most  fundamental  work  on 
Mahayana  philosophy;  perhaps  com- 
posed by  N  agar  j  una 

Indian  Buddhist  teacher  who  visited 
Tibet  in  1042  and  reestablished  Bud- 
dhism there 

the  self 

birth  stories  of  Buddha  Sakyamuni's 
previous  lives 

the  principal  bodhisattva  of  the 
Vajrayana/Mahayana  pantheon 

Hindu  scripture  and  philosophical 
work;  perhaps  the  most  sacred  book 
of  the  Hindus 

a  Mahayana  text  about  Bhaishajya- 
guru, the  Healing  Buddha 

a  Mahayana  bodhisattva 

rite  of  longevity  and  senility 
performed  in  Nepal  by  the  Newars 

a  stage  of  enlightenment;  a  term  in 
Mahayana  philosophy 

touching-the-earth  gesture  made  by 
Buddha  Sakyamuni  at  the  moment 
of  his  enlightenment 

enlightenment;  from  which  comes 
the  word  Buddha,  meaning  the  En- 
lightened One 

mind  of  enlightenment 


bodhisattva 


Brahma 

camara 
Camunda 

Candall 
carya 
Caurl 

Citralakshana 
dak  a 

dakini 

Dana  Paramita 

Devanagarl 
dharanl 

dharmadhatu 

dharmapala 
Dharmaraja 

dharmata 

Dharmatala 

dhoti 

Dhritarashtra 

dhyana 


dhyanamudra 
Divyavaddna 

Dombinl 
Ekajatl 


a  being  who  compassionately  refrains 
from  entering  Nirvana  in  order  to 
save  others;  worshiped  as  a  deity  in 
Mahayana  and  Vajrayana  Buddhism 

a  Hindu  god,  also  venerated  by  the 
Buddhists 

fly  whisk  made  from  yak's  tail  hair 

Hindu  goddess  of  dread;  identified 
with  the  Tibetan  goddess  Lhamo 

a  Vajrayana  goddess 

second  class  of  tantra  (praxis) 

a  Vajrayana  goddess 

a  book  on  iconometry 

a  class  of  demigods,  especially  associ- 
ated with  the  mahasiddhas 

a  class  of  demigoddesses;  female  of 
daka 

perfection  of  charity;  a  Buddhist 
goddess 

script  in  which  Sanskrit  is  written 

that  which  supports;  collection  of 
mantras 

synonym  for  stupa;  literally,  "essence 
of  religion" 

protector  of  religion 

synonym  for  Yama,  the  Hindu  god 
of  death 

religiosity 

an  arhat 

loincloth  worn  by  Indian  men 

regent  of  the  east 

invocation  of  a  deity  including  his  or 
her  personal  description;  used  by 
priests  to  invoke  a  deity  and  by  artists 
to  represent  him  or  her;  meditation 

gesture  of  meditation 

collection  of  stories  about  the  lives  of 
Buddha  Sakyamuni 

a  Vajrayana  Buddhist  goddess 

a  manifestation  of  Tara 


gajasimha 

Ganesa 

garuda 

Gaurl 
Gayadhara 

Ghasmarl 
Guhyasamdjatantra 

guruparampara 
harmika 

Hayagrlva 

ishtadevata 

Jambudvlpa 

jata 

jataka 
Jivarama 

jnana 

jnanakhadga 
kala 
Kalacakra 

kalasa 

Kali  or  Kalika 

Kalika 
Kamadhatu 


combined  motif  of  a  lion  and  an 
elephant  depicted  on  thrones 

elephant-headed  Hindu  god;  also 
worshiped  by  Buddhists 

Indian  mythical  bird  identified  with 
the  Tibetan  khyung;  avian  mount  of 
Vishnu 

a  Vajrayana  goddess;  also  a  name  lor 
the  Hindu  goddess  Durga 

an  Indian  Buddhist  teacher  who 
went  to  Tibet  in  the  eleventh 
century 

a  Vajrayana  goddess 

one  of  the  oldest  and  most  basic 
Vajrayana  texts 

lineage  of  gurus 

rectangular  entablature  above  the 
dome  of  a  stupa 

a  Vajrayana  god;  the  horse-headed 
one 

a  god  who  protects  and  guides  the 
individual,  family,  or  monastery 

a  name  of  the  Indian  subcontinent  in 
Indian  cosmography 

hairstyle  of  ascetics  who  allow  their 
hair  to  grow;  a  tall  hairdress  is  thus 
called  a  jatamukuta,  or  crown  of  jata. 

a  story  about  Sakyamuni's  previous 
births 

a  Newari  artist  who  visited  Tibet  in 
the  fifteenth  century 

wisdom  or  knowledge 

sword  of  knowledge 

time 

a  Vajrayana  text  and  god;  literally, 
"wheel  of  time" 

water  pot 

a  Hindu  goddess  of  dread;  also 
worshiped  by  Buddhists 

an  arhat 

realm  of  desire;  one  of  the  spheres  in 
the  Buddhist  cosmology 


266 


/ 


Kamalaslla 

Karikall 

Karall 

karuna 

khakhara 

khatvanga 

klla 
kinnara 

klrttimukha 

kritanjalimudra 

kriya 

kundika 
Kushana 

Mahabhairava 
Mahakala 

Mahakall 
Mahamaudgalyayana 

Mahamayurl 

mahasiddha 

Mahasthamaprapta 
mahasukha 
Mahayana 
Mahesvara 


an  Indian  Buddhist  teacher  who 
went  to  Tibet  in  the  eighth  century; 
a  disciple  of  Santarakshita 

a  Vajrayana  goddess;  a  manifestation 
of  Kali 

a  Vayrayana  goddess;  a  manifestation 
of  Kali 

compassion 

mendicant's  staff 

a  cot's  leg  which  is  wielded  as  a 
skull-crowned  magic  staff  by  angry 
Vajrayana  deities 

peg  or  nail  used  in  tantric  ritual 

an  Indian  mythical  creature;  half- 
bird,  half-human  in  form 

face  of  glory;  stylized  lion's  face;  an 
auspicious  Indian  symbol 

gesture  of  adoration;  synonym  of 
namaskaramudra 

a  class  of  tantra  (liturgical 
performance) 

small  water  pot  carried  by  ascetics 

an  Indian  dynasty  that  ruled  in 
northwest  India  from  the  first  cen- 
tury B.C.  until  third  century  A.D. 

an  epithet  of  MahjusrI;  also  of  the 
Hindu  Siva 


Maitreya 

makara 

manda 

mani 
ManjusrI 

mantra 

Mara 

meru-danda 

mudra 

naga 

Nagarjuna 


Nairatma  or  Nairatmya 


namaskaramudra 


Narasirhha 


a  Vajrayana  god;  also  the  Hindu 

Siva;  in  Tibet,  the  preeminent  dharma-    nyagrodhaparimandala 

pala,  and  protector  of  the  tent 


see  Kali 

one  of  Sakyamuni's  principal 
disciples 

a  Vajrayana  goddess;  also  a  dharanl 
who  heals  snakebite 

a  perfected  being;  venerated  by  both 
Buddhists  and  Saivas 

name  of  a  bodhisattva 

great  bliss 

a  form  of  Buddhism;  the  Great  Path 

a  synonym  of  Siva;  literally,  "the 
great  god" 


Odantapurl 
Pala 

pancasikha 
paramartha  sunyata 

paramita 

parasu 

paryarikasana 


the  future  Buddha,  whose  appear- 
ance is  still  awaited  by  the  Buddhists 

an  Indian  mythical  creature;  an  aus- 
picious symbol 

essence;  from  which  the  word  mandala 
is  derived  by  some  lexicographers 

jewel;  an  important  Buddhist  symbol 

one  of  the  most  important  Buddhist 
deities 

mystical  formula  of  invocation  or 
incantation  essential  in  tantric  reli- 
gious practice 

the  Buddhist  god  of  desire 

spinal  column  or  the  vertebrae 

gestures  made  with  the  hands  by 
both  priests  and  deities;  symbolize 
various  abstract  concepts 

serpent;  mythical  creatures  that  play 
an  important  role  in  Buddhist 
legends  and  art 

an  Indian  Buddhist  philosopher  who 
lived  in  the  second  century  A.D.; 
traditionally  credited  as  the  author  of 
Prajndparamita  literature 

a  Vajrayana  goddess;  literally, 
"No-Soul" 

gesture  of  adoration  or  greeting 

an  avatar  of  the  Hindu  god  Vishnu 

circular  like  the  fig  tree;  a  metaphor 
for  the  Buddha  image 

a  famous  Indian  Buddhist  monastery 

an  Indian  dynasty;  ruled  in  Bihar 
and  Bengal  from  the  eighth  through 
the  twelfth  century 

one  with  five  tufts  or  "crests"  of  hair 

ultimate  nothingness;  a  term  used  in 
Mahayana  philosophy 

perfection;  a  term  used  in  Mahayana 
philosophy 

battle-axe  used  as  an  attribute  by 
deities 

a  posture  of  meditation  in  which 
both  feet  are  placed  on  the  thighs 


267 


pata 
paubha 
prajria 
Prajriaparamita 

pratyalldha 

puja 

PukkasI 

Raktayamari 

Ratnasambhava 

S  add  ha  rmapu  nda  rika 
sadhana 
Sadhanamala 
sahaja 


sahasraksha 

Saiva 

Sakyamuni 

Sakya  Pandita 
SakyasrT 

Samputatantra 
samsara 

Santarakshita 
SarasvatI 


painting  on  cloth 

Newari  word  for  pata 

insight  or  wisdom;  partner  siddhi 

one  of  the  most  important  Buddhist 

goddesses  Silpasastra 

a  militant  posture  struck  by  angry 


Shadakshan  Lokesvara 


Savan 


deities 

worship 

a  Vajrayana  goddess 

a  Vajrayana  god;  an  angry  form  of 
MahjusrI 

jewel-born;  one  of  the  five  transcen- 
dental Buddhas  of  the  Vajrayana 
pantheon 

a  Mahayana  scripture;  literally, 
"Lotus  of  the  True  Law" 

a  meditation  formula;  same  as 
dhyana 

a  Vajrayana  text  containing  descrip- 
tions and  mantras  of  deities 

co-emergence  of  the  twin  principles 
of  insight  and  compassion;  technical 
term  in  tantric  Buddhism;  literally, 
"natural"  or  "spontaneous" 

an  epithet  meaning  thousand-eyed 

a  follower  of  Siva 

an  epithet  of  the  Buddha;  sage  of  the 
Sakya  tribe 

a  Tibetan  teacher  (1182-1251) 

an  Indian  Buddhist  teacher  who 
went  to  Tibet  in  1204 

a  Vajrayana  text 

phenomenal  world;  the  indefinitely 
repeated  cycle  of  transmigration, 
birth,  death,  and  rebirth 

an  Indian  Buddhist  teacher  who 
went  to  Tibet  in  the  eighth  century 

the  popular  goddess  of  learning, 
wisdom,  and  music;  worshiped  by 
both  Hindus  and  Buddhists;  called 
Changehanma  in  Tibet 

a  Vajrayana  goddess 


Siva 

Somapuri 
Sraddhakaravarman 

Sravakayana 
stupa 
Sukhavati 
Sukhdvativyuha 

sunyata 

Suryavaivrocana 

sutra 

Tara 

Taranath 

tarjanlmudra 
tathagata 

Trayastrirhsa 
Triratna 

Uddiyana 


a  form  of  Avalokitesvara;  deification 
of  the  six-syllable  mantra:  om  mani 
padme  hum 

enlightenment;  miraculous  powers; 
perfection 

treatise  on  the  theory  and  practice  of 
the  visual  arts 

one  of  the  two  principal  Hindu 
gods,  also  venerated  by  Buddhists; 
the  other  is  Vishnu 

an  Indian  Buddhist  monastery 

an  Indian  Buddhist  teacher  who 
lived  in  the  eleventh  century;  the 
guru  of  Rinchen  Sangpo 

an  early  form  of  Buddhism;  the  path 
of  the  sravaka,  or  the  listeners 

a  hemispherical  or  cylindrical  mound 
or  tower  serving  as  a  Buddhist  shrine 

Amitabha's  paradise;  commonly 
known  as  the  Western  Paradise 

a  Mahayana  text  about  the  Western 
Paradise  of  Amitabha 

nothingness  or  voidness;  a  term  in 
Mahayana  philosophy 

a  bodhisattva;  acolyte  of 
Bhaishajyaguru 

a  scripture  or  book  containing  doc- 
trines and  aphorisms 

one  of  the  most  important  Vajrayana 
goddesses;  consort  of  Avalokitesvara 

Tibetan  polymath  and  famous  lama; 
born  in  1575 

gesture  of  admonition 

synonym  for  a  Buddha;  literally,  "he 
who  comes  and  goes  in  the  same 
way" 

name  of  a  heaven;  literally, 
"thirty-third" 

Three  Jewels  of  Buddhism — the 
Buddha,  the  religion  (dharma),  and 
the  monastic  order  (sarhgha) 

a  sacred  region  in  tantric  mythology; 
identified  with  the  Swat  Valley  in 
Pakistan 


268 


upaya 
urna 

ushnlsha 

Ushnlshavijaya 
Vairocana 

Vaisravana 


vajracarya 

Vajradhara 

vajrahurhkaramudra 

vajraklla 

Vajrakumara 

vajrapanjara 

Vajrapani 

vajrasana 


Vajrasattva 


Vajravarahl 


Vajra  vidd  rana-nd  ma  ■ 
dhdrani 

Vajrayana 


Vajnputra 


means  or  fitness  of  action;  a  concept 
in  Vajrayana  philosophy 

an  auspicious  tuft  of  hair  between 
the  eyebrows  of  a  Buddha  signifying 
superhuman  quality 

cranial  bump  on  the  head  of  a 
Buddha  symbolizing  wisdom 

a  Vajrayana  goddess  of  long  life 

belonging  to  the  sun;  one  of  the  five 
transcendental  Buddhas  of  the  Vajra- 
yana pantheon 

the  god  of  wealth  and  guardian  of 
the  north;  venerated  by  both  Hindus 
and  Buddhists;  identified  with  Kubera, 
the  Indian  god  of  wealth 

generally  applied  to  a  Vajrayana 
teacher;  in  Nepal  signifies  a  Bud- 
dhist priest 

a  Vajrayana  Buddhist  deity;  regarded 
as  the  supreme  Buddha  in  some  texts 

a  particular  gesture  of  the  hands 
used  by  Vajrayana  deities  and  priests 

literally,  "diamond  peg" — a  weapon 
or  ritual  implement  used  by  Vajra- 
yana priests 

Sanskrit  name  for  Dorje  Phurpa; 
literally,  "diamond-youth" 

literally,  "diamond  cage";  an  attri- 
bute of  a  deity 

one  of  the  oldest  and  most  signifi- 
cant bodhisattvas;  literally, 
"thunderbolt-bearer" 

literally,  "diamond  seat";  specifi- 
cally refers  to  Bodhgaya,  where  the 
Buddha  was  enlightened 

name  of  an  important  Vajrayana 
Buddhist  deity;  literally,  "thun- 
derbolt-being" 

name  of  an  important  Vajrayana 
goddess;  literally,  "Adamantine  Sow" 


Vasudhara 

Varall 

Varuna 

Vetall 
vidya 
vlja 

Vikramaslla 
Vimalaklrti 

Vimalakirtinirdesa 

Vinapa 

Virudhaka 
Vishnu 

visvavajra 

yaksha 

Yama 

Yamantaka 

yana 
yoga 


yogi 


a  Vajrayana  text  of  protective  spells        Tibetan  Terms 


a  form  of  Buddhism;  the  diamond  Alchi 

path  or  vehicle 

an  arhat  Bod 


the  Buddhist  goddess  of  wealth 

a  Vajrayana  goddess 

a  Hindu  god;  lord  of  the  west  and 
the  waters;  venerated  by  both 
Hindus  and  Buddhists 

a  Vajrayana  goddess 

knowledge;  incantation;  charm 

literally,  "seed";  elemental  and 
essential  syllables  in  a  mantra 

a  Buddhist  monastery  in  India 

a  Buddhist  adept;  human  hero  of 
Vimalakirtinirdesa 

an  important  text  on  Mahayana 
philosophy 

one  of  the  eighty-four  mahasiddhas 

regent  of  the  south 

one  of  the  two  most  important 
Hindu  gods;  the  other  is  Siva 

a  ritual  implement  known  as  the 
double-thunderbolt 

an  ancient  Indian  nature  deity;  often 
portrayed  as  a  gnome 

Hindu  god  of  death;  in  Tibet,  Lord 
of  the  Dead  and  King  of  Religion 

name  of  an  angry  form  of  MahjusrI; 
literally,  "Destroyer  of  Yama" 

path;  way;  vehicle 

spiritual  system,  common  to  both 
Buddhism  and  Hinduism,  which 
emphasizes  rigorous  physical  and 
mental  discipline  in  order  to 
attain  knowledge  of  the  self,  and  to 
achieve  union  with  the  Universal 
Consciousness;  literally,  "union" 

a  practitioner  of  yoga 


a  monastery  in  Ladakh;  founded  in 
the  eleventh  century 

Tibetan  name  for  Tibet 


269 


Bodpas 

Chamdo 

cho 

chokyong 
Drepung 

Drigung 

Drigungpa 

Drukpa 

Ganden 

Gelukpa 


geshe 
Guge 

Gyantse 

hoshang 
Iwang 

Kagyupa 

Kanjur 

Karmapa 
Khedubje 


Tibetan  name  for  Tibetan  people; 
derived  from  Bod 

a  Gelukpa  monastery  in  Kham; 
founded  1436—44 

a  meditative  technique  that  leads  to 
detachment  from  the  ego 

a  god  who  protects  the  religion 

a  monastery  in  central  Tibet; 
founded  by  Gelukpas  in  14 16 

a  Kagyupa  monastery;  founded 
in  1167 

a  Kagyupa  suborder;  an  adherent  of 
Drigung  monastery 

a  subsect  of  the  Kagyupa  order, 
founded  by  Padmo  Dorje  (1128— 
1 188);  principal  order  in  Bhutan 

monastery  where  Gelukpa  order 
originated;  founded  in  1409  by 
Tsongkhapa 

religious  order  founded  by 
main  disciples  of  Tsongkhapa;  be- 
came the  country's  most  important 
order  beginning  in  the  seventeenth 
century;  adherents  distinguished  by 
their  yellow  hats 

a  doctor  of  divinity 

kingdom  founded  in  western  Tibet 
in  the  ninth  century  by  one  of  Lang- 
darma's  sons 

important  commercial,  artistic,  and 
religious  center  in  central  Tibet 

Chinese  monk;  literally,  "teacher" 

an  early  Kadampa  monastery  in 
south-central  Tibet;  founded  in  the 
eleventh  century 

religious  order  founded  by  Marpa; 
more  mystically  oriented  than  other 
orders 

Tibetan  Buddhist  canonical  litera- 
ture; the  commentaries  on  original 
texts 

a  Kagyupa  suborder;  the  abbots  dis- 
tinguished by  their  black  hats 

one  of  Tsongkhapa 's  chief  disciples; 
an  authority  on  tantras;  author  of 
Fundamentals  0}  the  Buddhist  Tantras: 
lived  1385— 1438 


khyung 

kumbum 
Langdarma 

Lhamo 


lotsawa 
Marpa 


Ngor 


Nyingmapa 


Panchen  Lama 

Phagmotrupa 

Reting 
Rinchen  Sangpo 


Sakya 
Samye 

Sera 
Shalu 


mythical  bird;  identified  with  the 
Indian  garuda 

a  choten  with  chapels 

known  as  "apostate  king";  anti-Bud- 
dhist;  assassinated  around  842;  this 
assassination  ended  Yarlung  dynasty 

most  eminent  goddess  of  Tibetan 
pantheon;  protectress  of  Gelukpa 
order  and  of  Lhasa,  Tibet's  capital 

general  term  for  metal  alloy  used  in 
sculptures 

translator 

founder  of  the  Kagyupa  order;  re- 
membered for  introducing  Tibetan 
poetry  which  was  expressive  of  per- 
sonal feelings  and  observations  as 
well  as  religious  ones;  teacher  of 
Milarepa;  lived  1012  — 1096 

monastery  founded  in  1429  by 
Kunga  Sangpo;  branch  of  the  Sak- 
yapa  order;  followers  called  Ngorpas 

"ancient  order";  a  religious  order 
founded  around  the  tenth— eleventh 
centuries  by  combining  various  older 
sects  and  traditions 

title  of  the  abbot  of  the  Tashilumpo 
monastery;  most  important  religious 
figure  in  Tibet  after  the  Dalai  Lama 

a  Kagyupa  suborder;  founded  in 
1158  by  Phagmotrupa,  member  of  a 
royal  dynasty 

a  Kadampa  monastery  established  by 
Dromton  in  1056—57 

great  translator  who  revived  Bud- 
dhism in  the  country;  lived 
958—1055  in  western  Tibet;  friend 
of  King  Yeshe  O 

monastery  founded  in  1073  by  Khoii 
family;  adherents  called  Sakyapas 

monastery  established  c.  779  by 
King  Thisong  Detsen,  Santarakshita, 
and  Padmasambhava 

a  monastery  in  central  Tibet;  estab- 
lished by  Gelukpas  in  1419 

monastery  founded  by  Che  family  in 
1040;  belongs  to  Sakyapa  order;  seat 
of  Buton  rinpoche  (1290-1364); 
adherents  called  Shalupas 


270 


/ 


Songtsen  Gampo 

Sumda 

Tabo 

Tanjur 

Talungpa 

Tashilumpo 

Thel 

Thisong  Detsen 

Thubten  Namgyal 

Toling 

torma 

Tsang 
tshe  bum 

Tshel 

Tshurphu 

Tsongkhapa 

tulku 
yab-yum 

Yarlung  dynasty 


king  of  Tibet  (r.c.  609-49);  founded     Yeshe  O 
Yarlung  dynasty;  Buddhism  intro- 
duced to  Tibet  during  his  reign 


a  monastery  in  western  Tibet; 
rounded  in  the  eleventh  century  by 
Rinchen  Sangpo 

a  monastery  in  western  Tibet; 
founded  in  the  tenth  century  by 
Rinchen  Sangpo 

Tibetan  Buddhist  canonical  litera- 
ture; original  treatises 

a  branch  of  the  Kagyupa  order; 
monastery  of  Talung  founded  by 
Taking  Tashipal  (1142-1210) 

monastery  established  in  1447  by 
Gelukpas  in  Tsang;  seat  of  the 
Panchen  Lamas 

monastery  founded  1158;  principal 
seat  of  the  Phagmotrupas 

king  of  Tibet  (b.  742);  fervent  ad- 
herent of  Buddhism;  established  first 
great  monastery  at  Samye 

monastery  established  in  1478  by 
Sonam  Senge;  belonged  to  Sakyapa 
order 

monastery  founded  by  Yeshe  O  and 
Rinchen  Sangpo  in  the  tenth  century 
in  the  kingdom  of  Guge 

an  effigy  of  Hour  and/or  yak's  butter; 
offered  as  a  substitute  for  real  objects 

region  in  central  Tibet 

water  container  used  on  altars  and 
in  life-prolonging  ceremonies 

monastery  founded  1175;  a  Kagyupa 
suborder 

monastery  founded  1189;  principal 
sear  of  the  Karmapas 

great  reformer  of  Tibetan  Buddhism; 
founder  of  the  Gelukpa  order;  lived 
1357-1419 

a  living  Buddha;  an  emanation  of  an 
earlier  lama;  Dalai  Lima  is  an  example 

literally,  "father-mother";  position  of 
sexual  union;  means  union  of  com- 
passion and  insight 

mid-seventh  to  mid-ninth  century; 
founded  by  Songtsen  Gampo 


yidam 


Zanskar 


a  member  of  Guge  royal  fai 
abdicated  the  throne  to    , 
dhism  in  Tibet;  lived  c.  1000 

a  god  who  protects  and  guides  the 
individual,  family,  or  monastery 

region  in  India  adjoining  Ladakh; 
culturally  Tibetan 


271 


Bibliographies 


Books  and  Articles 

Anyetsang,  M.  C.  1980.  "The  Thanka  Paint- 
ings of  Tibet."  The  Tibet  Society  Bulletin. 
vol.  15,  pp.  5-9. 

Aris,  M.  and  A.  S.  S.  Kyi,  eds.  1981.  Tibetan 
Studies  in  Honour  of  Hugh  Richardson.  War- 
minster: Aris  and  Phillips. 

Austen,  H.  H.  G.  1865.  "On  the  System  Em- 
ployed in  Outlining  the  Figures  of  Deities 
and  Other  Religious  Drawings,  as  Prac- 
ticed in  Ladak,  Zaskar,  etc."  Journal  of  the 
Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  vol.  33,  pp.  151-54. 

Aziz,  B.  N.  1979.  "Indian  Philosopher  as  Ti- 
betan Folk  Hero."  Central  Asiatic  Journal, 
vol.  23,  nos.  1-2,  pp.  19—37. 

Bartholomew,  T  T  1980.  "Guardians  of  Ti- 
betan Buddhism."  Apollo,  vol.  CXII,  no. 
222,  pp.  94—100. 

Beguin,  G.  1974.  "Bronzes  himalayens,"  La 
Revue  du  Louvre,  vols.  4-5,  pp.  333-44. 

1980.  Forty-one  Thang-kas  from  the 


Collection  of  His  Holiness  the  Dalai  Lama. 
Paris:  Editions  Sciaky. 

Bell,  C.  1968.  The  Religion  of  Tibet.  London: 
Oxford  University  Press. 

Beyer,  S.  1978.  The  Cult  of  Tara.  Berkeley  and 
Los  Angeles:  University  of  California  Press. 

Bhattacharyya,  B.  1958.  The  Indian  Buddhist 
Iconography.  2nd  ed.  Calcutta:  Firma  K.  L. 
Mukhopadhyay. 

Birnbaum,  R.  1979.  The  Healing  Buddha. 
Boulder,  Colo.:  Shambhala. 

Blofeld,  J.  1978.  Bodhisattva  of  Wisdom.  Boul- 
der, Colo.:  Shambhala. 

Brauen,  M.  and  P.  Kvaerne.  1978.  Tibetan 
Studies.  Zurich:  Volkerkundemuseum  der 
Universitat  Zurich. 

Chang,  G.  C.  C.  1977.  The  Hundred  Thousand 
Songs  of  Milarepa,  2  vols.  Boulder,  Colo.: 
Shambhala. 

Chapin,  H.  B.  and  A.  C.  Soper,  1972.  A  Long 
Roll  of  Buddhist  Images.  Ascona,  Switzer- 
land: Artibus  Asiae. 

Chattopadhyay,  A.  1972.  Catalogue  of  Kanjur 
and  Tanjur.  vol.  1.  Calcutta:  Indo-Tibetan 
Studies. 


1981.  Atisa  and  Tibet .  Delhi:  Motilal 

Banarasidass. 

Chow,  F.  197 1.  "Arts  from  the  Rooftop  of 
Asia — Tibet,  Nepal,  Kashmir."  Metropolitan 
Museum  of  Art  Bulletin,  May,  pp.  380-93. 

Clark,  W.  E.  1965.  Two  Lamaistic  Pantheons. 
Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University 
Press. 

Conze,  E.  et.  al.  1964.  Buddhist  Texts  through 
the  Ages.  New  York:  Harper  and  Row. 

Dargay,  E.  M.  1977.  The  Rise  of  Esoteric  Bud- 
dhism in  Tibet.  Delhi:  Motilal  Banarasidass. 

Das,  S.  C.  1965.  Indian  Pandits  in  the  Land  of 
Snow.  Calcutta:  Firma  K.  L.  Mudkhpadhyay. 

David-Neel,  A.  1971.  Magic  and  Mystery  in 
Tibet.  New  York:  Dover. 

Denwood,  P.  1971.  "The  Tibetan  Temple — 
Art  in  Its  Architectural  Setting,"  in 
W.  Watson,  ed.  Mahay anist  Art  after  A.  D. 
900.  London:  University  of  London. 

Douglas,  N.  and  M.  White.  1976.  Karmapa: 
The  Black  Hat  Lama  of  Tibet.  London:  Luzac. 

Dutt,  N.,  ed.  1939.  Gilgit  Manuscripts,  vol.  1. 
Srinagar:  Government  of  Kashmir. 

Ekvall,  R.  B.  1964.  Religious  Observances  in 
Tibet:  Patterns  and  Functions.  Chicago:  Uni- 
versity of  Chicago  Press. 

Eliade,  M.  1964.  Shamanism.  London:  Rout- 
ledge  and  Kegan  Paul. 

Ellingson-Waugh,  T.  1974.  "Algebraic  and 
Geometric  Logic,"  Philosophy  East  and  West, 
vol.  24,  no.  1,  pp.  23-40. 

Evans-Wentz,  W.  Y ,  ed.  1954.  The  Tibetan 
Book  of  the  Great  Liberation.  London:  Oxford 
University  Press.  See  also  Lama  Kazi 
Dawa-Samdup. 

Ferrari,  A.  1958.  mK'yen-brtse's  Guide  to  the 
Holy  Places  of  Central  Tibet.  Rome:  Istituto 
Italiano  per  il  medio  ed  estreme  oriente. 

Francke,  A.  H.  1978.  Ladakh.  New  Delhi: 
Cosmo  Publications. 


272 


Getty,  A.  1962.  The  Gods  oj  Northern  Bud- 
dhism. Tokyo:  Tuttle. 

Giles,  H.  A.  1918.  An  Introduction  to  the  History 
of  Chinese  Pictorial  Art.  2nd  ed.  Shanghai: 
Kelly  and  Walsh. 

Gordon,  A.  K.  1959.  The  Iconography  of 
Tibetan  Lamaism.  Rutland,  Vt.:  Charles  E. 
Tuttle. 

Goswamy,  B.  N.  and  A.  L.  Dahmen-Dallapic- 
cola.  1976.  An  Early  Document  of  Indian 
Art.  New  Delhi:  Manohar. 

Granoff,  P.  1968-69.  "A  Portable  Buddhist 
Shrine  from  Central  Asia."  Archives  of  Asian 
Art.  vol.  22,  pp.  80-95. 

Guenther,  H.  V.  1963.  The  Life  and  Teaching 
ofNaropa.  London:  Oxford  University  Press. 

1966.  Tibetan  Buddhism  without 


Mystification.  Leiden:  Brill. 
1969.  The  Royal  Song  of  Saraha. 


Seattle:  University  of  Washington  Press. 

Guenther,  H.  V.  and  C.  Thungpa.  1975.  The 
DawnofTantra.  Berkeley:  Shambhala. 

Hambis,  L.,  ed.  1977.  L'Asie  centrale.  Paris: 
Collection  orientale  de  1'impirimerie 
nationale. 

Hatt,  R.  T  1980.  "A  Thirteenth-Century  Ti- 
betan Reliquary."  Artibus  Asiae,  vol.  42, 
nos.  2—3,  pp.  175-220. 

Heissig,  W.  1980.  The  Religions  of  Mongolia. 
trans.  G.  Samuel.  Berkeley  and  Los  Angeles: 
University  of  California  Press. 

Henss,  M.  1981.  Tibet.  Die  Kulturdenkmaler. 
Zurich:  Atlantis. 

Hoffman,  H.  1961.  The  Religions  of  Tibet,  trans. 
E.  Fitzgerald.  London:  Allen  and  Unwin. 

Huntington,  J.  C.  1970  A.  "The  Technique 
of  Tibetan  Paintings."  Studies  in  Conserva- 
tion, vol.  15,  no.  2,  May,  pp.  122-23. 

1970  B.  "The  Iconography  and 

Structure  of  the  Mountings  of  Tibetan 
Paintings."  Studies  in  Conservation,  vol.  15, 
no.  3,  August,  pp.  190-205. 

1972.  "Gu-gre  bris:  A  Stylistic 


Amalgam,"  in  Aspects  of  Indian  Art. 
ed.  P.  Pal.  Leiden:  Brill. 

..  1975.  The  Phur-pa,  Tibetan  Ritual 


Daggers.  Ascona,  Switzerland:  Artibus 
Asiae. 

Inoue,  T  et.  al.  1978.  Chibetto  Mikkyo  Nekiga 
[Tibetan  esoteric  murals].  Kyoto: 
Shinshindo. 

Jisl,  L.  n.d.  Tibetan  Art.  London:  Spring 
Books. 

Jung,  C.  G.  1973.  Mandala  Symbolism,  trans. 
R.  F.  C.  Hull.  Princeton:  Princeton  Uni- 
versity Press. 

Kak,  R.  C.  1923.  Handbook  of  the  Archaeologi- 
cal and  Numismatic  Section  of  the  Sri  Pratap 
Museum,  Srinagar.  Calcutta  and  Simla: 
Thacker,  Spink  and  Co. 


Karmay,  H.  1975.  Early  Sino-Tibetan  Art. 
Warminster:  Aris  and  Phillips. 

1977.  "Tibetan  Costume,  Seventh  to 


Eleventh  Centuries,"  in  Macdonald,  A.  and 
Y.  Imaeda.  1977.  pp.  64-81. 

Khosla,  R.  1979.  Buddhist  Monasteries  in  the 
Western  Himalaya.  Kathmandu:  Ratna 
Pustak  Bhandar. 

Kidd,  D.  1975.  "Tibetan  Painting  in  China," 
Oriental  Art,  n.s.  vol.  21,  no.  1,  pp.  56-60. 

Lalou,  M.  1957.  Les  religions  du  Tibet.  Paris: 
Presses  universitaires  de  France. 

Lama  Anagarika  Govinda.  1962.  Foundations 
of  Tibetan  Mysticism.  London:  Rider. 

Lama  Kazi  Dawa-Samdup,  trans,  and  W.  Y. 
Evans-Wentz,  ed.  1960.  Tibetan  Yoga  and 
Secret  Doctrines.  London:  Oxford  University 
Press. 

1969.  Tibet's  Great  Yogi  Milarepa. 


London:  Oxford  University  Press. 

Lamotte,  E.  1961.  "Mahjusrl,"  T'oung  Pao, 
vol.  49,  nos.  1-2,  pp.  1—96. 

Lauf,  D.  I.  1976  A.  Secret  Revelation  of  Tibetan 
Thangkas.  Freiburg,  Switzerland:  Aurum 
Verlag . 

1976  B.  Tibetan  Sacred  Art .  Berkeley: 


Shambhala. 

1977-  Secret  Doctrines  of  the  Tibetan 

Book  of  the  Dead.  Boulder,  Colo.:  Shambhala. 

Laufer,  B.  191 }.  Dokumente  der  Indischen  Kunst. 
Leipzig:  Otto  Harrassowitz.  See  also 
Goswamy. 

Lessing,  F.  D.  1942.  Yung-Ho-Kung.  Stock- 
holm: Elanders  Boktryckeri  Aktiegolag. 

Lessing,  F.  D.  and  A.  Wayman.  1968.  Mkhas 
grub  rje's  Fundamentals  of  the  Buddhist  Tantras. 
The  Hague:  Mouton. 

Liu-I-se,  ed.  1957.  Hsi-tsang  Fo-Chiao  l-shu 
[Tibetan  buddhist  art].  Peking. 

Lokeshchandra,  ed.  1968.  The  Autobiography 
and  Diaries  of  Si-tu  Pan  chen.  Sata-Pitaka 
Series,  vol.  77.  New  Delhi:  Indian 
Academy  for  International  Culture. 

Lowry,  J.  1973  A.  Tibetan  Art.  London:  Her 
Majesty's  Stationery  Office. 

197}  B.  "Tibet,  Nepal  or  China?" 


Oriental  Art.  n.s.  vol.  19,  no.  3,  pp. 
306-15. 

1977.  "A  Fifteenth-Century  Sketch- 


book (Preliminary  Study),"  in  Macdonald 
A.,  and  Y  Imaeda  (see  below),  pp.  83-118. 

Macdonald,  A.  et.  al.  1977.  "Un  portrait  du 
Cinquieme  Dalai-Lama."  Macdonald  A., 
and  Y  Imaeda.  pp.  119-56. 

Macdonald,  A.  and  Y  Imaeda,  eds.  1977. 
Essais  sur  Tart  du  Tibet.  Paris:  Librairie 
d'amerique  et  d'orient. 

Macdonald,  A.  and  A.  V.  Stahl.  1979.  Newar 
Art.  Warminster:  Aris  and  Phillips. 


Mallmann,  M.  T  de.  1964.  Etude  iconogra- 
phique  sur  Mahjusri .  Paris:  Ecole  francaise 
d'extreme-oritnt. 

1967.  Introduction  a  I'etude  d'Avalo- 


kitesvara.  Paris:  Presses  universitaire  de 
France. 

1975.  Introduction  a  Ticonographie  du 


tantrisme  bouddhique.  Paris:  Andrien- 
Maissoneuve. 

Meredith,  G.  1967.  "The  Phurbu:  The  Use 
and  Symbolism  of  the  Tibetan  Magic 
Dagger."  History  of  Religions ,  vol.  vi, 
no.  3,  pp.  239-41. 

Monod-Bruhl,  O.  1954-55.  Peintures 
tibetaines.  Paris:  A.  Guillot. 

Mukherji,  D.,  ed.  1964.  Aryamahjusrinama- 
sahgiti.  Calcutta:  University  of  Calcutta. 

Miiller,  M.,  ed.  1965.  Buddhist  Mahayana  Texts. 
Delhi:  Motilal  Banarasidass. 

Nebesky-Wojkowitz,  R.  de.  1956.  Oracles  and 
Demons  of  Tibet.  The  Hague:  Mouton. 

Oddy,  W.  A.  and  W.  Zwalf,  eds.  198 1. 

Aspects  of  Tibetan  Metallurgy.  British  Museum 
Occasional  Papers,  no.  15.  London:  British 
Museum. 

d'Oldenburg,  S.  1914.  "Materiaux  pour 

Ticonographie  bouddhique  de  Kharakhoto  I," 
in  Materiaux  pour  Tethnographie  de  la  Russie, 
tome  2,  pp.  79-157.  St.  Petersburg, 
Russia. 

Olschak,  R.  C.  and  G.  T  Wangyal.  1973. 
Mystic  Art  of  Tibet.  New  York:  McGraw- 
Hill. 

Olson,  E.  1964.  "A  Tibetan  Buddhist  Altar." 
The  Museum,  n.s.  vol.  16,  nos.  1-2,  pp.  1- 
40.  Newark,  N.J.:  Newark  Museum.  See 
also  reprint  in  vol.  24  (1972). 

Pachow,  W.  1979.  A  Study  of  the  Twenty-two 
Dialogues  on  Mahayana  Buddhism.  Taipei: 
Chinese  Culture. 

Pal,  P.  1969  B.  "The  Art  of  Tibet."  The  Con- 
noisseur, vol.  171.  no.  687,  pp.  43-50. 

..1972-73.  "A  Note  on  the  Mandala 


of  the  Eight  Bodhisattvas."  Archives  of  Asian 
Art,  vol.  26.  pp.  17-73. 

1974.  vol.  1  and  1978,  vol.  2.  The 


Arts  of  Nepal.  Leiden:  Brill. 

1975-  Bronzes  of  Kashmir.  Graz,  Aus- 
tria: Akademische  Druk. 

..  1977.  "The  Lord  of  the  Tent  in 


Tibetan  Paintings."  Pantheon,  vol.  35,  no.  2, 
April-June,  pp.  97-102. 

1979-  "Kashmiri-Style  Bronzes  and 

Tantric  Buddhism."  Annali  dell'lstituto 
Orientale  di  Napoli,  vol.  39  (n.s.  xxix), 
PP-  253-73- 

1982  A.  "Cosmic  Vision  and  Bud- 


dhist Images."  Art  International,  vol.  25, 
nos.  1-2,  pp.  8-40. 


273 


19H2  B.  A  Buddhist  Paradise:  The 

Murals  ofAJchi.  Basle:  Ravi  Kumar  for 
Visual  Dharma  Publications. 

Pallis,  M.  1949.  Peaks  and  Lamas .  New  York: 
Alfred  A.  Knopf. 

i960.  The  Way  and  the  Mountain. 


London:  Peter  Owen. 

Pelliot,  P.  1924.  Les  Grottes  de  Touen-Houang, 
vol.  XI.  Paris:  Librairie  Paul  Geuthner. 

Petech,  L.  1979.  The  History  of  Ladakh.  Rome: 
Istituto  Italiano  per  il  medio  ed  estremo 
oriente. 

Pott,  P.  H.  1951.  Introduction  to  the  Tibetan 
Collection  of  the  National  Museum  of  Ethnology, 
Leiden.  Leiden:  Brill. 

..  1964.  "Tibet,"  in  Griswold,  A.  B. 


et  al.  Burma.  Korea  ami  Tibet.  London: 
Methuen. 

Raghuvira  and  Lokeshchandra.  1961-72.  A 
New  Tibeto-Mongol  Pantheon.  20  vols.  New 
Delhi:  Indian  Academy  for  International 
Culture. 

Richardson,  H.  E.  1958-59.  "The  Karmapa 
Sect,  a  Historical  Note."  Journal  of  the 
Royal  Asiatic* Society,  1958.  pts.  3  and  4, 
pp.  1^9-64  and  1959,  pts.  1  and  2, 
pp.  1-18. 

1962.  Tibet  and  Its  History.  London: 


Oxford  University  Press. 

1977-  "The  Jo-khang,  'Cathedral'  of 

Lhasa,"  in  Macdonald  A.  and  Y.  Imaeda, 
pp.  157-88. 

Robinson,  J.  B.  trans.  1979.  Buddha's  Lions. 
Berkeley:  Dharma. 


Roerich,  G.  1925.  Tibetan  Painting.  Paris: 
Paul  Geuthner. 

'979-  The  Blue  Annals.  Delhi:  Motilal 


Banarasidass. 

Ruegg,  D.  S.  1966.  The  Lije  of  Bu  Stou  Rtn 
Po  Che.  Rome:  Istituto  Italiano  per  il 
medio  ed  estreme  oriente. 

Schafer,  E.  H.  1963.  The  Golden  Peaches  of 
Samarkand.  Berkeley  and  Los  Angeles:  Uni- 
versity of  California  Press. 

Schiefner,  A.  1869.  Taranath's  Geschicte  des 
Buddhismus.  St.  Petersburg,  Russia:  Com- 
missionhare  der  Kaiserlichen  akademie  der 
w  issenschaften. 

Schmid,  T  1952.  The  Cotton-Clad  Mila.  Stock- 
holm: Statens  Etnografiska  Museum. 

1958.  The  Eighty-fivi  Siddhas.  Stock- 


holm: Statens  Etnografiska  Museum. 

Schrocdcr,  U.  von.  1981.  I ndo-Tibetan  Bronzes. 

Hong  Kong:  Visual  Dharma  Publications. 

Shunsho,  M.  198 1.  Chibetto  Bijutsu  no  tabi 
[Survey  of  tibetan  art}.  Tokyo:  Rokko 
Shuppan. 

Sierksma,  E.  1966.  Tibet's  Terrifying  Deities. 
Tokyo:  Tuttle. 


Singh,  M.  1968.  Himalayan  Art.  Greenwich, 
Conn.:  New  York  Graphic  Society. 

Smith,  G.  1969.  "Introduction,"  in  Ngawang 
Gelek  Demo,  ed.:  The  Autobiography  of  the 
First  Pa ni.  hen  Lama,  Blobzang  chos  kyi  rhyal- 
mtshan.  New  Delhi:  Caxton  Press  Extension. 

Snellgrove,  D.  L.  1957.  Buddhist  Himalaya. 
Oxford:  Cassirer. 

1959.  The Hevajra  Tantra.  2  pts. 


London:  Oxford  University  Press. 
1967.  The  Nine  Ways  of  Bon.  London: 


Oxford  University  Press. 

197 1.  "Indo-Tibetan  Liturgy  in  Its 


Relationship  to  Iconography,"  in  Mahayanist 
Art  after  A. D.  goo.  ed.  W.  Watson.  Lon- 
don: University  of  London. 

,  ed.  1978.  The  Image  of  the  Buddha. 


Tokyo:  UNESCo/Kodansha. 

Snellgrove,  D.  L.  and  H.  E.  Richardson.  1968. 
A  Cultural  History  of  Tibet.  New  York: 
Praeger. 

Snellgrove,  D.  L.  and  T  Skorupski.  1977.  vol. 
1,  and  1980,  vol.  2.  The  Cultural  Heritage 
of  Ladakh.  Warminster:  Aris  and  Phillips. 

Stein,  M.  A.  1921.  Serindia.  5  vols.  London: 
Oxford  University  Press. 

1975.  Ancient  Khotan,  vol.  1.  New 


York:  Hacker. 

Stein,  R.  A.  1958.  "Peintures  Tibetaines  de  la 
vie  de  Gesar."  Arts  Asiatic/tie.  vol.  5,  no.  4, 
pp.  243-71. 

1972.  Tibetan  Civilization.  Palo  Alto, 


Ca. :  Stanford  University  Press. 
1977-     La  Guele  du  makara:  u  trait 


inexplique  de  certains  objets  rituels,"  in 
Macdonald,  A.  and  Y.  Imaeda,  pp.  2^-51. 

Stooke,  H.  J.  1 96 1.  "Some  Tibetan  T'ankas  at 
Oxford."  An  Orientalis,  vol.  4,  pp.  207—18. 

Thinley,  K.  1980.  The  History  of  the  Sixteen 
Karmapas  of  Tibet.  Boulder,  Colo.:  Prajna 
Press. 

Thomas,  F.  W.  1935-55.  Tibetan  Literary  Texts 
arid  Documents  Concerning  Chinese  Turkestan. 
4  vols.  London:  Royal  Asiatic  Society. 

Trungpa,  C.  et  al.  1980.  The  Rain  of  Wisdom. 
Boulder,  Colo.:  Shambhala. 

Tsong-ka-pa.  1977.  Tantra  in  Tibet,  trans,  and 
ed.  J.  Hopkins.  London:  Allen  and  Unwin. 

Tucci,  G.  1932-41.  Indo-Tibetica.  4  vols. 
Rome:  Reale  Accademia  d'ltalia. 

'935-  "On  Some  Bronze  Objects 

Discovered  in  Western  Tibet."  Artibus  Asiae, 
vol.  5,  pp.  105-16. 

..  1937.  "Indian  Paintings  in  Western 


Tibetan  Temples."  Artibus  Asiae,  vol.  7, 
pp.  191-204. 

1949.  Tibetan  Painted  Scrolls.    ^  vols. 


1956.  To  Lhasa  and  Beyond.  Rome: 

Istituto  Poligratico  dello  Stato. 

1959-  "A  Tibetan  Classification  of 


Buddhist  Images  According  to  Their  Style." 
Artibus  Asiae.  vol.  22,  pp.  I79ff. 

196 1.  The  Theory  and  Practice  of  the 

Mandala.  London:  Rider. 

1967.  Tibet:  Land  of  S nous,  trans. 

J.  E.  S.  Driver.  New  York:  Stein  and  Day. 

1973-  Transhimalaya.  Geneva:  Nagel 

Publishers. 

1980.  The  Religions  of  Tibet,  trans. 

G.  Samuel.  Bombay:  Allied  Publishers. 

Tulku,  T  1972.  Sacred  Art  of  Tibet.  Berkeley: 
Dharma. 

de  Visser,  M.  W.  1920.  The  Arhats  in  China 
and  Japan.  Berlin:  Oesterheld. 

Waddell,  L.  A.  1958.  The  Buddhism  of  Tibet  or 

Lama  ism.  2nd.  ed.  Cambridge:  Heffer. 

Wayman,  A.  1973.  The  Buddhist  Tantras. 
New  York:  Samuel  Wieser. 

1977.  "The  Goddess  Sarasvatl- 


From  India  to  Tibet."  Kailash.  vol.  5, 
no.  3,  pp.  246-51. 

1982.  "Notes  on  the  phur-bu."  The 


Journal  of  the  Tibet  Society,  vol.  1,  pp.  79—85. 

Williams,  C.  A.  S.  1976.  Outlines  of  Chinese 
Symbolism  and  Art  Motives.  New  York:  Dover. 

Wylie,  T.  V.  1962.  The  Geography  of  Tibet  Ac- 
cording to  the  'Dzamgling  rgyas-bshad .  Rome: 
Istituto  Italiano  per  il  medio  ed  estremo 
oriente. 

1964.  "Ro-langs:  The  Tibetan  Zom- 


bie." History  of  Religions,  vol.  4,  no.  1, 
pp.  69—80. 

Zwalf,  W.  1981.  Heritage  of  Tibet.  London: 
British  Museum. 


Rome:  La  Libreria  Dello  Stato. 


274 


Catalogues  of  Exhibitions  and 
Permanent  Collections 


Beguin,  G.  1981.  Les  mandalas  hi ma lay  ens  dit 
Musk  Guimet.  exh.  cat.  Reunion  des  musees 
nationaux,  Paris. 

et  al.  1977.  Dieux  et  demons  de 


I'Himalaya.  exh.  cat.  Reunion  des  musees 
nationaux,  Paris. 

Brzostoski,  J.  196^.  Collection  of  Tibetan  Art. 
Riverside  Museum,  New  York. 

Chibetto-no-Hiboten  [Exhibition  of  secret 
treasures  from  Tibet].  1967.  exh.  cat. 
Yumuri  Shimbum,  Tokyo. 

Chibetto-no-Kaiwa  [Tibetan  painting].  1980. 
exh.  cat.  Itabashi  Ward  Museum  of  Art, 
Tokyo. 

Chow,  F.  1979.  Arts  from  the  Rooftop  oj  Asia. 
exh.  cat.  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art, 
New  York. 

Copeland,  C.  1980.  Tankas  from  the  Koelz  Col- 
lection, exh.  cat.  Museum  of  Anthropology, 
University  of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor. 

Doris  Wiener  Gallery,  New  York.  1974. 
Thangka  Art.  exh.  cat. 

Fisher,  R.  1974.  Mystics  and  Mandalas.  exh. 
cat.  Tom  and  Ann  Peppers  Art  Gallery. 
University  of  Redlands,  California. 

Guy,  J.  1982.  Palm-leaf  and  Paper,  exh.  cat. 
National  Gallery  of  Victoria,  Melbourne, 
Australia. 

Kobayashi,  Y.  and  T.  Harudan.  1980.  Man- 
dala:  Now  You  See.  Now  You  Don't,  exh.  cat. 
Seibu  Museum  of  Art,  Japan. 

Kramrisch,  S.  1964.  The  Art  oj  Nepal,  exh.  cat. 
New  York:  Asia  Society. 

Kunstamt  Berlin-Tempelhof.  1981.  Tantrische 
Knust  des  Bnddhisn/us.  exh.  cat. 

Laut,  D.  I.,  et  al.  1969.  Tibettsche  Kunst.  exh. 
cat.  Helmhaus,  Zurich. 

Lee,  S.  E.  and  Wai-kam  Ho.  1968.  Chinese 
Art  under  the  Mongols:  The  Yuan  Dynasty 
(7279-/568).  exh.  cat.  Cleveland  Museum 
of  Art,  Ohio. 

Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art.  1975-  A 
Decade  oj  Collecting,  exh.  cat. 


Museum  fur  Ostasiatische  Kunst,  Cologne. 
1974.  Buddhistische  Kunst  a  us  dew  Himalaya. 
exh.  cat. 

Neven,  A.  1980.  New  Studies  into  Indian  and 

Himalayan  Sculpture,  exh.  cat.  Gallery 
"De  ruimte,"  Ersel,  The  Netherlands. 

Olson,  E.  1950-71.  Catalogue  of  the  Tibetan 
Collection  and  Other  Lamaist  Articles.  5  vols. 
Newark  Museum,  New  Jersey. 

1974.  Tautric  Buddhist  Art.  exh.  cat. 


China  Institute  in  America,  New  York. 

Pal,  P.  1966.  "Tibet  and  Nepal,"  in  J.  Rosen- 
field,  et  al.  (see  below) 

1969  A.  The  Art  of  Tibet,  exh.  cat. 


Asia  House,  New  York. 

and  H.  C.  Tseng.  1969.  Lamaist  Art. 

exh.  cat.  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston. 

1971-  I'ido- Asian  Art  front  The  John 

Gilmon  Ford  Collection,  exh.  cat.  Baltimore, 
Md.:  Walters  Art  Gallery. 

1976.  Nepal.  Where  the  Gods  Are 

Young,  exh.  cat.  Asia  House,  New  York. 

1977.  The  Sensuous  Immortals,  exh. 


cat.  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art. 


1980.  "In  Her  Image:  Indie  Cul- 
in  G.  Larson,  et  al.  In  Her  Image. 


ture, 


exh.  cat.  UCSB  Art  Museum,  University  of 
California,  Santa  Barbara. 

Reynolds,  V.  1978.  Tibet:  A  Lost  World,  exh. 
cat.  New  York:  American  Federation  of 
the  Arts. 

Rosenheld,  J.,  et  al.  1966.  The  Arts  of  India 
and  Nepal:  The  Nasli  and  Alice  Heeramaneck 
Collection,  exh.  cat.  Museum  of  Fine  Arts, 
Boston. 

Spink  and  Son,  London,  1979.  The  Art  of 
Nepal  and  Tibet,  exh.  cat. 

Tibet  House,  New  Delhi.  1965.  Tibet  House 
Museum.  Inaugural  exh.  cat. 

Topsheld,  A.  1982.  The  Art  of  Central  Asia. 
The  Stein  Collection  in  the  British  Museum, 
vol.  l.  Tokyo:  Kodansha  International. 


University  of  Rochester,  New  York.  1961.  The 
Art  of  India,  exh.  cat. 

Wai-kam  Ho,  et  al.  1981.  Eight  Dynasties  of 
Chinese  Paintings,  exh.  cat.  Cleveland 
Museum  of  Art  in  association  with  Indiana 
University  Press. 

Waley,  A.  193 1.  A  Catalogue  of  Painting: 
Recovered  front  Tun-huang  by  Sir  Aurel  Stem. 
K.C.l.E.  London:  Trustees  of  the  British 
Museum  and  the  Government  of  India. 


275 


Index 


umerals  in  bold  type  indicate 

illustrations. 


Abhayadatta,  155 

Abheda:  sculpture  of,  224,  225 

Abhirati,  139 

Acala,  134,  135 

Adihuddha,  184 

Ajatasatru,  142 

Ajita:  painting  of,  165—66,  167 

Akshayamati,  142 

Akshobhya,  41,  185;  painting  of,  139-40, 

141;  in  other  paintings,  144,  172,  175;  in 

sculpture,  211;  in  diadem,  242 
Alchi:  murals  at,  115,  116,  126,  132,  136,  193 
Altan  Khan,  27,  31 
Amdo,  16 
Amitabha,  41,  134,  177,  185;  paintings  of, 

76,  140,  142,  143,  177,  179;  in  other 

paintings,  153,  175;  in  sculpture,  193, 

202,  207,  230;  in  ritual  objects,  240,  242 
Amitayus,  44,  50,  237,  251;  paintings  of,  71, 

86,  116,  134,  135,  152,  152-53;  in  other 
works,  127,  142,  151,  172 

Amoghasiddhi,  41,  240,  242 

Amoghavajra,  135 

Anangavajra,  232 

Aphajyoti,  188 

Applique:  temple  hangings,  98,  180,  181,  182 

Apsarases,  140 

Architecture,  16,  126,  157 

Arhat  paintings,  30,  57-59,  118-19,  120; 
examples  of,  74,  78,  136-38,  137,  143- 
44,  145,  172,  174,  183,  184 

Arhats,  36,  45-46,  58,  119 

Ashtamandalakasutra  .135 

Ashtasahasrika  Prajnaparamita:  pages  from, 
70,  123,  123-25,  126,  130-32,  131 

Astrological  charts,  168,  169 

Atisa,  24-25,  30,  36,  44,  52,  58,  115,  134 

Aurangabad:  reliefs  at,  142 

Avalokitesvara,  16,  38,  41,  230,  238;  paint- 
ings of,  134,  135,  175,  175,  180,  181;  in 
other  paintings,  135,  142,  177;  sculptures 
of,  30,  99,  100,  192,  193,  195,  196,  202, 

203,  205,  207,  207,  262-63 

Baltis,  17 

Banners,  178,  179,  238 

Banre  craftsmen,  187 

Basgo:  murals,  118,  153;  painting  from, 

152-53 
Bat:  as  symbol,  49,  184 
Beer:  in  rituals,  237,  243 
Begtse,  43 
Bell,  Charles,  19 
Bells:  in  rituals,  234,  236 
Bengal,  25,  115,  188 
Beyer,  S. ,  38 
Bhairava,  216 
Bhaishajyaguru,  117,  142 
Bhaishajyaraja,  142 
Bhaishajyasamudgata,  142 
Bhimaratha  rite,  50;  thanka,  176,  177,  179 
Bhutan,  15 

Bihar,  19,  25,  115,  121,  126,  135,  188 
Birnbaum,  R.,  142 


Blood:  in  rituals,  237,  243 

Blue  Annals,  The.  134,  220,  23} 

Bodhicitta.  36,  42,  242 

Bodhisattvas,  35,  36,  41,  45,  123 

Bodhisattvayana,  35 

Bodpas,  17 

Bone  sculpture  217,  219 

Bone  trumpets,  234,  236,  237 

Bones:  in  Tibetan  ritual,  237 

Bon  religion,  17,  24,  38,  199 

Brahma,  139 

Buddha,  36,  41;  laughing,  46,  172;  in  paint- 
ings, 172,  175,  177,  177,  178,  179,  180, 
181,  182;  in  other  art  forms,  30,  124,  125, 
195,  196,  231,  240,  242.  See  also  Buddha 
of  Healing;  Sakyamuni;  Thirty-five  Bud- 
dhas  of  Confession  of  Sins;  Thousand  Bud- 
dhas  of  the  Auspicious  Age 

Buddha  of  Endless  Life:  painting,  86,  152, 
15  3.  See  also  Amitayus 

Buddha  of  Healing,  49,  77,  134,  142,  143,  199 

Buddhapa,  155 

Buton  rimpoche,  50,  52,  53 

Butter  lamps,  238,  250,  251 

Cakrasamvara,  216 

Candali,  139 

Candragarbha,  199 

Candravairocana,  77,  142,  143 

Cauri,  139 

Cemeteries,  45,  56,  235 

Central  Asia:  artists  of,  51;  cult  of  arhats  in, 
58;  influence  on  art,  55,  60,  117,  121, 
142,  150 

Chala  people,  17 

Chamdo  monastery,  26 

Chan  Buddhists,  119 

Chang  tribes,  16 

Changchanma,  160 

Chanting,  38,  236 

Che  family,  25 

Chenghua,  226 

China:  arhat  concept,  45-46;  motifs,  119, 
184;  influence  on  painting,  57—60,  117— 19, 
121,   142,   144,   152,   153,   160,   177; 
Pala-Tibetan  style  in,  116;  relations  with 
Tibet,  15-16,  19,  20;  ritual  weapons  in, 
235;  influence  on  sculpture,  57,  188,  189, 
207,  225 

C ho  rite,  17,  220,  234-35,  236,  238 

Chodrag  Gyatsho  (karmapa),  51 

Chokyong,  43 

Chokyi  Gyaltsen  (lama),  134,  262 

Chokyi  Wangchuk,  55 

Chopper,  235,  236,  245,  245,  246,  247 

Chopsticks,  255,  255 

Chospal  Yeshe,  162,  262 

Chbten.  36,  166,  167,  175,  175,  237, 
240,  240 

C ire  perdu  casting  process,  187 

Citipati,  166 

Citralakshana:  poem  by,  114 

Clay  sculpture,  185,  191,  231 

Clear  Light,  36,  37,  57 


276 


Colors  and  coloring:  Guge  style,  117;  in  iden- 
tifying thankas,  135,  148,  150,  158,  177; 
Indian  influence,  121;  Karma-gadri  style, 
162;  in  manuscripts,  126,  127;  methods  of 
using,  56,  57,  185-86;  Nepali  style,  118, 
129;  Pala  style,  115;  Sakyapa  style,  153 

Compassion,  42 

Conch  shell,  111,  236,  248,  248 

Copper:  inlaid,  in  sculpture,  106,  186,  192, 
193;  sculptures  made  of,  186,  201,  205, 
206,  212,  226,  226 

Cranial  bump,  41 

Crystal:  use  of  in  ritual  objects,  232,  246, 
249 

Daka.  44,  63  039 

Dakint.  44,  165 

Dalai  Lama:  as  emanation,  38,  177;  Fifth, 

31,  50,  52;  institution  of,  20,  27,  31;  rites 

performed  by,  232-33,  235;  Seventh, 

172,  181 
Dampa  Sangye,  27,  36,  47,  233,  234,  237; 

sculpture  of,  49,  106,  189,  190,  219, 

220,  263 
Dards,  17 

David-Neel,  Alexandra,  234-35 
Demons,  117,  148,  150,  226,  235 
Derge:  metalwork  from,  19,  187,  246,  247, 

250,  251 
Dezhin  Shegpa,  30,  47,  53,  60;  painting  of, 

92,  162,  163,  262 
Dbarani,  36,  43 
Dharani  manuscript,  69,  127—28, 

127-28,  259 
Dbarma,  46 
Dharmapala,  43 
Dharmatala,  46,  175,  184 
Dhritarashtra,  172 
Dhyana,  56 
Diadems,  241,  242 
Divination  charts,  168,  169 
Dolma  monastery,  135 
Dolpo  region,  38 
Dombini,  139 
Dorje.  See  Thunderbolt 
Dorje  Phurpa:  sculpture,  208-10,  209,  244, 

244,  245 
Dranang  monastery:  murals,  115 
Drepung  monastery,  26,  27 
Drigung  monastery,  25 
Drigungpas,  25,  29,  116,  136 
Dro  clan,  25 
Dromton,  24—25 
Druk,  27 

Drums:  in  rituals,  234,  236 
Dukhang  temple  (Alchi):  murals  at,  115 
Dunhuang,  28;  art  of,  29,  52,  116,  185,  235; 

documents,  15 
Dzalamati  sisters,  43 

»      Eight  Bodhisattvas,  135,  177;  cult  of,  116, 
135.  179 
Eight  Guardians  of  the  Directions,  144,  145, 

172,  174 
Ekajati,  144,  145,  158 
Evam  monastery,  158 

Four  guardians  of  the  cardinal  directions,  184 

Gajasimha  motif,  207 
Ganden  monastery,  26 
Gandhara  reliefs,  142 
Ganesa,  145-46,  230 
Gansu,  29 


Gau.  19,  44,  238,  251,  251,  253 

Gauri,  139 

Gelukpa  monastery:  painting  from,  97,  171; 

sculpture  from,  105,  216,  217 
Gelukpas,  26-27,  3°,  31,  44,  47;  in 

paintings,  150,  153,  181 
Genghis  Khan,  29 
Gesar,  27 
Ghasmari,  139 
Gilding,  185-86,  239;  of  sculpture,  108, 

194,  203,  205,  206,  210,  214,  215,  221, 

225,  231;  of  ritual  objects,  112,  241-43, 

246,  250-52 
Gilgit,  115,  188 
Godan,  29 
Gold:  sculpture  painted  with,  186,  200,  202, 

203;  in  ritual  objects,  232,  242 
Golok  nomads,  16 
Guan  Xiu,  137,  166 
Guge  kingdom,  24,  25,  52,  123,  126,  188; 

paintings  from,  139,  141,  142,  143;  style, 

116-18,  153 
Guhyasamaja,  43,  129,  129,  153 
Gitbyasamajatantra.  129 
Guilds,  52,  188 
Guru,  18,  37,  233 
Gushri  Khan,  31 
Gyalpo  Dar,  138 

Gyalpo  Palseng:  thanka  by,  50,  138,  139,  260 
Gyaltsabje,  172 
Gyaltsen  Ozer,  151 
Gyantse,  25,  50;  Chinese  influence,  118,  119; 

metalwork,  187,  207;  murals,  30,  53,  117, 

118,  120,  213,  220,  222;  Nepali  influence, 

129;  style,  60,  144,  146,  148,  157 
Gyeltsen,  138 

Hariti,  43 

Hasuraja,  122  n4 

Hayagriva,  134,  181 

Healing  Buddha.  See  Buddha  of  Healing 

Heruka,  222 

Hevajra,  43,  44,  162,  213;  mandala  of,  75, 

118,  138-39,  139,  259-60 
Hevajratantra,  213 
Himalayas,  15,  19 
Horpas,  17 

Huntington,  J. C,  126,  140 
HvaShang,  46,  160,  172,  174,  175,  184 

Illuminated  manuscript  pages.  See  under 
Manuscripts 

India:  influence  on  Tibetan  art,  51,  53, 
55-56,  58,  121,  188-89,  l9%  influence 
on  religion,  23,  24,  31,  43,  45;  sexual 
imagery  in  art  of,  42 

Indra,  139 

Inlaying,  186,  187;  in  sculpture,  99,  106, 
192,  194,  219,  223;  in  ritual  objects,  110, 
232,  239,  242,  247,  249,  251,  255,  256 

Iwang  monastery,  115,  134,  135 

Jain  bronzes,  53,  188 

Jambhala,  136,  137,  142,  143,  146,  147 

Jambudvipa,  140 

Jamyang  (lama),  138,  260 

Japan:  art  of  compared  to  Tibetan,  42,  189, 

190;  Buddhism  of,  45,  142 
Jewelry:  example  of,  254,  255;  inlaying,  187 
Jivarama,  60,  117,  120,  148,  175 
Jokhang,  The:  artworks  in,  193,  230 
Jung,  Carl,  44 
Jurchen  Jin  dynasty,  29 


Kadampas,  24,  25,  213;  art  from  monastc  • 
of,  71,  115-16,  134,  240 

Kagyupas,  25,  28,  38,  158,  208,  2 
associated  with,  83,  136,  148,  149,  2 
See  also  Drukpas 

Kalacakra,  43,  232 

Kali,  43,  158 

Kalika:  bronze  of,  58,  108,  187,  225, 
225-26 

Kanakavatsa:  painting  of,  78,  142,  144,  145 

Kangxi  (emperor),  26,  31 

Kanheri  reliefs,  142 

Kanjur.  25,  37,  129 

Kankali,  158 

Karakoram  mountains,  15,  19 

Karali,  158 

Karma  Dudtsi:  bronze  of,  57,  220,  221,  26^ 

Karma-gadri  style,  51,  120,  162,  163, 
165,  165 

Karmapas,  25,  26,  30,  47,  51,  120,  220; 
portrait  of  Fifth,  92,  163,  262 

Karma  Pakshi,  51 

Karmay,  Heather,  30,  116 

Karuna.  36 

Kashgar,  19 

Kashmir,  17,  19,  25,  31;  influence  on 

painting,  52,  115,  116-17,  121;  influence 
on  sculpture,  53,  138,  186,  188,  193, 
195,  197,  202 

Kathmandu  valley,  15,  52,  118 

Kham:  and  China,  120,  187;  as  metalwork 
center,  187;  painting  style,  119,  120;  reli- 
gion in,  24,  26,  38;  thankas  from,  157, 
160,  161,  162,  164,  165,  166,  168,  172, 
173,  175 

Kharakhoto,  19,  29,  52,  116,  134,  136 

Khedubje,  37,  172 

Khitan  Liao  dynasty,  29 

Khon  family,  25 

Khotan,  30,  51,  55,  187 

Khyung  bird,  17 

Kokonor,  29 

Kubera,  142,  146,  151-52,  177.  See  also 
Jambhala 

Kublai  Khan,  29,  51 

Kunga  Sangpo,  148 

Kunga  Tashi,  50,  261;  painting  of,  49,  87, 
156,  157 

Kunga  Wangchuk,  148 

Kiinlek,  27 

Kunlun  mountains,  15 

Kushan  period,  197 

Ladakh,  15,  16,  17,  19,  25,  50,  52,  117; 

painting  from,  152-53;  sculpture  from, 

192,  193,  195 
Ladong  monastery,  119 
Lahoul,  15 

Lake  Mipham  (Manasarowar),  16 
Lakhang  monastery,  135 
Lamas,  18,  27,  37,  45,  47,  50 
Landscape  elements,  120,  121,  153;  Chinese 

influence  on,  58-60,  118,  119,  121; 

example  of  use  of,  117,  160,  162,  164, 

165-66 
Langdarma,  24 
Lapis  lazuli,  187 
Lauf,  D.I.,  151 
Legden  Nagpo,  144,  158 
Leh,  19 

Lhakhang  Chemo:  temple  at,  87,  156,  157 
Lhamo,  43,  126,  127,  144,  145,  157,  158,  171 
Lhasa,  23,  31,  52,  120,  171,  188 
Lhatsun  Nagaraja,  188 


277 


Life-attainment  ceremony,  49,  50 

Life-prolonging  ceremonies,  237 

Lineage  paintings,  47,  73,  82,  118,  136,  137, 

148,  149,  153 
Lobsang  Bangphyug,  181 
Lobsang  Sam  ten,  168,  262 
Lohan.  45-46.  See  also  Athats 
Lokesvata,  175,  177,  177,  179,  199,  200, 

208,  208 
Longevity  rite.  See  Bhimaratha  rite 
Lotus:  styles  of,  55-56,  117,  129,  138; 

symbolism  of,  140,  213 
Lowry,  J.,  151 
Lu,  17,  237 
Lu  Xinchong,  120 
Luipa,  164 
Luk.  187 
Lume,  58,  118 

Macig,  2^},  237 

Madhyamika  school  of  Buddhism,  128 

Mahabhairava,  146 

Mahakala,  17,  4^,  45,  56,  128,  172,  236; 
paintings  of,  79,  80,  88,  126,  127,  " 
144-46,  145,  147,  157-58,  159,  166,  181, 
262;  sculptures  of,  103,  212,  213,  215, 
216,  230—31,  231 

Mahakali,  15S 

Mahamaudgalyayana,  184 

Mahamayuri,  36 

Mahasiddhas,  27,  36,  38,  45,  46-47; 

depictions  of,  58,  60,  119,  120,  155,  155, 
164,  261;  sculpture  of,  107,  222,  222 

Mahasthamaprapta,  140,  142 

Mahasukha,  ^6 

Mahayana  Buddhism,  35-36,  46,  1  S5 

Mahesvara,  128 

Maitreya,  45,  51,  134,  1^5,  153,,  181,  182, 

205,  205 

Mandala,  37,  44-45,  49,  232;  paintings  of, 
75,  85,"  138-39,  139,  151-52,  152, 
260-61 

Manjusri,  136;  forms  of,  42,  129,  146;  in 
manuscript  illustrations,  126,  127,  131;  in 
paintings,  51,  142,  157,  164,  168,  179; 
sculptures  of,  194,  195,  198,  199, 

206,  207 

Mannang:  murals  at,  115,  126 

Mantra.   36,  4^.  49,  236 

Manuscripts:  covers  of,  67,  68,  127,  126-28, 

130,  130,  132,  133;  illuminated  pages  of, 

65,  66,  69,  70,  114-15.  12^,  123-25, 

126.  12S-29,  128-29,  no-32.  131 
Mar  Kham  region,  51 
Mara.  1  44.  150 
Marpa.  25,  28.  4-,  150 
Man,  193 

Meditation,  41,  44.  49 
Mica  flakes:  example  of  use.  135,  135 
Mikyo  Dorje  (karmapa),  51,  120 
Milarepa,  28,  46,  47,  220,  234;  paintings  of, 

83,  116,  II-.  [38,  148-50,  149,  260; 

sculpture  of,  229,  230;  writings  of,  28, 

35,  4'-  59,  117 
Ming  dynasty.  30,  31;  influence  on  Tibetan 

art,  58,  60,  118.  119,  144,  175,  226 
Mon,  17 

Monasteries,  24,  25,  26.  37,  50 
Mongolia,  16,  30 
Mongols,  29-32 
Mount  Kailasa  region,  116,  136 
Mudra,  42 
Mughal  period,  24- 
Music:  in  ritual,  38,  2  -, 


Mystics,  27 

Nagarjuna,  12s,  128,  i^i 

Nairatmya  (Nairatma),  104,  138,  139, 

212,  213 
Nakhi  (Nashi)  paintings,  181 
Nalanda,  52,  115,  116 
Namgyal:  painting  from,  150 
Namkha  Shenyen  (lama),  223 
Narasimha,  128 
Naropa,  46 

Narthang  monastery.  53,  118,  120,  138,  175 
Nebesky-Wojkowitz,  R.  de,  213 
Nepal,  15,  18,  19,  25,  38;  influence  on 

Tibetan  art,  31,  51,  60,  117-21,  188,  189, 

202;  style  of  art  in,  126—27,  M2,  1^6, 

146,  152,  201,  219,  231.  See  alio  Nevvan 

artists;  Newars 
Nesar  monastery:  murals,  115 
Nethang  monastery:  murals,  115 
Newari  artists,  60,  61,  120,  186,  187,  207, 

226,  250;  and  Sakyapas,  51,  52,  118 
Newars,  15,  31.  See  also  Newari  artists 
New  Year  festivals,  216 
Ngok  Lotsawa,  213 
Ngokton,  24 
Ngor  monastery,  50,  52,  118,  129,  148; 

paintings  from,  88,  146,  151,  152,  153, 

154,  157-58 
Nirvana,  35 

Nomads,  16,  17,  18,  234 
Norbulinga  monastery,  49,  181,  182,  262 
Nyag  Chang  Lha,  193 
Nyingmapas,  25,  208,  216 

Odantapuri  monastery,  31 
Olsen,  Eleanor,  2^6 
Orissa,  25 

Padmasambhava,  23,  24,  36,  43,  175,  189, 
226,  226,  230,  244 

Pala  style,  115,  126,  135,  136,  188,  199, 
202,  240 

Pala-Tibetan  style,  56,  115  — 16,  136,  137,  199 

Palden  Remati,  97,  171-72,  171 

Palden  Sengge,  220 

Pallis,  Marco,  36,  62  n32 

Panchen  Lama,  61,  172,  181,  262 

Paradise  thankas,  76,  116,  139—40,  1-41, 
142,  143 

Pattern  books,  60,  60,  120,  155 

Pehar.  4  ^ 

Phagmotru  family,  25 

Phagmotrupas,  25,  26 

Phakpa,  29 

Phoenix  motif,  58 

Phurpa.  17,  38,  109,  208,  234,  235, 
244-45,  244,  245,  246,  247 

Polyandry,  19 

Polychromv.  185;  examples  of,  107,  208,  222, 
229,  231,  242,  244 

Potala,  20,  31 

Prajna,  36,  42,  43,  44 

Prajnaparamita  (deity),  42,  43,  127 

Prajnaparamita.  43,  115,  213,  259;  manu- 
script covers,  65,  68,  126-2-.  127;  folios, 
65,  66,  123,  124,  125.  See  also  Asbtasahas- 
rika  Prajnaparamita 

Prajnaparamtta-satasahasrika ,  46 

Pratimoksha.  46 

Pukkasi,  139 

Qianlong  (emperor),  166 
Qing  dynasty,  30 


Raktayamari,  129 

Ratnasambhava,  41,  72,  134—35,  135,  202, 

242,  242 
Reo-Chi,  187 
Repousse  work:  in  sculpture,  187,  204,  205, 

206,  207 
Reting  monastery,  24 
Richardson,  H.  E.,  29,  60,  134,  157, 

158,  220 
Rinchenpal,  59 
Rinchen  Sangpo,  24,  25,  43,  44,  123,  132, 

188;  and  Kashmiri  artists,  52,  5^,  115 
Rites,  232-39 
Rolpe  Dorje,  51 
Rudras,  208 
Rumtek  monastery  (Sikkim),  51,  220 

Sacrifice  rituals,  253 

Saddbarmapundarika.  140 

Sahaja.  36 

Sakyamuni,  23,  35,  51,  142,  150,  158,  165, 
181,  226,  254;  paintings  of,  91,  93,  95, 
161,  162,  163,  164,  165,  183,  184;  sculp- 
ture of,  201,  201 

Sakyapa  monasteries,  25,  118,  128;  paintings 
from,  75,  79,  81,  84,  87,  139,  145, 
146-48,  147,  149,  150,  151,  156,  157; 
sculptures  from,  204,  205,  207,  215,  218, 
219,  227,  228 

Sakyapas,  25,  26,  29,  30,  44.  118,  136,  216, 
231;  abbot,  29,  204;  lamas,  47,  158; 
lineage,  82,  146-48,  149,  260;  monks, 
81,  84,  136,  146,  147,  150,  151,  160;  and 
Newari  artists,  51,  52 

Sakyasri,  89,  158,  159 

Samada  temple:  sculpture  from,  19^ 

Samatabahadra,  204 

Samding  monastery,  1  ^5 

Samp// 1 'a  Tantra,  j,- 

Samsara.  45,  57 

Samudra,  155 

Samye  monastery,  2^,  29,   31,  46,  244 

Sangphu  monastery,  2 1  ^ 

Santarakshita,  23,  136 

Saraha,  35 

Sarasvati,  58,  90,  148,  149,  160,  161 

Sariputra,  184 

Savari,  1  39 

Schafer,  E.H.,  [87 

Semding  nunnery,  216 

Semiprecious  stones:  in  sculpture,  186,  189. 
200;  in  ritual  objects,  110,  111,  112,  2^2. 
237,  24^-51,  254-56 

Senge  Namgyal.  i=s  5, 

Sengepa,  155 

Sera  monastery,  26 

Serzang  temple,  15} 

Sexual  imagery,  42.  See  also  Yab-yum 

Shadakshari,  179,  199.  200,  207,  208 

Shalu  monastery,  25,  30,  50,  53,  118,  119, 
128,  129 

Shalupa  school,  129 

Shamarpas,  162,  262 

Shiche  doctrine.  220,  263 

Shigatse,  S2 

Sikkim,  15.  51,  220 

Silk  Route.  28,  187 

Silpasastra,  55 

Silver:  inlaid  in  sculpture,  99,  106,  186.  192, 
[93,  194,  195,  219,  220;  painted  on  sculp- 
ture, 208;  sculpture  made  of,  103,  207, 
212;  use  in  ritual  objects,  112,  223,  225, 
232,  242-43,  245,  247-51,  254-56 


278 


Singing  yogis,  27,  35.  See  also  Mahasiddhas 

Sino-Tibetan  style,  117,  184,  187 

Situ  Panchen,  50 

Siva,  139,  146,  216,  225 

Skullcup,  242,  243 

Skull  motif,  235 

Snellgrove,  D.L.,  29,  153 

Sonam  Gyatso,  27,  31 

Sonam  Senge,  148 

Sonam  Tsemo,  49,  148,  153,  154,  227, 

228,  263 
Song  dynasty,  29,  30,  45,  119,  137,  138 
Songtsen  Gampo,  23-24,  29,  189,  230,  231 
Spiti  tegion,  15 
Stein,  R.A.,  17,  18,  2^,  24 
Stucco,  185 

Sugatisandarsana  Lokcsvata,  193 
Sukhavati  patadise,  1^9,  140,  142 
Sukhavativyuha,  1 S9,  140 
Sumda,  115 

Sumpa  Khenpo  (lama),  14,  50 
Sumstek  temple:  murals,  115 
Sun)  at  a.  35  —  36 
Suryagarbha,  199 
Suryavairocana,  142,  143 
Swat,  2},  188,  195.  See  also  Sultans 
Swords,  110,  247-48,  247,  256,  256 

Tabo:  murals  at,  115,  126,  136 

Takahashi  collection,  166 

Tanag,  187 

Talung  monastery,  164 

Talungpa  sect,  164 

Tang  dynasty,  15,  28,  29,  51,  118,  137,  230 

Tanjur.  25,  37,  55,  129 

Tantras,  37 

Tantrayana  Buddhism,  ^,5 

Tantric  Buddhism,  18,  41-42,  226,  235, 

236,  243 
Tara,  16,  38,  42,  44,  230,  237;  in  paintings, 

142,  148,  157,  177 
Taranath,  50 
Tashilumpo  monastery,  26,  120,  121,  172, 

177-  '79 
Tashipal,  164 
Tathagatas,  41,  55 
Teapot,  250,  250 
Temple  hangings,  49,  98,  180,  181,  182, 

184,  262 
Ten  Guardians  of  the  Directions,  146 
Tents,  17,  43,  62  n4,  234,  235 
Terracotta,  58,  231,  252,  253 
Thel  monastery,  25 
Thirty-five  Buddhas  of  Confession  of  Sins, 

130,  142,  179 
Thisong  Detsen,  23,  162,  226,  228 
Thousand  Buddhas  of  the  Auspicious 

Age,  172 
Throne  back,  205,  205,  206,  207 
Thubten  Namgyal  monastery,  118,  148 
Thunderbolt  (dorje),  235,  236,  242-43,  242 
Tibeto-Kashmiri  style,  115,  116-17 
Toling  monastery,  25,  115,  123,  126 
Torma.  181,  238,  253 
Trade,  18—19,  26 
Trayastrimsa,  140 
Triratna,  183,  184 
Trophu  monastery,  158 
Tsang  region,  26,  118,  150,  187 
Tsangpo  (Brahmaputra)  river,  15 
Tsaparang  murals,  146 
Tsedong,  187 

Tsba  tsha.  19,  252,  253,  263 
Tshel  monastery,  25 


Tshelpas,  29 

Tshewang  Namgyal,  153 

Tshulgyi  Ozer  (lama),  151,  152 

Tshurphu  monastery,  25,  51,  60 

Tsongkhapa,  26,  30,  162,  172;  depictions 
of,  180,  181,  182,  183,  184;  writings  on 
Vajrayana  Buddhism,  ^6,  57,  41,  4^, 
130,  216 

Tucci,  Giuseppe:  on  artists,  49,  50;  on  cho 
rite,  234;  on  Hva  Shang,  46,  160,  172, 
175;  identification  of  artworks,  i}8, 
139-42,  145-46,  151,  153,  157,  193;  on 
Iwang  temple,  115-16;  and  manuscripts, 
123,  126;  on  religious  and  secular 
powers,  27,  31 

Titl kit.  38,  62  n^2 

Turkestan,  15,  28,  52,  185 

Turquoise:  use  of  in  sculpture,  103,  [86—87, 
212;  in  ritual  objects,  232,  247-49, 
254-55 

U  region,  26 

Unicorns:  in  ritual  objects,  253,  25^-54 

Up  ay  a.  36 

Uray,  52,  207 

U ma.  41 

Ushnishavijaya,  142,  148,  150,  158,  177,  237 

Vairocana,  41,  125,  242 
Vaisravana,  126,  127,  H9,  151 
Vajrabhairava,  42,  44,  45,  81,  105,  144—45, 

146,  147,  216,  217 
Vajracarya  Srimantadeva,  61,  62  n72,  120 
Vajradhara:  in  paintings,  136,  146,  157,  164; 

print  of,  184,  184 
Vajrakumara,  208 
Vajrapani:  sculpture  of,  197,  197,  201-02, 

201,  206,  207,  210-21,  210;  in  thankas, 

134,  144,  158,  166,  179 
Vajrapa>i/ara.  37 
Vajrasana,  131 

Vajrasattva:  depictions  of,  136,  151,  179,  181 
Vajravarahi,  214,  216 
Vajrayana  Buddhism,  -^5-^8,  197,  242; 

pantheon,  41,  43,  127,  134-35,  136,  139, 

148,  184,  197,  242;  rituals,  232—33;  texts, 

43,  129,  213 
Variputra,  137 
Varali,  158 
Vasudhara,  138,  158 
Vetali,  139 

Vikramasila  monastery,  24 
Vimalakirti,  139 
\  'imalakirtinirdesa .  139 
Vinapa,  155 
Vinaya  College,  181 
Virudhaka,  172 

Virupa,  46;  sculpture  of,  223,  223,  225,  263 
Vishnu,  139 

Water:  in  rituals,  237,  248-50 
Water  pot,  248,  249 

Wood:  carving,  185;  sculpture  of,  202,  203; 
ritual  objects  of,  241,  244,  252,  255 

Xian,  28 

Xixia  kingdom,  16,  29,  52,  116 

Xuanzang,  45 

Yab-yum,  42,  105,  129,  179,  187,  211,  217 
Yaks,  17;  yak  tails,  17,  19 
Yama,  43,  139,  168,  170,  171 
Yamantaka,  146 
Yami,  170,  171 
Yangtse  river,  15 


Yarkand,  19 

Yarlung  dynasty,  20,  23,  28,  29, 

Yeshe  O,  24,  25,  116,  12^,  1^2 

Yulam.  43,  44,  47,  238 

Yoga,  36-37,  41-42,  53,  189 

Yogatantra,  42,  207 

Yogi:  portrayal  of,  55;  singing,  27,  42 

Yongle  (emperor),  30,  47,  60,  162 

Yuan  dynasty,  29,  31,  58,  118,  119,  120,  1^,8. 

226,  235 
Ynganaclciha.  42 
Yum-) ion:  See  Dzalamati  sisters 
Yuthok  Yonten  Gonpo,  189,  228,  228-29 

Zan-par,  252,  25^ 
Zanskar,  15,  19,  52,  1^2 
Zhang  Sigong,  138 
Zhao  Mengfu,  120 


279 


County  of  Los  Angeles 
Board  of  Supervisors,  1983 


Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art,  Board  of  Trustees, 
Fiscal  1983-84 


Michael  D.  Antonovich 

Chairman 

Deane  Dana 

Edmund  D.  Edelman 

Kenneth  Hahn 

Peter  F.  Schabarum 

Harry  L.  Hufford 

Chief  Administrative  Officer 

and  Director  of  Personnel 


Mrs.  F.  Daniel  Frost 
Chairman 

Julian  Ganz,  Jr. 
President 

Norman  Barker,  Jr. 
Vice-President 

Eric  Lidow 
Vice-President 

Charles  E.  Ducommun 

Treasurer 

Mrs.  Harry  W.  Wetzel 
Secretary 

Donald  Spuehler 
Counsel 

Honorary  Life  Trustees 
Mrs.  Freeman  Gates 
Mrs.  Alice  Heeramaneck 
Joseph  B.  Koepfli 
Mrs.  Rudolph  Liebig 
Mrs.  Lucille  Ellis  Simon 
John  Walker 
Mrs.  Herman  Weiner 


Earl  A.  Powell  ill 
Director 


Mrs.  Howard  Ahmanson 
William  H.  Ahmanson 
Howard  P.  Allen 
Robert  O.  Anderson 
Mrs.  Anna  Bing  Arnold 
R.  Stanton  Avery 
Daniel  N.  Belin 
Mrs.  Lionel  Bell 
B.  Gerald  Cantor 
Edward  W.  Carter 
Hans  Cohn 
Justin  Dart 
Joseph  P.  Downer 
Richard  J.  Flamson  ill 
Arthur  Gilbert 
Stanley  Grinstein 
Dr.  Armand  Hammer 
Felix  Juda 

Mrs.  Howard  B.  Keck 
Harry  Lenart 
Robert  F.  Maguire  in 
Mrs.  David  H.  Murdock 
Dr.  Franklin  D.  Murphy 
Mrs.  Edwin  W.  Pauley 
Sidney  R.  Petersen 
Henry  C.  Rogers 
Richard  E.  Sherwood 
Nathan  Smooke 
Ray  Stark 
Hal  B.  Wallis 
Frederick  R.  Weisman 
Dr.  Charles  Z.  Wilson,  Jr. 
Robert  Wilson 


280 


■ 


■ 


■ 


M-    j 


■ 

mi 


rb 


«   •  ■..    .  -j- «-  •*»—'-■/.• 

*  ►«*-  •  »*•  *■>*    *  «y~i*^   •*# 

.  ••«*.    j-    «*•.-   !•«,»  ..'W  •  •» 

■    •  ■ 


r  tiri,     I    ■-•'»• 
BMBVIB^Hb^BH 


•  ■♦••» 


.««•«..  -J     r-   >  «  ■  I  j 


BBBbWAV 


Bw4n 


1  >S-r- 

IBBBBMH 


DMM 


■  >   •  »-  1 

■    -.tW. - 

mMM 


IV 


mhMM 


*:•'•-  -v« 


ijM 

WMMH 

■    ^  -  -  1 

*  •>-' 

.    i  /  ♦ . 

.»>-»*! 

|M|j|M 

jpffcKSN 

^Hn^LVH 

t1w*i< 

..    .*  *  y. . 

1       A,*    .,    , 

K*9l 

H 

H   i*".-^ 

MM 

K*9 

tMWMflMI 

wS^Sij 

■  ..<*■ ... 

MtNIi 

■ibiMVB] 

9WW 

*■    H  -  -*B 

■dWwfiP 

p*wMpl 

■  *,-*.   1 

imuUm 

pUpMi 

*  ■  1 

mUffmJli 

•  I"  1  *  » 

**v 

9B^fM£fr^ 

fc-*»*  ■»*- 

**•*. 

■*  ~  * 

*)»-,«•  bbr    •    -  %    ,^w.*%»^*. 
■    .....    ■ ..'.*-'• 

,   ,    .»    ■       •  .  %*    -»i-**|t-T» 

,  1,..     ■   —  rt,,vi   J*.-*' 
....  .-■  I       ..,....,.-*-'- 

B^B^B^B^B^BB^B^B^Bj 

BBBHMB^BVBB^BBl^M 
•  ■     •    •      ' 

--•••■ 


HflBMMB__ 

■WMjMHflB; 
PhhmwJbV- 

.  ■    ■■■■■ 


I^B^tyyyBB*^^1*^ 


I  H  ^'  I      I  KlfilW 


MMWmhMjmuu 

HHHI  PwOSVyHi 

HMMMMMn 


HH^ 

"HHI 
__HHHH 


■  HJj  •  it.'  *»  I 

hJhh v  I      hhhhhhhhJI 

•    -  •     ■        <i., ■   I    .    *.  _    ,,l  l- -J    4  .  .,  HHHH 

v,  " HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHP 

IT".    I  ""** 

■   ■  {!'■     •    ■-    ■     HH  — --y-  '•  -•  ■-%    ■    •»  -».>»-».r.  #i  ,....■  ■ 

*'^"^  ■   *^»  HJi  t  ■-,—»■  H|  "<*i  t   ■, ',.  i       ..    irn#n  <4.   J 

BdCH  ••*•*      •'•'*■'' 

IOEwmXHIXmI 

jhmm     HHl      H    HHHHl  I  IBSmmh 

HHHHl  t* H  IH  I     j^-»'-«r#  »,»*.,   BEEaBj 

■H    •    -V    .     »..•-    HHHHHHHHHHI   E^**8 

■1  HI  HI  i  HHHI »j<^».(t»„  HI 
gfl       c  *■  <  k  ^  •  *  ,  r* v    HHI HHHH  *  **■** 

^HHHHHHHH       HHJ  HHHHH 

HJH  HHHJ  I  -->■-•*  •>r'#L. 

*  i  HHI  HHHHhVJ   hhh* 

HI  **  Www  HHI  I  HHHHH 

HMIwlWWirW   Mw!lIiB"HJHHBHHHl>HMH 
HJH  •»  •  .  ■  HHhJ  HHHJ  .*3 

J—HJI 

M*Hht^S  v«4lf  HHHHHHHHl  ■~*k        HHHHJ 

HH    HI  w  ><  HHHH1  ■         HHHHHHHH  HHH      *» 

■w  ''O'W'  HHH  HHH 

-•.»*      HhI  HH 

.«.•         HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH         * v-«^^>*\.-  I  *-.*  •       HHJ  *-«lHB* 
-  •  r    ,  i,  .j*.k-^.«»v#w»  •»-,>•  HHHHHH1  *  i»nininvHlRln*<KUH*lr#4 

^■HHI    ' 

MwflPlHWW»"* 


-Hi. 


■ 


■■ 


■HHI  ■ 


HbGfiyJiY 

I ,  •: 
HHI  "  ■'  ■  •  Hi  ("■" 

•>  HHI  ■  HHI  I ' 

HmmRWh         Mi 

HHJ    Mf-Ji 
HHJI  MM 


1  ■  r-+  ■■ 


f«  1 1^-'.'»- 


,  ^  »■   ■    >t<h4 


:-.  j».  J. 


HI   HHHI        J<N<"'¥r*-' 

■JHJJ  ■■ 

<••■  .»i,ri"i       4Hnv*^HHi 
,   -  ■  ^fW* 

Ivdi  HHI  nHBI%vni(*Mv''l 

■JHJHJHJ]  hj  •         OW 

Hi  I  DHNvnKVlP 


HHH 


i*  '-t* 


#««• 


HHHHI  » •  HI  —•/■-••f  • 

■JJ   •  •*->...'•.'' 

■JHJJ    ;^ 


4-  HHI  ' 

HHJ  ffefc 

Mm 

hemm  HJH 

HJHH  HH 

HHI    HHHHHHHHHI       HI  HHH 

•  ■  HI  HHI  I 

HHHHHHHHHHHH  ■  .   HHHHHHH  HI 


HHH 


'..'■  >-  r  HHHHHH  **■  ' 


PHMMMMM 

■V  I    """V  I 


H  •  |HH  HHHHHHJI  HHHHHH 
HHHHHHHHH     HH  HHHHHHH 
■j  ■■  ■  ,■       ■■■■■    .,  ..n 

1 1 

■■■J  ■  ,..-*J.ir. 

H  '-  <:  y       HHJI  ''"**tBHw  HH  *tfH(  HHHl 
HHHHHHJ  HHI  HHHI     RPOPntllR^       **■*»  * 


HHH  HHHI 

-  HHHHHHHHHI 
i .-.«  ■■■■■  ■■ 


■mm  ■■■■ 

PHlflHHHMHH)'iiHcHHiH"iuw9 

i  HH  HI  I  •*»*>•  I  Hi  HJ     PlWg**- 

hhhhhhI    huhhhmpj*#vhi 

<»4t^'y-   u>-<      iHiHHHHHniBiV**1^!* 
•^."•'Ari^-"*"  HHl  w» 


HHH      HJ    HHHHH 


■HfaUHMvil 

■J  ■■■  HHl 
■HI  H  I  ■   ■ 
WUmmpw 

vHBwHpHHI 
UWWflMYrfZi 

HH 
I  HHJI       MKn 


HH  >4i»*««*<?iy  »^  >*» 


■.  -  '-■  */»-'    ^J****  *-  -*  -»•  * 

'V   ^« 

^',*-  /w    ^                JTi 

*%f%vV^    ^■''i  '"»t   •»*•  #■ 

ShrvV 

. -w   1 

-   1  ■  1  ^«    t*^-f  ^C'fcii  hm^^w 

BHHJfj|Sw^^*M 

'  «■* 

-  #  w.       .  m>*    «Mf>M'|il>i'v4tl«4l 

BhIhjh»IS9 

|^H 

.»■  *    i*-^*  *■•%**■ **  *♦** "V* ■* ' '  *  -4>*^ * 

k^HHt 

H^H 

-*^  •  ■  ':  W^^l  »M-<*y|M* 

[r*«  *c  I  'd^^NcrlFHn 

^^| 

-    ■  i*.  ■•  .  «^  •    -ktw-^h-\  A-  ■+**+* 

HHHHHj]            VWHVHV9'lVPr*^ 

-       ^         ^'      »•»*»    *  ■ 

•  ^.    -^.         . 

Hhh4hjhtMwMPv1h«'  -^ ' 

*;  '       '  •■  ■    *«  ^  ■  *V>  •    i  <  *H** 

^*'%-*-*.  »./•'*," 

BhhhH 

.   1     (      ■   1      .-^;»,*'-     ..,.-Wk« 

a  •  ^i  4h>  t  1 

1    ».        •j.~#Vt**<<.    .fc^«>»i4Hl 

•m  ,  »  Jr  *k^  -*>  1  -  *&.  1 

IH ^» HJ  *     'V,,^        .«.-*,<*•"    <^4A 

*^**  v  lcsnHJHi!^7vMRd^p*1 

f4hhpBhh*hiCW#<h)w*Jhphp 

1    ^  '-«   .  ■    ,  *»,    V*  *  *-V». %•*•»* 

|^^lfl|M^£BrdHHu|H^.  H 

^fMft             «"!*^*/ 

W#JT*#w|p»tVHjH  M^Ma^  ' 

•    •*. 

,«»««>h«*.4r«  w  -^*«* 

1  «wr* 

9HMfafe^4Lw  Vj^^HAPJSE| 

^hhhBhi 

1*  ^*  WHH* '  1  **  HHl  *  *  HHI  "lj    ^  *  * 

-■-*-. 

|HVMHjMB|^B3kHVHHH|'iH*Jk,w«^> 

if^j-j^ 

%0\)+*    J*    1    *  -^    *--w*--?^  ^u>% 

•  1    1 

IiV^KtMwIIIiI 

DDHH 

j-f'Wjr  ft  i'  "**  -  *  .x  i  ,_  <> 

«>      1    a 

^hhhhBhhr^hhhVShhVHI 

■C^H               ^H^^H  -*.  ,^t 

i  wCH|^«MiLP^^^HK^U|BMflp| 

^^H^^P^MC)M|KHlMHMMg 

kiMl 

>jfjwMg  nn,rlrvv^4*ia>^[ 

Ml  WHhjw^^Bp  **nff! 

WW 

S22.50 

ISBN  0-520-05214-5 


Art  of  Tibet 

A  Catalogue  of  the  Los  Angeles 
County  Museum  of  Art  Collection 


Pratapaditya  Pal 

Tibetan  art — one  of  the  last  of  the  great  non-Western  tradi- 
tions to  become  known  in  the  West — is  alive  with  the  mingled 
violence  and  tranquility  of  vajrayana .  the  "diamond  path"  or 
"thunderbolt  path"  of  Buddhism.  The  spirit  behind  this  art  may 
be  mystically  serene,  but  its  serenity  has  been  won  in  a  battle- 
to  which  the  art  gives  a  sometimes  terrifying  expression. 

In  this  catalogue  raisonne  of  a  collection  that  is  clearly  the 
finest  in  the  United  States  and  arguably  the  finest  outside  Tibet, 
Pratapaditya  Pal  begins  with  a  book- length  introduction  placing 
the  art  in  religious  context  and  the  religion  in  historical  context. 
As  remarkable  for  its  clarity  and  style  as  for  the  breadth  of  its 
learning,  this  introduction  shows  how  Indian.  Xepalese.  Mongol. 
Chinese,  and  pre-Buddhist  indigenous  influences  fused  in  a 
culture  of  extraordinary  vigor  and  originality. 

The  catalogue  itself  is  divided  into  three  parts — painting, 
sculpture,  and  ritual  objects — each  with  a  generous  art  historical 
introduction  of  its  own.  Of  the  seven  manuscript  illuminations 
and  book  covers,  forty-seven  paintings  and  hangings,  forty-three 
sculptures,  and  twenty-two  ritual  objects,  ranging  in  date  from 
the  eleventh  to  the  twentieth  century,  more  than  half  are  pub- 
lished here  tor  the  first  time. 

Each  entry  is  illustrated  with  either  a  full-view  or  a  detail  pho- 
tograph in  black  and  white.  In  each  entry.  Pal  meticulously  de- 
scribes the  work,  identifying,  as  necessary,  scenes  or  personages 
depicted,  and  then  reviews  relevant  published  scholarship.  The 
startling  color  of  Tibetan  art  is  illustrated  in  a  forty-eight-plate 
color  section. 


Art  of  Tibet  is  the  auspicious  first  volume  in  a  projected  series 
of  catalogues  raisonnes  documenting  the  Los  Angeles  County 
Museum  of  Art's  holdings  in  the  arts  of  India.  Tibet.  Nepal.  .\nd 
Southeast  Asia.  Pratapaditya  Pal  is  senior  curator  of  Indian  and 
Southeast  Asian  Art  at  the  Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art. 


