Spurgeon’s Sermons 

The Metropolitan 
Tabernacle Pulpit 

By Rev. C. H. Spurgeon 

Volume IX 

V 


Preached primarily at 
The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

1863 



Spurgeon’s Sermons 

Volume IX 


The Metropolitan 
Tabernacle Pulpit 


BY 

Charles Haddon Spurgeon 

(1834-1892) 


This collection contains numbers 487 through 546 
of C. H. Spurgeon’s published sermons. 

These sermons were preached before 
CONGREGATIONS IN 1863. THEY WERE ALSO 
PUBLISHED AS PAMPHLETS DURING THOSE YEARS, AND 
LATER COMPILED IN BOOK FORM AS, 

The Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit, vol. IX 


Collated and compiled by the 
Classic Christian Library, 

a library of the best Christian works, over the centuries, 
and available, free of charge, at 
http: / / www.ClassicChristianLibranr.com 



To 

THE ONE God of heaven and earth, 
in the Trinity of his sacred persons, 

BE ALL HONOUR AND GLORY, 

WORLD WITHOUT END, 

AMEN. 

TO THE GLORIOUS FATHER, 

AS THE COVENANT GOD OF ISRAEL; 

TO THE GRACIOUS SON, 

THE REDEEMER OF HIS PEOPLE; 

to the Holy Ghost, 

THE AUTHOR OF SANCTIFICATION; 

BE EVERLASTING PRAISE FOR THAT GOSPEL OF 
THE FREE GRACE OF GOD, 

HEREIN PROCLAIMED UNTO MEN. 




Contents 


Preface v 

487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best Succor - Heb. 2:18 1 

488 The Voice from Heaven — Rev. 11:12 21 

489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 33:20-23 41 

490 Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 62 

491 Our Stronghold — Prov. 18:10 82 

492 Nominal Christians — Real Infidels — John 8:46 102 

493 Gethsemane — Luke 22:44 122 

494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 142 

495 The Greatest Trial on Record - Ps. 2:2 162 

496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 183 

497 The Procession of Sorrow — John 19:16 201 

498 The Gladness of the Man of Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 220 

499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 1 1 :2-3 241 

500 Ebenezer! — I Sam. 7:12 261 

501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 281 

502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 301 

503 Death and Life in Christ — Rom. 6:8-1 1 321 

504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives — Job 19:25-27 340 

505 The Root of the Matter — Job 19:28 359 

506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 378 

507 The Power of Prayer and Praise — II Cor. 1:11-12 398 

508 Comfort to Seekers - Isa. 45:19 419 

509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” — Matt. 6:13 439 

510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 459 

511 Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 479 

512 A Precious Drop of Honey — Isa. 49:16 500 

513 The Young Man’s Prayer — Ps. 90:14 519 

514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 539 



515 The Sinner’s Advocate — I John 2:1 560 

516 The Minister’s Stock-Taking — Acts 28:24 580 

517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 601 

518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 622 

519 Believing with the Heart — Rom. 10:10 641 

520 Confession with the Heart — Rom. 10:10 659 

521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 7:12 680 

522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields — Ruth 2:14 701 

523 From Death to Life — I Sam. 2:6 721 

524 From The Saint’s Horror at the Sinner’s Ball — Ps. 26:9. ..742 

525 Am I Sought Out? — Isa. 62:12 762 

526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 783 

527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 801 

528 Chastisement - Now and Afterwards — Heb. 12:1 1 822 

529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 104:16 842 

530 The Chief of Sinners — I Tim. 1:15 862 

531 The Warrant of Faith - 1 John 3:23 882 

532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 65:11 903 

533 The Queen of the South — Matt. 12:42 922 

534 The Mighty Power Which Sustains Faith — Eph. 1:19-23 942 

535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape — I Kings 20:31-34 962 

536 Jehovah-Shammah — Ezek. 35:10 983 

537 Encourage Your Minister — Deut. 1:38 1003 

538 Caleb - The Man for the Times — Num. 14:24 1023 

539 Heavenly Lovesickness — Song. 5:8 1043 

540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - Isa. 40:11 1063 

541 Direction in Dilemma — Ex. 14:13 1083 

542 Paul — His Cloak and His Books — II Tim. 4:13 1103 

543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing — Zech. 8:13 1123 

544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion — Acts 16:13-14 1143 

545 The Holy Child, Jesus — Acts 4:30 1163 

546 Alpha and Omega — Rev. 22:13 1184 




Preface 


HOW SOON has 1 863 hurried forward to the years beyond 
the flood! Truly our years fly as the eagle, and are as the swift 
ships. We cannot say that our days are here, but only that they 
are gone. As the waters of the waterfall are ever leaping down 
the rock and hurrying on their way, even so our days hasten as 
a torrent and are gone as the bubble on the stream. Let us be 
content that it is so; for the unmoving air yields no music to 
the harp of Aeolus, and the stagnant pool turns not the wheel 
of industry. A horse in its stable wins not the race — it must run 
if it would serve its owner! Time, like a ship, brings no wealth, 
except as it makes its passages. To stay the flight of time were 
to clip the wings of angels. If we use our hours in the service 
of God, they are better spent than hoarded — to have a wealth 
of time to come is not to be compared with the riches of time 
already spent for the God of heaven! Our days unused are the 
plowed field, but the good time past has already yielded its 
harvest. As the shipwright is happy that the vessel is 
launched — as the warrior shouts that the battle is fought — and 
as the woman in travail rejoices that a man-child is born — so 
are we grateful to the eternal God that another year has gone. 

When our year’s ministry is over, we feel a sweet relief; we 
sit down upon the milestone of our preface, and remember that 
we are nearer home. Looking back with gratitude upon the 
steps already trod, we are cheered in our onward way. This 
volume is the record of another year’s campaign against sin and 
Satan — the memorial of another series of struggles, 
contentions, defeats and triumphs! Better is the end of a thing 
than the beginning — we began with trembling hope, we close 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


with deep repentance for our shortcomings, and hearty 
thanksgiving for our successes. Litde does any man know, 
beside the man who endures the like, the agonies and joys of a 
preacher; as the weaver sees every thread dyed with the sweat 
of his brow, and marks in the fabric his own nerves and sinews 
interwoven in its tissue, even so does the minister of God, 
when he reviews his sermons. The farmer has been Jzn/partaker 
of the fruits; and in that first feasting, he tasted his own labors, 
anxieties, and hopes sweetened with the dew of heaven and 
flavored with the genial sunshine of God — no other man can 
partake of the fruits with such a zest as he! Permit me, then, to 
pour out my whole soul unto God in praise for the unceasing 
mercy, which has given me this series of discourses. O God, 
most gracious, be You extolled, and be You very high! You 
have dealt well with Your servant according to Your Word. 

Here, reader, you have the fragments of the bread, and of 
the fishes, with which the Master has fed the multitude in the 
wilderness — that the cakes were made of barley is our fault, 
that the fishes were little is due to the small net which caught 
them — but, that they have been blessed and multiplied is to the 
Master’s honor, and should make you bless His name! None 
were more surprised than the disciples when the crowd was 
supplied from their meager store! And no one marvels more 
than the preacher that the Lord works such great things by his 
slender abilities. You have here, reader, ox-goads which have 
slain Philistines, stones which have smitten Goliaths, and nails 
which have pierced the brains of Siseras! Call these sermons 
blasts of the ram’s horn if you will, Jericho is fallen, go up and 
smite the inhabitants there. As no man might despise the youth 
of Timothy, so despise not the weakness of the author. But, as 
the Lord was seen in the bush, so behold His glory in our 
bramble. So far from desiring to be esteemed eloquent and 
learned, the preacher glories in his infirmities, because the 


vi 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Preface 


power of Christ does rest upon him! The vessel is earthen and 
may be clearly seen to be such — but the golden treasure is put 
into such keeping, that the excellence of the power may be of 
God and not of us. It is not the pole, but the brazen serpent, 
to which men are bidden to look and live. Woe unto us if we 
attract gazers to ourselves, rather than to our Lord! Look, 
reader, look to Jesus as our subject matter. Look to the Holy 
Spirit as our only strength, and to the eternal Father as the alone 
object of praise! 

During the year, we have heard with joy of conversions 
worked by the Holy Spirit from most of these discourses! But 
to assist the judgment of those who wish to distribute the most 
useful, we would mention as having had many seals put upon 
them — “The Voice from heaven,” “Nominal Christians — Real 
Infidels,” “The Root of the Matter,” “Comfort to Seekers from 
What the Lord Has Not Said,” “The Bridgeless Gulf,” 
“Believing with the Heart,” and “Mealtime in the Corn Fields.” 

The sermon entitled, “The Warrant of Faith,” has caused 
some litde controversy, and one very absurd pamphlet has been 
issued in order to disprove it, but the writer was far too 
ignorant of Scripture and the fundamental principles of all 
theology, to be worthy of an answer. It is gready to be desired 
that those who are led captives by ultra-Calvinistic theories 
would weigh the arguments of this sermon carefully, and then 
I pray they would begin to preach the whole gospel, instead of 
a part, and preach it freely to sinners in the name of Jesus! The 
truth of God is no more to be contained in one rigid system 
than the ocean in a shell! Divine sovereignty is a great and 
undoubted fact, but human responsibility is quite as 
indisputable. God, in His plan of grace, contemplates man as a 
reasonable being, and not as a stone or a beast. His deeds of 
grace never violate the will, but sweedy constrain it to consent. 
Salvation is all of grace — but God works by means. Faith is 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


God’s gift, but it is also the act of renewed manhood. 
Damnation is the result of justice, not of arbitrary 
predestination. O that the time were here when seeming 
opposites would be received becaus & faith knows that they are 
portions of one harmonious whole! Would that an enlarged 
view of the dispensations of God to man would permit 
ministers to be faithful to the human race, and at the same time 
true to the sovereign Lord of all! The Lord knows with what 
earnestness of soul this preacher has striven to declare not a 
part — but the whole of the counsel of God. 

Thanks are hereby very affectionately tendered to those 
earnest friends who have diligently circulated these sermons. 
May their reward be great in the day of account. 

Many friends send us texts requesting us to preach from 
them — this we cannot engage to do. Our habit has been to look 
to the Lord for our guidance, and when a text comes with 
power to our soul, we preach from it without hesitation. As we 
dare not select our own themes, so neither can we receive those 
suggested to us unless our Master seals them upon our heart. 
Remarks are also occasionally made upon our style, and our 
reflections upon different denominations and doctrines; these 
we accept with deferential respect — but, at the same time 
venture to observe that we can never hope to please all, and do 
not aim to gratify any! Our style has been useful up to now to 
the many, and we shall be very slow to change it to oblige the 
few. We must work in our own way, however rough that way 
may be. Saul’s armor we have not proved; and without finding 
fault with it as worn by Saul, we must be permitted to go out 
as before, with our sling and stone! Indeed, without any human 
allowance, our mind is made up to do so. As to sharp remarks 
upon the errors of different Churches, fidelity compels us to 
make them, and no one should wish us to be faithless to our 
sense of duty, and our reverence to God. 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Preface 


Believers, we entreat you give your continued prayers for a 
blessing upon our endeavors. Let all who read to profit pray 
with fervor, and who can tell the blessed result? O for an 
unction from on high! This is the one thing needed. Let us pray 
that the ever-present Spirit may work among us more and more. 
O Lord, send now prosperity. Amen. 

Reader, your Friend, 

C. H. Spurgeon 




487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best Succor - 

Heb. 2:18 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, January 4 th, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“For in that He Himself has suffered being tempted, He is 
able to succor them who are tempted.” — Hebrews 2:18 

My TEXT, furnishing the motto for the congregation for 
the New Year is, as you know, always supplied to me by a most 
venerable clergyman of the Church of England who has always 
showed to me the most constant and affectionate regard. I have 
no doubt that the present text has been suggested to this aged 
servant of the Lord by his deep experience at once of affliction 
and deliverance; for there he has learned his need of solid, 
substantial food — fat things full of marrow, fit for the veteran 
warriors of the cross. Having been tempted these many years 
in the wilderness, my esteemed friend finds that, as his natural 
strength decays, he needs more and more to cast himself upon 
the tenderness of the Redeemer’s love; and he is led more fully 
to look to Him who is his only help and succor in every day of 
trouble, finding consolation alone in the person of Christ Jesus 
the Lord! My text seems to me to be a staff fitted for old age 
to lean upon in the rough places of the way; a sword with which 
the strong man may fight in all hours of conflict; a shield with 
which youth may cover itself in the time of peril, and a royal 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


chariot in which babes in divine grace may ride in safety. There 
is something here for every one of us; as Solomon puts it, a 
portion for seven, and also for eight. If we consider the Great 
Prophet and High Priest of our profession — Jesus Christ — as 
being tempted in all points, we shall not grow weary or faint in 
our minds, but shall gird up our loins for our future journey, 
and like Elijah, go in the strength of this meat for many days to 
come! 

You who are tempted — and I suppose the major part of 
this present congregation is included in the list — you who are 
tempted — and indeed if you know yourselves, you are all in 
your measure thus exercised — you who are tempted, listen to 
me this morning while I endeavor to speak of your temptations, 
and in parallel lines of the temptations of Him who, having 
known your trials, is able to succor you at all times! 

I. Our first point this morning is this — MANY SOULS ARE 
TEMPTED — CHRIST WAS TEMPTED. All the heirs of heaven 
pass under the yoke; all true gold must feel the fire; all wheat 
must be threshed; all diamonds must be cut; all saints must 
endure temptation. 

1. They are tempted from all quarters. It is as Christ’s parable 
puts it concerning the house whose foundation was on the 
rock — “The rain descended, the floods came, and the winds 
blew and beat upon that house but it fell not, for it was founded 
upon a rock.” The descending rain may represent temptations 
from above; the floods pouring their devastating torrents upon 
the land may well denote the trials which spring from the world, 
while the howling winds may typify those mysterious influences 
of evil which issue from the Prince of the power of the air. 
Now, whether we shudder at the descending rain, or fear 
before the uprising flood, or whether we are amazed at the 
mysterious energy of the winds, it is well to recollect our 
blessed Lord was tempted in all points like as we are! This is to 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


be our consolation — that nothing strange to the Head has 
happened to the members! 

Beloved friends, it is possible that we may be tempted by 
God! I know it is written that “God is not tempted, neither 
tempts He any man,” yet I read in Scripture, “It came to pass 
that God did tempt Abraham.” And I know it is a part of the 
prayer which we are taught to offer before God — “Lead us not 
into temptation” — by which it is clearly implied that God does 
lead into temptation, or why else should we be taught to entreat 
Him not to do so? In one sense of the term, “tempt,” a pure 
and holy God can have no share, but in another sense, He does 
tempt His people! The temptation which comes from God is 
altogether that of trial; trial, not with an evil design as are the 
temptations of Satan, but a trial meant to prove and strengthen 
our graces, and so at once to illustrate the power of divine grace, 
to test the genuineness of our virtues, and to add to their energy. 
You remember that Abraham was tried and tested of God 
when he was bid to go to a mountain that God would show 
him, there to offer up his son, Isaac. You and I may have a like 
experience. God may call us in the path of obedience to a great 
and singular sacrifice, the desire of our eyes may be demanded 
of us in an hour — or He may summon us to a tremendous duty 
far surpassing all our strength! We may be tempted by the 
weight of the responsibility, like Jonah, to flee from the 
presence of the Lord; we can only know when placed in the 
position what temptations the Lord’s message may involve. But, 
beloved, whatever these may be, our Great High Priest has felt 
them all! His Father called Him to a work of the most terrific 
character; He laid upon Him the iniquity of us all; He ordained 
Him, the second Adam, the bearer of the curse, the destroyer 
of death, the conqueror of hell, the seed of the woman to be 
wounded in the heel, and elected to bruise the serpent’s head! 
Our Lord was appointed to toil at the loom and there, with 


3 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


ever-flying shuttle, to weave a perfect garment of righteousness 
for all His people. Now, beloved, this was a strong and mighty 
testing of the character of Him who was found in fashion as a 
man, and it is not possible that we can ever be thrust into such 
a refiner’s fire as that which tried this most pure gold! No other 
can be in the crucible so long or subjected to such a 
tremendous heat as that which was endured by Christ Jesus! If 
then, the trial is sent direcdy from our heavenly Father, we may 
solace ourselves with this reflection — that He Himself has 
suffered, and being tried of God — He is able also to succor 
them who are likewise tried! 

But, dear friends, our God not only tries us direcdy, but 
indirectly. All is under the Lord’s control of Providence. 
Everything that happens to us is meted out by the decree, and 
setded by His purpose. We know that nothing can occur to us 
save as it is written in the secret roll of providential 
predestination; consequently, all the trials resulting from 
circumstances are traceable at once to the great First Cause! 
Out of the golden gate of God’s ordinance, the armies of trial 
march forth in array. No shower falls without permission from 
the threatening cloud; every drop has its order before it hastens 
to the earth. Consider poverty for instance. How many are 
made to feel its pinching necessities? They shiver in the cold 
for lack of clothes; they are hungry and thirsty; they are 
homeless, friendless, despised. This is a temptation from God, 
but all this Christ knew — “Foxes have holes, and the birds of 
the air have nests, but I, the Son of Man, have not where to lay 
My head.” When He had fasted 40 days and 40 nights, He was 
hungry, and then it was that He was tempted of the devil! Nor 
do the scant table and the ragged garments alone invite 
temptation, for all providences are doors to trial. Even our 
mercies, like roses, have their thorns. Men may be drowned in 
seas of prosperity as well as in rivers of affliction; our 


4 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


mountains are not too high, and our valleys are not too low for 
temptation to travel. Where shall we flee from their presence? 
What wings of wind can carry us? What beams of light can bear 
us? Everywhere, above and beneath, we are beset and 
surrounded with dangers! Now, since all these are under the 
superintendence and direction of the great Lord of Providence, 
we may look upon them all as temptations which come from 
Him. But in every one of these, Christ had His part. Let us 
choose the special one of sickness — sickness is a strong 
temptation to impatience, rebellion, and murmuring, but He 
Himself took our infirmities, and bore our sicknesses. That 
visage had not been marred more than that of any man, had 
not the soul been sorely vexed, and the body consequently 
much tormented. Bereavement, too — what a trial is this to the 
tender heart! You arrows of death, you kill, but you wound with 
wounds worse than death! “Jesus wept,” because His friend 
Lazarus slept in the tomb. In that great loss, He was schooled 
to sympathize with the widow in her needs, with the orphan in 
his fatherless estate, and with the friend whose acquaintance 
has been thrust into darkness. Nothing can come from God to 
the sons of men the like of which did not also happen unto the 
Lord Jesus Christ! Herein let us wrap ourselves about with the 
warm mantle of consolation, since Christ was tempted in this 
point like as we are. 

2. But still more do temptations arise from men. God does 
try us now and then, but our fellow men every day. Our foes 
are found in our own household among our friends. Out of a 
mistaken kindness, it often happens that they would lead us to 
prefer our own ease rather than the service of God. Links of 
love have made iron chains for saints! It is hard to ride to 
heaven over our own flesh and blood. Kinsfolk and 
acquaintances may much hinder young disciples. This, however, 
is no novelty to our Lord. You know how he had to say to Peter, 


5 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


well-beloved disciple though he was, “Get you behind Me, 
Satan. You savor not the things that are of God.” Poor, 
ignorant human friendship would have kept Him back from 
the cross; would have made Him miss His great objective in 
being fashioned as a man, and so have robbed Him of all the 
honor which only shame and death could win Him! Not only 
true, but false friends attempt our ruin. Treason creeps like a 
snake in the grass, and falsehood, like an adder, bites the horse’s 
heels. Does treachery assault us? Let us remember how the Son 
of David was betrayed. “He that eats bread with Me has lifted 
up his heel against Me.” “Yes, My own familiar friend in whom 
I trusted, which did eat of My bread, has lifted up his heel 
against Me.” What shall be done unto you, you false tongue? 
Eternal silence rest on you! And yet, you have spent your 
venom on my Lord — why should I marvel if you try your worst 
on me? 

As by friends, you and I are tempted, so often are we 
assailed by enemies. Enemies will waylay us with subtle 
questions, seeking to entrap us in our speech. O cunning 
devices of a generation of vipers! They did the same with Christ. 
The Herodian, the Sadducee, the Pharisee, the lawyer — each 
one has Iris riddle, and each one is answered — answered 
gloriously by the Great Teacher who is not to be entrapped! 
You and I are sometimes asked odd questions; doctrines are set 
in controversy with doctrines; texts of Scripture are made to 
clash with other portions of God’s Word, and we hardly know 
how to reply. Let us retire into the secret chamber of this great 
fact — in this point, too, Christ was tempted! And then, when 
His foes could not prevail against Him, they slandered His 
character. “A drunken man and a winebibber, a friend of 
publicans and sinners,” said they, and He became the song of 
the drunkard till their reproach had broken His heart! This may 
happen to us; we may be subjected to slander just in that very 


6 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


point where we are most clear! Our good may be spoken evil 
of; our motives misinterpreted; our words misquoted; our 
actions misconstrued — but here also, we may shelter ourselves 
beneath the eagle wings of this great truth of God — our 
glorious Head has suffered, and, being tempted, He can give us 
aid! But His foes did even more than this — when they found 
Him in an agony of pain, they taunted Him to His face! 
Pointing their finger, they mocked His nakedness; thrusting out 
their tongue, they jeered at His claims, and hissed out that more 
than diabolical temptation, “If You are the Son of God, come 
down from the cross and we will believe in You.” How often 
do the sons of men, when they have gone to the full length of 
their tether, charge us in like manner? They have caught us in 
some unhappy moment — surprised us when our spirits were 
broken, when our circumstances were unhappy, and then they 
say, “Now — now where is your God? If you are what you 
profess to be, now prove it!” They ask us to prove our faith by 
a sinful action which they know would destroy our 
characters — some rash deed which would be contrary to the 
profession we have espoused! Here, too, we may remember 
that, having been tempted, our High Priest is able to succor 
those who are tempted! Moreover, remember that there are 
temptations which come from persons who are neither friends 
nor foes — from those with whom we are compelled to mix in 
ordinary society. Jesus went to the Pharisee’s table; the example 
of the Pharisee reeked with infectious pride; He sat with the 
publicans, whose characters were contagious with impurity; but, 
whether it was in one leper house or another, the Great 
Physician walked through the midst of moral plagues and 
leprosies unharmed! He associated with sinners, but was not a 
sinner! He touched disease, but was not Himself diseased! He 
could enter into the chambers of evil, but evil could not find a 
chamber in Him! You and I are thrown by our daily avocations 


7 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


into constant contact with evil; it would be impossible, I 
suppose, to walk among men without being tempted by them. 
Inadvertently, men who have no studied design to betray us, by 
the mere force of their ordinary behavior, entice us to evil, and 
corrupt our good manners. Here, too, if we have to cry, “Woe 
is me, for I dwell in Meshech, and sojourn in the tents of Kedar,” 
we may remember that our great Leader sojourned here, too, 
and being here, He was tempted even as we are! 

Dear friends, we shall not complete the list of temptations 
if we forget that a vast host, and those of a most violent 
character, can only be ascribed to Satanic influence. These are 
usually threefold — for Christ’s temptation in the wilderness, if 
I read it right, was a true picture of all the temptations which 
Satan uses against God’s people. The first grand temptation of 
Satan is usually made against our faith. Being hungry, Satan 
came to our Lord and said, “If you are the Son of God, 
command that these stones be made bread.” Here was that 
devilish “If,” that cunning suggestion of a doubt concerning 
His Sonship coupled with the enticement to commit a selfish 
act, to prove whether He were the Son or not. Ah, how often 
does Satan tempt us to unbelief. “God has forsaken you,” he 
says. “God has no love for you; your experience has been a 
delusion; your profession is a lie; all your hopes will fail you — 
you are but a poor miserable dupe! There is no truth in 
religion — if there is, how is it that you are in this trouble? Why 
not do as you like, live as you like, and enjoy yourself?” Ah, foul 
fiend, how craftily do you spread your net! But it is all in vain, 
for Jesus has passed through and broken the snare! My hearers, 
beware of intermeddling with divine providence! Satan tempts 
many believers to run before the cloud, to carve their own 
fortunes, build their own house, to steer their own vessels. 
Mischief will surely befall all who yield to this temptation! 
Beware of becoming the keepers of your own souls, for evil will 


8 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


soon overtake you! Ah, when you are thus tempted by Satan 
and your adoption seems in jeopardy, and your experience 
appears to melt, fly at once to the good shepherd remembering 
this, “In that He Himself has suffered being tempted; He is able 
to succor them who are tempted.” 

The next foul temptation of Satan with Christ was not to 
unbelief, but to the very reverse — presumption. “Cast Yourself 
down,” he said as he poised the Savior on the pinnacle of the 
temple. Even so, he whispers to some of us, “You are a child 
of God; you know that, and therefore you are safe — live as you 
like — cast yourself down, for it is written, ‘He shall give His 
angels charge over you to keep you.’” Oh, that foul temptation! 
Many an Antinomian is led by the nose of this — driven like a 
fatted bullock to the slaughter, and like a fool to the correction 
of the stocks; for many an Antinomian will say, “I am safe, 
therefore, I may indulge my lusts with impunity.” But you who 
know better! When you are thus molested; when the devil 
brings the doctrine of election or the great truth of the final 
perseverance of the saints, and seeks to soil your purity, and 
stain your innocence by temptations drawn from the mercy and 
love of God — then console yourselves by this fact — that Christ 
was tempted in this point, too, and is able to succor you even 
here! The last temptation of Christ in the wilderness was to 
idolatry. Ambition was the temptation, but idolatry was the end 
at which the tempter aimed. “All these things will I give You if 
You will fall down and worship me.” The old serpent will 
suggest, “I will make you rich if you will only venture upon that 
one swindling transaction; you shall be famous, only palm off 
that one falsehood; you shall be perfectly at ease, only wink at 
one small evil. All these things will I give you if you will make 
me Lord of your heart.” Ah, then it will be a noble thing if you 
can look up to Him who endured this temptation before you, 
and bid the fiend depart with, “It is written, you shall worship 


9 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the Lord with all your heart, and Him only shall you serve.” 
Thus shall Satan leave you and angels minister unto you as they 
did to the tempted one of old! 

Still further, to enlarge on this point, let me observe that 
we are tempted not only from all quarters, but in all positions. 
No man is too lowly for the shafts of hell — no person too 
elevated for the arrows of evil! Poverty has its dangers — “Lest 
I be poor and steal” — Christ knew these. Contempt has its 
aggravated temptations — to be despised often makes men 
bitter of spirit, exasperates them into savage selfishness, and 
wolfish cruelty of revenge. Our great Prophet knew 
experientially the temptations of contempt. It is no small trial 
to be filled with pain — when all the strings of our manhood are 
strained and twisted, it is little wonder if they make a discord. 
Christ endured the greatest amount of physical pain, especially 
upon the cross; and on the cross, where all the rivers of human 
agony met in one deep lake within His heart; He bore all that it 
was possible for the human frame to bear! Here, then, without 
limit He learned the pain of pain. Turn the picture — Christ 
knew the temptations of riches. You will say, “How?” He had 
the opportunities to be rich. Mary, and Martha, and Lazarus 
would have been too glad to give Him their substance; the 
honorable women who ministered to Him would have 
begrudged Him nothing! There were many opportunities when 
He might have made Himself a king; He might have become 
famous and great like other teachers, and so have earned 
honors and wealth; but as He knew, so also He overcame, the 
temptations of wealth! The temptations of ease — and these are 
not small — Christ readily escaped. There would always have 
been a comfortable home for Him at Bethany; there were many 
disciples who would have thought themselves but too honored 
to have found for Him the softest couch on which head ever 
rested — but He who came not to enjoy, but to endure, He 


10 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


spumed all — but not without knowing the temptation! He 
learned, too, the trials of honor, of popularity, and of applause. 
“Hosanna, hosanna, hosanna,” said the multitudes in the 
streets of Jerusalem, when palm branches were strewed in the 
way, and He rode in triumph over the garments of His disciples! 
Knowing all this, He was still meek and lowly, and in Him was 
no sin! We cannot either be cast down or lifted up, we cannot 
be put into the most strange and singular positions without still 
being able to remember that Christ has made a pilgrimage over 
the least trod of our paths, and is, therefore, able to succor 
them who are tempted! 

3. Further, let me remark that every age has its temptations. The 
young, while yet children, if believers, will discover that there 
are peculiar snares for the little ones. Christ knew these. It was 
no small temptation to a youth, a lad of some 12 years of age, 
to be found sitting in the midst of the doctors, hearing them, 
and answering their questions! It would have turned the heads 
of most boys, and yet, Jesus went down to Nazareth and was 
subject to His parents. It is small peril to grow in knowledge 
and in favor with God and man, if it were not for the word 
“God” put in it; to grow in favor constandy with men would 
be too much of a temptation for most youths. It is good for a 
man that he bear the yoke in his youth, for youth, when 
honored and esteemed, is too apt to lift its head and grow 
conceited, vain and obstinate! When a young man knows that 
by-and-by he shall become something great, it is not easy to 
keep him balanced. Suppose that he is born to an estate, and 
knows that, when he comes of full age, he will be lord and 
master, and will be courted by everybody — -why, he is apt to be 
very wayward and self-willed! Now, there were prophecies that 
went before concerning Mary’s son — which marked Him out 
as King of the Jews, and a Mighty One in Israel. But I find not 
that the holy child Jesus was ever decoyed by His coming 


11 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


greatness into any actions inconsistent with the duty of a child. 
So young believers, you who are like Samuel and Timothy — 
you can look to Christ and know that He can aid you! In His 
full manhood, it is unnecessary for me to repeat the various 
afflictions which beat upon our Lord. You, who today bear the 
burden and heat of the day, will find an example here; nor need 
old age look elsewhere, for we may view our Redeemer with 
admiration as He goes up to Jerusalem to die. His last moments 
are manifestly near at hand; He knows the temptations of an 
expected dissolution — He sees death more clearly than any of 
you — even though your temples are covered with gray. And yet, 
whether in life or in death, on Tabor’s summit or on the banks 
of the river of death, He is still the same — always tempted, but 
never sinning — always tried, but never found wanting. 

O Lord! You are able thus to succor them who are tempted. 
Help us! I need not say more. If I have not mentioned the 
particular trial of everyone here today, I think it may be 
included in some one of the general descriptions. Whatever it 
may happen to be, it cannot be so out of the catalog as not to 
come in somewhere or other in the temptations of our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ. I, therefore, now turn to the second 
part of the discourse upon which I shall speak with brevity. 

II. Our second point is THAT AS THE TEMPTED OFTEN 
SUFFERED; CHRIST ALSO SUFFERED. 

Notice, the text does not say — “In that He Himself also 
has been tempted, He is able to succor them who are tempted.” 
It is better than that — “In that He Himself has suffered, being 
tempted, He is able to succor them who are tempted.” 
Temptation, even when overcome, brings with it to the true 
child of God a great degree of suffering. The suffering consists 
in two or three things. It lies, mainly, in the shock which sin gives to 
the sensitive, regenerate nature. A man who is clothed in armor may 
walk in a wilderness through the midst of tearing thorns and 


12 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


brambles without being hurt. But let the man be stripped of his 
garments, and then, let him attempt the same journey, and how 
sadly will he be cut and torn! Sin, to the man who is used to it, 
is not suffering; if he is tempted, it is no pain to him; in fact, 
frequently, temptation yields pleasure to the sinner. To look at 
the bait is sweet to the fish which means to swallow it by-and- 
by; but to the child of God, who is new-made and quickened, 
the very thought of sin makes him shudder! He cannot look at 
it without abhorrence and detestation, and without being 
alarmed to think that he is likely ever to fall into so abominable 
a crime! Now, dear friends, in this case, Christ indeed has 
fellowship and far outruns us; His detestation of sin must have 
been much more deep than ours. A word of blasphemy, a 
thought of sin must have cut Him to the very quick! We cannot 
get a complete idea of the degree of wretchedness which Jesus 
must have endured in merely being upon earth among the 
ungodly; for infinite purity to dwell among sinners must be 
something as terrible as if you could suppose the best educated, 
the most pure, the most amiable person condemned to live in 
a den of burglars, blasphemers, and filthy wretches! Such a 
man’s life must be miserable. No whip, no chain would be 
needed — merely associating with such people would be pain 
and torment enough! So the Lord Jesus, in merely bearing the 
neighborhood of sin without any other troubles, would have 
had to suffer a vast, incalculable amount of woe. Suffering, too, 
arises to the people of God from a dread of the temptation when its 
shadow falls upon us before it comes. At times, there is more dread 
in the prospect of a trial than there is in the trial itself! We feel 
a thousand temptations in fearing one! Christ knew this. What 
an awful dread was that which came over Him in the black 
night of Gethsemane! It was not the cup — it was the fear of 
drinking it! “Let this cup pass from Me,” just seemed to indicate 
what the sorrow was; He knew how black, how foul, how fiery 


13 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


were its deeps, and it was the dread of drinking it that bowed 
Him to the ground till He sweat, as it were, great drops of blood. 
When you have the same overwhelming pressure upon your 
spirit in the prospect of a trial yet to come, fly to the loving 
heart of your sympathizing Lord — for He has suffered all 
this — having been Himself tempted! 

The suffering of temptation also lies often in the source of it. 
Have you not often felt that you would not mind the 
temptation if it had not come from where it did? “Oh,” you say, 
“to think that my own friend, my dearly beloved friend, should 
test me!” You are a child, and you have said, “I think I could 
bear anything but my father’s frown, or my mother’s sneer.” 
You are a husband, and you say, “My thorn in the flesh is too 
sharp, for it is an ungodly wife.” Or you are a wife, which is 
more frequendy the case, and you think there is no temptation 
like yours, because it is your husband who assaults your religion, 
and who speaks evil of your good! It makes all the difference 
where the temptation comes from. If some scoundrel mocks 
us, we think it honor — but when it is an honored companion, 
we feel his taunt. A friend can cut under our armor, and stab 
us the more dangerously! Ah, but the Man of Sorrows knew all 
this since it was one of the chosen 12 who betrayed Him. And 
besides, “It pleased the Father to bruise Him; He has put Him 
to grief.” To find God to be in arms against us is a huge 
affliction! “Eloi, Eloi, la?na Sabacthani l My God, My God, why 
have You forsaken Me?” is the very emphasis of woe! Jesus has 
surely suffered your griefs, from wherever they may come! 

I have no doubt, too, that a portion of the sorrow and 
suffering of temptation may also lie in the fact that God’s name 
and honor are often involved in our temptation. It happens to some of 
us, who are more publicly placed than others, to be reviled, and 
when the reviling is merely against our own personal character, 
against our modes of speech or habit, we not only receive it 


H 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


gratefully, but thankfully — blessing God that He has counted 
us worthy to suffer for His Name’s sake. But sometimes the 
attack is very plainly not against us, but against God, and there 
will be things said of which we should say with the Psalmist 
David — “Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the 
wicked who keep not Your Law!” When direct blasphemies are 
uttered against the person of Christ, or against the doctrine of 
His holy gospel, we have been “very heavy.” We have 
thought — “If I have opened this dog’s mouth against myself, it 
matters not, but if I have made him roar against God — then 
how should I answer, and what should I speak?” This has often 
been the bitterness of it — “If I fall, God’s cause is stained; if I 
slip through the vehemence of this assault, then one of the 
gates of the church will be carried by storm! Mischief comes 
not to me alone, but to many of the Israel of God.” David says, 
of grieving the saints — “When 1 thought to know this, it was 
too painful for me.” David’s Lord had to suffer this, for He 
says, “The reproaches of them who reproached You fell on Me.” 
He was made the target for those errors which were really shot 
at God, and so He had to feel first this bitterness of sympathy 
with His ill-used God. 

I cannot, of course, particularize this morning so as to hit 
upon the precise sorrow which you, beloved brother or sister 
in Christ, are enduring as the result of temptation. But whatever 
phase your sorrow may have assumed, this should always be 
your comfort — that He has suffered in temptation; that He has 
not merely known the temptation as you sometimes have 
known it, when it ratded on your harness and fell harmless to 
the ground — but it has rankled in His flesh! It has not made 
Him sin, but it has made Him smart. It has not made Him err, 
but it has caused Him to mourn! Oh, child of God, I know not 
a deeper well of purer consolation than this — “He Himself has 
suffered being tempted.” 


15 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


III. Now, for the third and last point. THEY WHO ARE 
TEMPTED HAVE GREAT NEED OF SUCCOR, AND CHRIST IS 
ABLE, HAVING HIMSELF BEEN TEMPTED, TO SUCCOR 
THEM WHO ARE TEMPTED. 

Of course, this is true of Christ as God. Apart from any 
temptation He has ever endured, He would be able to succor 
the tempted. But we are now speaking in our text of Christ as 
a High Priest in which we are to regard Him in His complex 
character as God-man. Christ is not only God, but man, and 
not only man, but God! The Christos — the anointed one, the 
High Priest of our profession — is, in His complex character, 
able to succor them who are tempted. How? Why, first, the very 
fact that He was tempted has so?>te succor in it to us. If we had to walk 
through the darkness alone, we would know the very extremity 
of misery; but having a companion, we have comfort — having 
such a companion as Jesus Christ, we have joy! It is all black 
about me, and the path is miry, and I sink in it and can find no 
standing. But I plunge onwards, desperately set on reaching my 
journey’s end. It frets me that I am alone, but I hear a voice (I 
can see nothing) — but I hear a voice which says, “Yes, though 
1 pass through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no 
evil.” I cry out, “Who goes there?” and an answer comes back 
to me — “I, the faithful and true witness, the Alpha and the 
Omega, the sufferer who was despised and rejected of men, I 
lead the way.” And at once I feel that it is light about me, and 
there is a rock beneath my feet, for if Christ, my Lord, has been 
here, then the way must be safe! The very fact that He has 
suffered, then, consoles His people! 

But further, the fact that He has suffered without being destroyed 
is inestimably comforting to us. If you could see a block of ore just 
ready to be put into the furnace, if that block of ore could look 
into the flames, and could mark the blast as it blows the coals 
to a vehement heat — if it could speak, it would say, “Ah, woe 


16 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


is me that ever I should be put into such a blazing furnace as 
that! I shall be burnt up! I shall be melted with the slag! I shall 
be utterly consumed!” But suppose another lump, all bright and 
glistening, could lie by its side and say, “No, no, you are just 
like I was, but 1 went through the fire and I lost nothing! Look 
how bright I am, and how I have survived all the flames.” Why 
then that piece of ore would rather anticipate than dread the 
season when it, too, should be exposed to the purifying heat 
and come out all bright and lustrous like its companion! I see 
You, I see You, Son of Mary — bone of our bone, flesh of our 
flesh — You have felt the flames, but You are not destroyed! 
The smell of fire has not passed upon You; Your heel has been 
bruised, but You have broken the serpent’s head! There is no 
scar, nor spot, nor injury on You; You have survived the 
conflict and I, bearing Your name, purchased with Your blood, 
and dear to God as You are dear to Him — I shall survive it too! 
Therefore will I tread the coals with confidence, and bear the 
heat with patience. Christ’s conquest gives me comfort, for I 
shall conquer, too. 

And please remember, too, that Christ, in going through 
the suffering of temptation was not simply not a loser but He 
was a great gainer, for it is written it pleased God “to make the 
captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.” It was 
through His suffering that He obtained the mediatorial glory 
which now crowns His head! Had He never carried the cross, 
He had never worn that crown — that transcendently bright and 
glorious crown which now He wears as King in Zion, and as 
leader of His people whom He has redeemed by blood! God 
over all, blessed forever He would have been, but as God-man- 
mediator, He could never have been extolled unless He had 
been obedient even unto death, so He was a gainer by His 
suffering! And glory be to His name, we get comfort from this, 
too, for we also shall be gainers by our temptations. We shall 


17 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


come up out of Egypt enriched! As it is written, “He brought 
them forth also with silver and gold,” so shall we come forth 
out of trial with better than these treasures. “Blessed is the man 
who endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall obtain a 
crown of life which fades not away.” The deeper their sorrows, 
the louder their song; the more terrible their toil, the sweeter 
their rest; the more bitter the wormwood, the more delightful 
the wine of consolation! They shall have glory for their share; 
they shall have honor for their contempt; they shall have songs 
for their sufferings, and thrones for their tribulations. 

But more — in that Christ has suffered being tempted, He 
is able to succor us who are tempted by sending His grace to help 
us. He was always able to send divine grace, but now as God 
and man, He is able to send just the right grace at the right time, 
and in the right place! You know a doctor may have all the 
drugs that can be gathered, but an abundance of medicine does 
not make him a qualified practitioner; if however he has been 
ill himself and seen the case, then he knows just at what crisis 
of the disease such-and-such a medicine is needed. The stores 
are good, but the wisdom to use the stores — this is even more 
precious! Now, it pleased the Father that in Christ should all 
fullness dwell — but where should the Son of Man earn His 
diploma and gain the skill with which to use the fullness 
correcdy? Beloved, He won it by experience! He knows what sore 
temptations mean, for He has felt the same. You know, if we 
had comforting grace given to us at one part of our temptation, 
it would tempt us more than before — even as certain 
medicines given to the patient at one period of the disease 
would aggravate the malady, though the same medicine would 
cure it if administered a little later. Now, Christ knows how to 
send His comfort at the very nick of time, to afford His help 
exactly when it will not be an excess — to send His J oy when we 
shall not spend it upon our own lusts. And how does He know 


18 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


487 A Tempted Savior - Our Best 
Succor - Heb. 2:18 


this? Why, He recollects His own experience — He has passed 
through it all! There appeared an angel unto Him strengthening 
Him — that angel came just when he was needed. Jesus knows 
just when to send His angelic messenger to strengthen you, 
when to lay on the rod more heavily, and when to stay His hand 
and say, “I have forgiven you. Go in peace.” 

Once more, dear friends, lest I keep you too long. Having 
suffered Himself, being tempted, Christ knows how to succor 
us by His prayers for us. There are some people whose prayers are 
of no use to us because they do not know what to ask for us. 
Christ is the intercessor for His people — He has prevalence in 
His intercession — but how shall He learn what to ask for? How 
can He know this better than by His own trials? He has suffered 
being tempted! You hear some brethren pray with such power, 
such unction, such fervor! Why? Part of the reason is that theirs 
are experiential prayers — they pray out their own life; they just 
pray the great deep waters over which they themselves sail. 
Now, the prayer of our great High Priest in heaven is 
wonderfully comprehensive — it is drawn from His own life, 
and it takes in every sorrow and every pain that ever rent a 
human heart, because He Himself has suffered being tempted. 
1 know you feel safe in trusting your case in the hand of such 
an Intercessor, for He knows which is the precise mercy to ask 
for, and when He asks for it, He knows how to put the words 
and frame the petition so that the mercy shall surely come to 
you at the right time! Ah, dear friends, it is not in my power to 
bring out the depth which lies under my text — but 1 am certain 
of this — when through the deep waters He shall cause you to 
go, or you are made to pass through furnace after furnace, you 
cannot want a better rod and staff nor a better table prepared 
for you in the wilderness than this, my text, “In that He Himself 
has suffered being tempted, He is able to succor them who are 
tempted.” Hang this text up in your houses! Read it every day — 


19 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


take it before God in prayer every time you bend the knee, and 
you shall find it to be like the widow’s vessel, which failed not, 
and like her handful of meal which wasted not. It shall be unto 
you till the last of December what now it is when we begin to 
feed upon it in January! Will not my text suit the awakened 
sinner as well as the saint? There are timid souls here. They 
cannot say they are saved — yet here is a loophole of comfort 
for you, you poor troubled ones who are not yet able to get a 
hold of Jesus. “He is able to succor them who are tempted.” 
Go and tell Him you are tempted — tempted, perhaps, to 
despair; tempted to self-destruction; tempted to go back to 
your old sins — tempted to think that Christ cannot save you! 
Go and tell Him that He Himself has suffered being tempted, 
and that He is able to succor you. Believe that He will, and He 
will! You can never believe anything too much of the love and 
goodness of my Lord! He will be better than your faith to you! 
If you can trust Him with all your heart to save you, He will do 
it! If you believe He is able to put away your sin, He will do it! 
If you can but honor Him by giving Him a good character for 
grace, you cannot give Him too good a name — 


“Trust Him, He will not deceive you, 
Though you hardly on Him lean! 

He will never, never leave you, 

Nor will let you quite leave Him!” 


Receive, then, the blessing — May the grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and the love of God our Father, and the 
fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you forever. Amen and 
Amen. 


20 



488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 11:12 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, November 23 rd, 1862 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto 
them, Come up here.” — Revelation 11:12 

WHAT MAY be the particular meaning of the prophecy 
concerning the witnesses clothed in sackcloth, their death, their 
resurrection, and their subsequent entrance into heaven, I am 
unable to guess. Nor am I clear that anybody else has hit upon 
it. Although I do not despise prophesying, I entertain a very 
intense disgust of those who know nothing about them, and 
yet pretend to be their interpreters. I am free to confess that I 
have not the key to the book of Revelation, and dare not set up 
to be its expositor. This, however, is no great matter — for 
without my venturing upon that line of things — there are quite 
enough who are always studying the apocalyptic mysteries, and 
a sufficient number who believe that they can comprehend 
them. No branch of literature has more devoted students, and 
in none are men more successful in refuting one another or 
more sure that they have established their own theories by 
demolishing those of others! It may be that there are some 
whose office it is to open sealed books; I know that it is mine 
to enforce the teachings of the unsealed volume. They may have 
a call to expound Daniel and Ezekiel; mine is of a much 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


humbler, but, I think I may add, of a much more useful 
character — not so much to foretell the fall of dynasties and the 
deaths of monarchs, as to deal with matters of vital godliness, 
and with eternal realities; with things that are plainly revealed, 
which certainly belong unto us and unto our children, I had 
rather be a sweet savor unto God in souls converted, than 
explain all the last vials; and I would prefer rather to 
comprehend the heights and depths of my Great Master’s love, 
than to count the number of the beast, or calculate the duration 
of the little horn! 

I. Waiving, then, all attempts at explaining the text from its 
context, I intend to use it as the voice of God to His people. 
We shall regard it, first of all, as A SUMMONS SENT AT THE 
APPOINTED HOUR TO EVERY SAINT. When the time shall 
come, fixed by irreversible decree, there shall be heard “a great 
voice from heaven” to every believer in Christ, saying, “Come 
up here.” 

This should be to us — each one of us, if we are in Christ — 
the subject of very joyful anticipation ! Instead of dreading the time 
when we shall leave this world to go to the Father, we should 
be thirsting and panting for the hour that shall set our soul at 
liberty, and give our spirit, once and for all, its full discharge 
from an imprisonment of clay, and from the bondage of “the 
body of this death.” To some Christians it will not only be 
joyful in anticipation, but it will be intensely delightful when it 
arrives! It is not true, as some suppose, that death, when it really 
appears, is necessarily a dreadful and hideous apparition — 

“Death no terrific foe appears; 

An angel’s lovely form he wears; 

A friendly messenger he proves 
To every soul whom Jesus loves.” 


22 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


I doubt not, that many believers welcome the kind 
approach of death, as the arrival of their best friend, and salute 
their last hour with intense delight. Witness the saint who has 
been for years bedridden; she is tossed to and fro as on a sea 
of pain, never resting at the anchorage of ease. She cries at night, 
“Would God it were morning,” and when the light of day 
affects her eyes, she longs for the returning darkness, that she 
may slumber for a little season and forget her pains. Her bones 
have worn through her skin by long lying upon a bed made as 
soft as kindness can render it, but, alas, still too hard for so 
weak and tormented a body! Pangs have shot through her 
frame as arrows piercing the foe; every vein has been a river, 
flushed with agony, and every nerve a telegraph conveying 
messages of pain to the spirit. Oh, how welcome shall it be 
when the voice shall cry from heaven, “Come up here!” No 
more weakness now! The joyful spirit shall leave all bodily pain 
behind; the last tear shall be wiped away by the divine Father’s 
hand; and she who was a mass of disease and decay, shall now 
become an embodiment of intense delight, full to the brim with 
satisfaction, and infinite pleasure, in that land where Jehovah- 
Rophi reigns, the inhabitant shall no more say, “I am sick.” 

With what joy will the voice from heaven sound in the ear 
of the man wearied with labor! The world shall know of some 
of us, when we die, that we have not been idle — that we have 
served our God beyond our strength. He who finds the 
ministry an easy profession, shall find the flames of hell no 
pleasant resting place! Oh, there may be some of you in whose 
name I can speak now, who have served God with throbbing 
brow, with palpitating heart — -weary in your Master’s service, 
but never weary of it — springing to the collar, when the load 
was far too heavy for your single strength; ready to labor, or 
ready to fight, never putting off your armor — you stand 


23 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


harnessed both by night and day, crying in your Master’s 
name — 

“Is there a foe before whose face 
I fear His cause to plead? 

Is there a lamb among His flock 
I would refuse to feed?” 

The time must come when age shall take away the juvenile 
vigor, which for a while carried off weariness, and you shall be 
constrained to lament, saying, “When shall the shadows be 
drawn out? When shall I fulfill, as a hireling, my day?” Happy 
for the minister, if in his pulpit he shall hear the voice, “Come 
up here,” and shall — 

“His body and his charge lay down, 

And cease at once to work and live!” 

Happy for you, fellow laborers in the kingdom of Christ, 
and in the tribulation of our common Savior! When you think 
you can do no more, your doing shall be ended and your reward 
shall come, and your Savior shall say, “Come up here” — and 
you shall see the glory which you have believed in, upon the 
earth! 

Beloved, with what intense delight will death be hailed, by 
the sons of abject poverty, I mean, “Such as are of the 
household of faith.” From shivering in the winter’s cold, to the 
brightness of heaven; from the solitude and desolation of 
friendless poverty, to the communion and fellowship of saints 
made perfect; from the table scantily furnished with hard- 
earned bread — from famishing and want — from the poor 
emaciated bones; from the form ready to be bowed down with 
hunger; from the tongue that cleaves to the mouth with thirst; 


24 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


from crying children and a wailing wife — wailing for bread, 
crying that they may be fed! Oh, to be snatched away to heaven! 
Happy man, to have known so much of ill that he may know 
better the sweetness of perfect bliss! Mansions of the blessed, 
how bright you are in contrast with the peasant’s hut! Streets 
of gold, how you shall make the beggar forget the cold doorstep 
and dry arch! Paupers become princes — pensioners are peers! 
And peasants are kings and priests! O land of Goshen, how 
long before the sons of Israel receive you for a heritage? 

And, dear friends, I think I ought to add this — with what 
seraphic joy must this voice have been heard in the martyrs’ 
ears, in caves and dens of the earth, where the holy wander in 
their sheepskins and goatskins — what holy triumph must this 
message create! Blandina, tossed in the Roman amphitheatre 
on the horns of bulls — then seated in her red-hot iron chair, 
and mocked while she is there consumed before the leering 
multitude — oh, that voice, “Come up here!” How it must have 
cheered her in those horrid agonies, which she bore with more 
than masculine heroism! The many who have perished on the 
rack — surely they have seen visions like those of Stephen, who, 
when the stones were rattling about his ears, saw heaven open 
and heard the heaven-sent voice, “Come up here!” The 
multitude of our ancestors — our venerated predecessors who 
carried the banner of the cross before our day, who stood on 
flaming wood, and bore the flames with patience, with their 
bodies consumed by fire, till their lower limbs were burnt away 
and life just remained within a mass of ashes — oh the joy with 
which they would leap into their fiery chariots drawn by horses 
of fire straight to heaven — at this omnipotent bidding of the 
Master — “Come up here!” Though yours and mine may never 
be the lot of protracted sickness, or abject poverty, or excessive 
labor, or the death of martyrdom — let us still believe, that if we 
are true followers of Christ, whenever death shall come, or 


25 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


rather whenever life and immortality shall come — it shall be a 
joyous and blessed time for us! Seek not of the Most High to 
delay the time when He shall summon you to the upper 
chamber, but listen every morning — listen with your heart 
desiring to hear it — listen for the royal message which says, 
“Come up here!” An ancient singer sweedy words it — 

“I said sometimes with tears, 

Ah me! I’m afraid to die! 

Lord, silence You these fears; 

My life’s with You on high. 

Sweet truth to me! 

I shall arise, 

And with these eyes 
My Savior see! 

What means my trembling heart, 

To be thus shy of death? 

My life and I shall not part, 

Though I resign my breath. 

Sweet truth to me! 

I shall arise, 

And with these eyes 
My Savior see! 

Then welcome harmless grave! 

By you to heaven I’ll go — 

My Lord, Your death shall save 
Me from the flames below. 

Sweet truth to me! 

I shall arise, 

And with these eyes 
My Savior see!” 


26 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


To change the note a moment — while this should be the 
subject of joyous anticipation, it should also be the objective of 
patient waiting. God knows best when it is time for us to be bid 
to, “Come up here.” 

We must not wish to antedate the period of our departure. 
I know that strong love will make us cry — 

“O Lord of Hosts the waves divide, 

And land us all in heaven,” 

but, patience must have her perfect work! I would not wish 
to die while there is more work to do, or more souls to win, 
more jewels to place in the Redeemer’s crown, more glory to 
be given to His name, and more service to be rendered to His 
Church! When George Whitefield lay sick and wanted to die, 
his Negro nurse had prayed for him, and at last said, “No Massa 
Whitefield there is no dying for you! There’s many a poor 
Negro yet to be brought to Christ, and you must live.” And live 
he did! You know, when Melancthon lay very sick, Martin 
Luther said he should not die. And when his prayers began to 
work a cure, Melancthon said, “Let me die Luther, let me die, 
leave off your prayers.” Luther replied, “No, man, I need you. 
God’s cause needs you, and you shall not die yet.” And when 
Melancthon refused to eat or to take the necessary medicine 
because he hoped to be soon with Christ, Luther threatened 
him with excommunication if he did not then and there do as 
he was bid! It is not for us by neglect of means, or wanton waste 
of strength, or extravagant zeal, to cut short a life which may 
be useful. “Do yourself no harm” — the advice of Paul to the 
jailor — is not at all amiss here! God knows the pace at which 
time should travel, and how long the road of life should be. 
Why, if it were possible for there to be regrets in heaven, it 


27 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


might be that we did not live longer here to do more good. 
More sheaves! More jewels! But how, unless there is more work ? 
True, there is the other side of it — that living so briefly we sin 
the less, and our temptations are the fewer — but oh, when we 
are fully serving God, and He is using us to scatter precious 
seed and reap a hundred-fold, we would say it is well for us to 
abide where we are! An aged Christian asked whether she 
would rather die or live, said she would rather it should be as 
God willed it. “But if you might have your choice, which would 
you have?” “If I might have my choice,” said she, “I would ask 
God to choose for me, for I should be afraid to choose for 
myself.” So be ready to stay on this side of Jordan, or to cross 
the flood — just as your Master wills it. 

And then another thought. As this, “Come up here,” 
should excite joyous anticipation, tempered by patient waiting, 
so, beloved, it should always be to us a matter of absolute certainty 
as to its ultimate reception. I would not give sleep to my eyes, nor 
slumber to my eyelids if this were a subject of doubt, personally, 
as to whether at the last I should stand among the justified. I 
can understand a man being in doubt about his interest in 
Christ, but I cannot understand, and I hope I never may, a 
man’s resting content if there are doubts! This is a matter about 
which we need absolute certainty. Young man yonder! Are you 
sure that the King will say to you, “Come up here”? If you 
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ with all your heart, that call 
from the divine throne is as certain to meet your ears as that 
other cry, “Dust you are, and unto dust you shall return.” He 
who believes on the Son of God has everlasting life; no “ifs” 
or “huts” ought to be tolerated in our hearts! I know they will 
come up like ill weeds, but it is ours to pull them up, heap them 
together, and set them on fire, as farmers do with the twitch in 
their furrows. The devil loves us to cast lots at the foot of the 
cross — but Christ would have us look unto Him and find a sure 


28 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


salvation! No, no, we are not to be put off with guesswork here! 
My friend, can you be easy without infallible certainty? What? 
You may die tonight and be lost forever, and can you be happy? 
No, man, I charge you by the living God, shut not those eyes, 
until you are sure that you shall open them either in earth or 
heaven! But if there is this fear that you may lift up those eyes 
in hell, how dare you sleep? How dare you sleep, lest your bed 
becomes your tomb, and your chamber becomes the door of 
Tophet to you? Oh, brothers and sisters, let us seek to have the 
seal of God upon us — the infallible witness of the Holy Spirit 
bearing witness with our spirits — that we are born of God! 
Then, and only then, we may joyfully hope and quietly wait to 
see the salvation of God, when the Master says, “Come up 
here.” 

I will add this fourth thought and then proceed. I think 
very often, besides joyfully anticipating, patiently waiting, and 
being confidently assured of it, the Christian should delightfully 
contemplate it 1 Ah, let every Christian now say, “I shall soon be 
dying — time swiftly speeds away. There is my chamber. I can 
paint the picture now. They have told me that I am very sick, 
but they have kept back from me, till I asked them plainly, the 
news that I must very speedily die. But now I know it, and feel 
the sentence of death in myself. Now for the joyous secret — in 
a few minutes I shall know more of heaven than an assembly 
of divines could teach me! But, how solemn is the scene around 
me; they are moving quietly about the room; very silendy they 
are catching each word that is uttered — treasuring it up! Now 
Saint, you must play the man! Say a good word for your Master! 
Stir the deeps of Jordan with your bold march of victory, O 
soldier of Jesus! Make its shelving shores resound with your 
melodies! Show them how a Christian can die — now let your 
full heart overflow with flood tides of heaven! Drink up the 
bitter cup and say, “Death is swallowed up in victory.” But, 


29 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


how is this that my mind seems fluttering, as though about to 
take wing? — 

“What is this absorbs me quite — 

Steals my senses — shuts my sight — 

Drowns my spirit — draws my breath? 

Tell me, my soul, can this be death?” 

I cannot see; the film is forming on my eyes — it is the death 
glaze. A clammy sweat is on my brow; it is the dew from the 
damps of death! The kind hand of affection has just wiped my 
forehead, and I wish to speak, but there is a throttle in my 
throat which keeps down the words; this is the monitor to me 
of the silence of the tomb. I will strive against it — 

“Joyful, with all the strength I have, 

My quivering lips shall sing, 

‘Where is your victory, boasting grave? 

And where’s the monster’s sting?”’ 

The effort has exhausted the dying one. He must fall back 
again. They prop him up with pillows. Ah, you may prop him 
up with pillows, but he has a better arm beneath him than that 
of the fondest friend! Now does his beloved say, “Stay him with 
apples, and comfort him with flagons,” for while sick to death, 
he is also “sick with love.” His Master makes his bed in his 
sickness! His left hand is under his head, and His right hand 
does embrace him! The Husband of that chosen soul is now 
answering the prayer for His presence, which it delighted to 
offer, saying, “Abide with Me.” Now is the poet’s prayer 
granted to the letter — 


3 ° 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


“Hold then, Your cross 
before my closing eyes! 

Shine through the gloom, 
and point me to the skies! 

Heaven’s morning breaks, 

and earth’s vain shadows flee — 

In life and death, 

O Lord, abide with me!” 

We cannot paint the last moment. The rapture, the 
dawning glory, the first young flash of the beatific glory — we 
must leave all that. On earth, the scene is far more somber, and 
yet not sad — see yonder friends? They gather round. They say, 
‘Yes, he is gone — how placidly he slept! I could not tell the 
moment when he passed from sleep to death. He is gone.” 
They weep, but not with hopeless sorrow, for they mourn the 
body, not the soul! The setting is broken, but the gem is safe! The 
fold is removed, but the sheep is feeding on the hilltops of glory! 
Worms devour the clay, but angels welcome the soul! There is 
general mourning wherever the good man was known — but 
mark you, it is only in the dark that this sorrow reigns — up 
there in the light, what are they doing? That spirit, as it left the 
body, found itself not alone! Angels had come to meet it. 
Angelic spirits clasped the disembodied spirit in their arms, and 
bore it upward beyond the stars — beyond where the angel in 
the sun keeps his everlasting watch — beyond, beyond this 
lower sky, immeasurable leagues. Lo! The pearly gates appear, 
and the azure light of the city of be jeweled walls! The spirit asks, 
“Is yonder city the fair Jerusalem where they need no candle, 
neither light of the sun?” He shall see for himself before long, 
for they are nearing the Holy City, and it is time for the cherub- 
bearers to begin their choral! The music breaks from the lips of 
those that convey the saint to heaven — “Lift up your heads, O 


31 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you gates, and be you lifted up, you everlasting doors, that the 
blood-bought of the King of glory may come in!” The gates of 
pearl give way! The joyous crowds of heaven welcome their 
brother to the seats of immortality! But what next, I cannot tell. 
In vain the fancy strives to paint it. Jesus is there, and the spirit 
is in His arms in heaven, where should it be but in the arms of 
Jesus? O joy! Joy! Joy! Boundless oceans of joy! I shall see Him! 
I shall see Him! These eyes shall see Him, and not another — 

“Shall see Him wear that very flesh 
On which my guilt was laid! 

His love intense, His merit fresh, 

As though but newly slain. 

These eyes shall see Him in that day 
The man that died for me! 

And all my rising bones shall say, 

Lord, who is like to Thee?” 

I could lose myself while talking upon this subject, for my 
heart is all on fire! I wander, but I cannot help it! My heart is 
far away upon the hills with my beloved Lord! What will the 
bliss of glory be? A surprise, I think, even to those who shall 
obtain it; we shall scarcely know ourselves, when we get to 
heaven! We shall be so surprised at the difference. That poor 
man yonder is to be robed in all the splendors of a king! Come 
with me, and see those bright ones — that son of toil, who rests 
forever — that child of sin, washed by Jesus, and now a 
companion of the God of heaven! And I, the chief of sinners, 
singing out His praise! Saul of Tarsus, hymning the music of 
Calvary! The penitent thief, with his deep bass note, exalting 
dying love; and Magdalene, mounting to the alto notes, for 
there must be some voices, even in heaven, which must sing 
alone, and mount to higher notes where the rest of us cannot 


32 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


reach — the whole together singing, “Unto Him who loved us, 
and has washed us from our sins in His blood, unto Him be 
glory forever and ever.” Oh that we were there! Oh that we 
were there! But, we must patiently wait the Master’s will. It shall 
not be long before He shall say, “Come up here.” 

II. And now, we shall turn to a second part of the subject. 
We will take the text, this time, not as a summons to depart, 
but as a WHISPER FROM THE SKIES TO THE BELIEVER’S 
HEART. There is a voice that sounds from heaven tonight, not 
as a peremptory summons, but as a gently-whispered 
invitation — “Come up here.” 

The Father seems to say this to every adopted child tonight. 
We say, “Our Father which are in heaven.” The Father’s heart 
desires to have His children round His knees, and His love each 
day beckons us with a tender, “Come up here.” Nor will your 
Father, and my Father, ever be content, till each of His children 
shall be in the many mansions above! And Jesus whispers this 
in your ears tonight, too. Listen! Do you not hear Him say, “I 
will that they also whom You have given Me, be with Me where 
I am, that they may behold My glory — the glory which You 
have given Me — the glory which I had with You before the 
world was.” Jesus beckons you to the skies, believer! Lay not 
hold upon the things of earth. He who is but a lodger in an inn 
must not live as though he were at home! Keep your tent ready 
for striking; be always prepared to draw up your anchor, and to 
sail across the sea and find the better port; for while Jesus 
beckons, here we have no continuing city. No true wife has rest, 
save in the house of her husband; where her spouse is, there is 
her home — a home which draws her soul towards it every day! 
Jesus, I say, invites us to the skies! He cannot be completely 
content, until He brings His body, the Church, into the glory 
of its Head, and conducts His elect spouse to the marriage feast 
of her Lord! Besides the desires of the Father and the Son, all 


33 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


those who have gone before seem to be leaning over the 
battlements of heaven tonight, and calling, “Courage, brothers! 
Courage, brothers and sisters! Eternal glory awaits you! Fight 
your way, stem the current, breast the wave, and come up here! 
We, without you, cannot be made perfect — there is no perfect 
Church in heaven till all the chosen saints are there; therefore 
come up here!” They stretch out their hands of fellowship; they 
look with glistening eyes of strong affection upon us, and again 
they say, “Come up here!” Warriors who wear your laurels, you 
call us to the brow of the hill, where the like triumphs await us! 
The angels do the same tonight. How they must wonder to see 
us so careless, so worldly, so hardened! They also beckon us 
away, and cry from their starry seats, “beloved, you over whom 
we rejoiced when you were brought as prodigals to your 
Father’s house, ‘Come up here,’ for we long to see you. Your 
story of divine grace will be a strange and wondrous one — one 
which angels love to hear — 

“Stretch your wings, you saints and fly, 

Straight to yonder worlds of joy!” 

I have kept my pledge to be short on that point. You can 
walk in this meditation as in a garden, when you are quiet and 
alone. All nature rings the bell which calls you to the temple 
above! You may see the stars at night, looking down like the 
eyes of God upon you, and saying, “Come up here.” The 
whispers of the wind, as they come in the stillness of the night 
talk to you, and say, “There is another and a better land; come 
away with us — ‘Come up here.’” Yes, every cloud that sails 
across the sky may say to you, “Mount up beyond me, into the 
clear ether which no cloud can dim; behold the sun which I can 
never hide — the noon which I can never mar. ‘Come up here.’” 


34 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


III. I shall need your attention to my third point for a few 
minutes, for I think these words may be used as A LOVING 
INVITATION TO UNCONVERTED PERSONS. There are many 
spirit voices which cry to them, “Come up here; come up to 
heaven.” 

I like to see so many crowding here on these dark, cold, 
wintry days; this huge place is just as crowded as though it were 
some little vestry! You press upon one another as did the 
throngs in the days of the Master! God gives a spirit of hearing 
nowadays in a most wonderful manner, and oh, I would that 
while you are hearing, some living spark of divine fire may fall 
into your hearts and become the parent of a glowing fire! If we 
ask any man whether he desires to go to heaven, he will say, 
“Yes,” but alas, his desires for heaven are not strong enough to 
be of practical use! They are such sorry winds, that there is no 
sailing to heaven with them! Perhaps, if we can quicken those 
desires tonight, God the Spirit may bless our words, to the 
bringing of men into the way of life. Sinner, wanderer, far from 
God, many voices salute you tonight! Albeit you have chosen 
the paths of the destroyer, there are many who would turn you 
to the way of peace! 

First, God our Father calls you! You say, “How?” Sinner, you 
have had many troubles of late; business goes amiss; you have 
been out of work, unfortunate, troubled, disappointed; you 
have tried to get on, but you cannot do it in your house. 
Everything is out of order — somehow or other, whatever you 
put your hand to — nothing prospers! You are always 
floundering from one slough into another; and you are growing 
weary of your life. Do you not know, Sinner, this is your Father 
saying, “Come up here”? Your portion is not here! Seek 
another and a better land! You have built your nest on a tree 
that is marked for the axe, and He is pulling your nest down 
for you, that you may build on the Rock. I tell you, these 


35 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


troubles are but love strokes to deliver you from yourself! If 
you had been left untouched, I had had litde hope for you. 
Surely then, God would have said, “Let him alone. He will have 
no portion in the next life; let him have his portion here.” We 
have heard of a wife, a godly woman, who for 20 years had 
been persecuted by a brutal husband — a husband so 
excessively bad, that her faith at last failed her, and she ceased 
to be able to believe that he would ever be converted. But, all 
this while, she was more kind to him than ever. One night, at midnight, 
in a drunken state, he told his friends he had such a wife as no 
other man had; and if they would go home with him, he would 
get her up, to try her temper, and she would get a supper for 
them all! They came and the supper was very soon ready, 
consisting of such things as she had prepared, as well and as 
rapidly as the occasion would allow; and she waited at the table 
with as much cheerfulness as if the feast had been held at the 
proper time! She did not utter a word of complaint. At last, one 
of the company, more sober than the rest, asked how it was she 
could always be so kind to such a husband. Seeing that her 
conduct had made some litde impression, she ventured to say 
to him, “I have done all I can to bring my husband to God, and 
I fear he will never be saved. Since, therefore, his portion must 
be in hell forever, I will make him as happy as I can while he is 
here, for he has nothing to expect hereafter.” Now, such is your 
case tonight! You may get some pleasure here, but you have 
nothing to expect hereafter. God has been pleased, I said just 
now, to take your pleasures away. Here, then, I have good 
hopes that, since He shakes you from the present, you may be 
driven to the future! God your Father is thus making you 
uncomfortable, in order that you may seek Him. It is the 
beckoning of the finger of His love, “Come up here.” And you 
know, those deaths you have had lately, all say, “Come up here.” 
You remember when your mother died — that was a saint, 


36 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


indeed! Do you remember, John, what she said to you? She said, 
“I could die happy, if it were not for you and your brother. But 
O, that I might have a hope that you may yet come to God.” 
Do you remember, man, how that little daughter of yours, who 
had been to the Sunday school and died so young, kissed you 
and said to you, “Father, dear Father; do give up the drunkard’s 
cup and follow me to heaven! Do not be angry, Father, I am 
dying; do not be angry because I said that, Father; follow me to 
heaven!” You have not yielded to that loving entreaty; you are 
descending into hell! Yet remember, all this was God 
beckoning to you, and saying, “Come up here.” He has called, 
and you have refused! Take care, lest when you call, He should 
refuse you! Besides, you have had a sickness yourself. If I am 
not mistaken, I am speaking to the right man now. It is not so 
long ago since you had a fever, or what was it? It was an 
accident, and everybody said you had a near escape for life; you 
had time for reflection when you lay in that hospital, or in your 
own little room. Do you remember what conscience said to you? 
How it tore away the curtain, and made you look at your destiny, 
until you read in fiery letters these words, “You shall make your 
bed in hell”? Oh, how you trembled then! You had no 
objection to see the minister then! You could not laugh, then, 
at the gospel of Christ! You made a great many vows and 
resolutions, and you have broken them all; you have lied to the 
Most High! You have perjured yourself to the God of Israel, 
and mocked at the God of mercy and justice! Beware lest He 
take you away with a stroke, for then a great ransom shall not 
deliver you! These things, then, have been beckonings of your 
Father’s hand to you, saying, “Come up here.” 

But more, the Lord Jesus Christ has also beckoned to you to 
come. You have heard that He made a way to heaven. What 
does a way mean? Is not a road an invitation to a traveler to 
walk therein? I have crossed the Alps, and have seen the mighty 


37 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


roads which Napoleon made, that he might take his cannons 
into Austria; but how shall we compare the works which men 
have made through the solid granite, and over pathless 
mountains — mountains that before were pathless — how shall 
we compare these with the road which Christ has made to 
heaven through the rocks of justice, over the gulfs of sin, 
throwing Himself into the gaps, leaping into the chasm to 
complete the way? Now, the way itself speaks to you! The 
blood of Christ, which made the way, speaks better things than 
that of Abel, and it says, “Sinner, believe on Christ, and you are 
saved!” By every drop of blood, which streamed in sweat from 
Him in the garden; by every drop, which poured from His 
hands and feet; by all the agony which He endured, I do 
beseech you — hear the voice which cries, “Go and sin no more!” 
Trust your soul with Him, and you are saved! 

But, my dear hearer, have patience with me — give me your 
ear. The Spirit of God strives with you, and cries, “Come up here.” 
The Spirit of God wrote this book; and why was this book 
written? Hear the words of Scripture, “These are written that 
you might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and 
that believing, you might have life through His name.” Here is 
the book full of promises, perfumed with affection, brimming 
with love. Oh, why, why will you spurn it, and put the voice of 
mercy from you? Every time you see the Bible, imagine you see 
written on its cover, “Go up to heaven; seek eternal life.” Then, 
there is the ministry through which the Spirit of God speaks. I 
have often prayed my Master to give me a Baxter’s heart to 
weep for sinners, and a Whitefield’s tongue to plead. I have 
neither. But if I had them, oh, how would I plead with you! But 
such as I have, I give you. As God’s ambassador, I do beseech 
you, sinner, turn from the error of your ways! “As I live, says 
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of him who dies, but 
would rather that he turn unto Me and live.” “Why will you 


38 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


488 The Voice from Heaven - Rev. 

11:12 


die?” Is hell so pleasant? Is an angry God a trifle? Is sin a thing 
to be laughed at? Is the right hand of God, when bared in 
thunder, a thing to be despised? Oh, turn! Flee to the refuge! 
The Spirit bids you fly! 

Moreover, does not jour conscience say the same? Is not there 
something in your heart tonight which says — “Begin to think 
about your soul; trust your soul with Christ”? May divine grace 
compel you to listen to the still small voice, that you may be 
saved! 

And, last of all, the spirits of jour departed friends cry from 
heaven to you tonight — that voice which 1 would you could 
hear, “Come up here.” Mother — unconverted woman — you 
have a baby in heaven; perhaps not one or two, but a family of 
babies in heaven. You are a mother of angels, and those young 
cherubs cry to you, “Mother, come up here!” But this can never 
be, unless you repent and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ! I 
know there are some of you who have carried to the tomb the 
most sainted of relatives. Your hoary-headed father at last went 
the way of all flesh, and from his celestial seat before the eternal 
throne he cries, “Come up here.” A sister, sickened by 
consumption, who has long since left your house for you to 
mourn her absence, cries, “Come up here.” I entreat you, you 
sons of saints in glory! I entreat you, daughter of immortal 
mothers — despise not now the voice of those who speak from 
heaven to you! Oh, were they here — could it be possible for 
them to come here to speak to you tonight, I know the notes 
of fond affection which would spring from your lips — “There’s 
my mother.” “There’s my father.” They cannot come — but I am 
the spokesman for them. If I cannot speak as they might, yet 
remember, if you are not converted when you hear the gospel 
preached, “Neither would you be converted if one rose from 
the dead.” They could but tell you the gospel. I do no less. That 
gospel is, “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be 


39 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


saved.” “He who believes and is baptized shall be saved,” says 
the Evangelist. To believe is to trust Christ! To be baptized is 
not baby sprinkling — for that there is no warrant, but in the 
inventions of man! To be baptized is to be buried with Christ 
in baptism after faith — for that which is done without faith, and 
not done of faith, is contrary to the Lord’s command. Baptism 
is for believers, not for sinners — like the Lord’s Supper, it is in 
the Church, not out of it! Believing, you are saved. Baptism does not 
save you. You are baptized because you are saved! Baptism is the 
outward recognition of the great inward change, which the 
Spirit of God has worked. 

Believe, then, in Jesus! Cast yourself flat on your face 
before His cross. Then rise and say, “Now will I confess His 
name,” and be united with His Church, and believe that at last, 
having confessed Him before men, He may confess you before 
His Father which is in heaven! 

And now, you are going home tonight — remember, 1 am 
clear of your blood! I know not how many may be here, but I 
suppose there are seven thousand people here tonight, who will 
be without excuse in the day of judgment. I have warned you 
as best I can. I have pleaded with you. Sinner! Sinner! Your 
blood is on your own head if you refuse this great salvation! O, 
God the Holy Spirit, make them willing in the day of Your 
power, and save them this night and forever, for Your name’s 
sake. Amen. 


40 



489 Broad Rivers and Streams - 
Isa. 33:20-23 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, January 18th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: your eyes 
shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall 
not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be 
removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken. But 
there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers 
and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall 
gallant ships pass thereby. For the Lord is our judge, the Lord 
is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king; He will save us. Your 
tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast, 
they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil 
divided, the lame take the prey.” — Isaiah 33:20-23 

THIS PROPHECY was uttered when the city of Jerusalem 
was reduced to the direst extremity. The Assyrian hosts 
threatened the city with utter destruction. Rabshakeh, a fitting 
herald for his tyrannical master, had advanced to inspect the 
walls, while Sennacherib tarried at Lachish. False to all treaties, 
the heavy sum paid down by Hezekiah could not ensure the 
promised mercy from the ferocious despot. The treasuries of 
the city were exhausted, and therefore, no further attempt in 
that direction could be made. No help could be looked for 
from any other nation; even Egypt was in deadly fear of the 
great power of Nineveh. The Assyrians were strong as lions, 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and cruel as evening wolves; no nation had ever equaled them 
in remorseless and wanton cruelty; the most horrible 
punishments were constandy executed upon those whom they 
vanquished; impalement, flaying alive, and piercing out the eyes, 
were their ordinary amusements after the close of batde. Look 
at the stones disinterred from Nineveh, and you will see 
engraved there by themselves memorials of the horrible 
barbarities which they constandy perpetrated! Sennacherib’s 
army was exceedingly great; it had already stormed many cities; 
Arphad, and Sepharvaim, Hamath, and Samaria had fallen an 
easy spoil — cities that were surrounded by rivers had been 
defeated by diverting the current, and so drying up the streams, 
or else by using galleys with oars, the Assyrian monarch had 
reached the walls and applied the scaling ladders. The army was 
so well equipped, so numerous, and so thoroughly well 
supplied with all munitions of war, that there was not the 
slightest hope of the escape of Jerusalem, except by divine 
power. Yet the Assyrians did not shoot an arrow there, nor did 
they cast up a mound against it, for at nightfall the angel of the 
Lord went forth and slew 140,000 men, and Sennacherib 
hastened back to his own land! 

Brothers and sisters, you know the analogy here, how the 
Church of Christ is every day surrounded by the most ferocious 
adversaries; she is like Jerusalem; all round about her the dogs 
of hell are yelping for her as their prey; for Satan has multitudes 
of faithful servants too glad to engage in batde against the 
Lord’s anointed, and against the Church which He has 
redeemed by His own blood! They are well armed with an 
infernal protection; they are very skillful, detemiined and 
resolute; not a stone will be left unturned to blot out the 
remembrance of Christ’s kingdom from under heaven. But 
rejoice! Even if the dark day should come, be not dismayed! 
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble; 


42 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


the Church is not in danger; she is impregnably garrisoned! The 
gates of hell shall not prevail against her, and she shall abide in 
her place until He shall come who has made her beautiful for 
the situation, the joy of the whole earth! He shall come to 
translate her to the skies, to be the New Jerusalem — the Bride, 
the Lamb’s wife — to glitter forever in the brightness which far 
outshines the light of the sun! 

Let us now with profound attention meditate upon our text, 
and notice that, as the existence of Jerusalem was imperiled, the 
first promise of Isaiah was that Jerusalem should still exist — “Your 
eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation,” and so on. But, 
further, inasmuch as during the siege many unbelieving persons 
had found fault with the position of Jerusalem, because it was 
not surrounded by a river, the promise is given that she shall have 
a glorious position — “There the glorious Lord will be unto us a 
place of broad rivers and streams.” No, more than this, as a 
climax of blessing, she is promised perpetual triumph over all her 
enemies, since in her streams, “shall go no galley with oars, 
neither shall gallant ships pass thereby.” Or, if they come, they 
shall prove a wreck — “Your tacklings are loosed; they could 
not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail.” 

I. The first promise made to the Church of God in our text 
is one SECURING TO HER AN EVERLASTING EXISTENCE. 
The Church is not a temporary institution — it shall never be 
removed, but abide forever! 

1. From the words of the text, I gather that the Jerusalem 
of God shall exist as she is. What was she in those days? She was 
the city of solemnities; she was the place where prayer and 
praise were known to be made. So is she to continue 
throughout all generations. The Church of God is in this world 
the city of all true solemnities. Any prayer and praise that are 
not offered by the chosen of the Lord, who constitute the true 
and invisible Church of God, are but vain oblations! Zion — 


43 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the chosen Church, redeemed by blood, called by the Spirit, 
and preserved by divine grace — Zion is the one consecrated 
enclosure in which sacrifices of righteousness can be acceptably 
offered! This hallowed t3emple shall stand forever as the Lord’s 
chosen dwelling place. Beloved, the day shall never come when 
the Church shall cease to be the temple of prayer; the fire upon 
this altar shall never be quenched day nor night — 

“To Him shall constant prayer be made, 

And princes throng to crown His head. 

His name like sweet perfume shall rise 
With every morning’s sacrifice.” 

There shall never lack a man in our Israel to hold up holy 
hands, like Moses, upon the mountain, that the hosts of God 
may prevail in the plain below. Elijahs may be taken away, but 
Elishas shall follow. Aposdes may cease their perpetual 
supplications, but a train of intercessors shall follow in their 
footsteps! While earth brings forth her harvests, the Church 
shall yield her sheaves of prayer. Nor shall praise ever cease; the 
hallowed hymn, the psalm of victory, the hallelujah of 
triumphant joy — these shall never be suspended in the worst 
days of the Church! Even when she assembled in the 
catacombs, and gathered her sons for worship in the caves of 
the earth — even then, she had her hymns of praise — even then, 
they sang of Christ ascended and about to come! The roaring 
of the sea may cease, the thunders may be hushed, and the 
spheres may end their songs, but the redeemed of the Lord 
must praise the name of Jehovah world without end! Neither 
shall the Church ever cease to be the fountain of ministry. The 
ministration of the Word is a part of our solemnities. There 
shall never come a time when the prophet’s voice shall be stilled. 
Our Lord will still raise pastors after His own heart, and 


44 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


teachers anointed for His work. The living waters shall ever 
gush from the foot of Mount Zion, and the stream which 
welled up when Jesus sent forth His 12 disciples shall flow on, 
ever widening, ever deepening, “Till, like a sea of glory, it 
spreads from pole to pole.” City of our solemnities! We delight 
to behold the feet of the ambassadors of the Lord; they are 
beautiful upon the mountains, for they proclaim to us glad 
tidings. How greatly do we rejoice that we shall never lack the 
messenger sent from heaven, nor shall the candlestick be 
removed out of its place. 

Moreover, beloved, the ordinances of God’s house, such as 
baptism, and the sacred supper, these shall never cease! There was 
a day when baptism was hardly known in the Christian Church, 
save only among a persecuted few who were called heretics; 
nevertheless, the hallowed stream has always been stirred by 
some who, “faithful to their Master found,” were buried with 
Him in baptism unto death, and gave in baptism the answer of 
a good conscience towards God. And the Lord’s Supper, too, 
had almost ceased from the Christian Church. The “mass,” of 
course, continued, but what of that? Is that the Lord’s Supper? 
No, verily, but a profane prostitution of the simplicity of God, 
a silly mystery more fitted to be styled the incantation of a 
haggard witch, than to be called the Supper of our Lord Jesus 
Christ! But still, there were a faithful few, called heretics, who 
met together, and broke bread in remembrance of their Lord 
and Master. And so, brothers and sisters, while seedtime and 
harvest, summer and winter shall continue, until He comes, we 
will show forth His death, we will set forth His burial, 
celebrating, according to His own will, the commands and 
ordinances which He Himself has given us! City of our 
solemnities, I think I see you now in vision! You are the place 
where God dwells between the curtains, hidden from the gaze 
of unhallowed eyes, seen only by those whom Christ has made 


45 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


kings and priests unto God! Never, never; never from you, O 
Church of God, shall the presence of the Holy One depart! No 
rushing of wings shall be heard, as in the siege of Jerusalem; no 
mysterious voice shall thunder, “Arise, let us go from here.” 
“Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world,” 
secures to you, O Zion, the presence of your Lord and Master 
forever! I think I see your altar — on it smokes the Lamb that 
has just been slain — still acceptable before the Lord, and ever 
to remain the finished sacrifice — 

“Dear dying Lamb, Your precious blood 
Shall never lose its power, 

Till all the ransomed Church of God 
Be saved to sin no more.” 

Hallowed courts, you shall never be desecrated! Sacred 
rites, you shall never cease! The Lord has said it, and it must be! 
His Church abides — though the mountains depart, and the hills 
are removed, yet shall not His covenant of love depart from 
her — nor shall her safety ever be imperiled, even unto the 
world’s end! 

2. Further, my brothers and sisters, it appears to me that 
the city is to exist, not only as the city of our solemnities, which 
it is, but as a quiet habitation which we would desire it to be. The 
Church of God is always a quiet habitation, even when her enemies 
surround her. Some of you may have seen, some months ago in 
the Exhibition, a Belgian picture representing the reading of the 
statute of the Duke of Alva in the Flemish lawns, establishing 
the inquisition. Godly merchants are listening in deep 
solemnity of sorrow; the young maiden weeps upon her sister’s 
bosom; the aged woman turns her streaming eyes to heaven, all 
this the painter could depict, but he could not paint the deep 
heaven-born peace which still possessed the souls of the 


46 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


threatened ones — -who for the Master’s sake could suffer all 
worldly loss! That peace of God, which passes all 
understanding, lives even in the day of trial! You know what 
Martin Luther said, whenever any trouble came, “Come, let us 
go in and sing the 46th Psalm, and defy the devil.” And oh, 
how grandly that old Psalm would swell from the deep bass 
voices of the Reformer and his companions — “God is our 
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore 
we will not fear, though the earth is removed, and though the 
mountains are carried into the midst of the sea.” With all her 
foes about her, I say, the Church of God is evermore a quiet 
habitation! But how quiet is she, beloved, when her enemies are not 
allowed to prey upon her! “Then had the churches rest,” says the 
Holy Spirit in the Acts of the Apostles, and verily, the text 
applies to us now. We sit, every man, under his own vine, and 
under his own fig tree, none making us afraid. And besides the 
quiet we enjoy politically, I thank God that in this Church, at 
least, we know what quiet means in our communion with one another. 
Where ever the Holy Spirit dwells, there will be quietness! The 
Holy Spirit, you know, is represented to us as a dove — doves 
love not the storm, and the Spirit of God abides not where 
there is noise, strife, controversy and division! No, there must 
be peace and quietness. And you, my beloved friends, who are 
really in the Church of Christ — mark, you may be in our 
Church, and not in the Church of Christ — you may make a 
profession of being in the Church, and not be in the invisible, 
mysterious, secret body of the faithful. But if you really are 
among that chosen number, you will enjoy great quietness; you 
will be able to say with the aposde, “Therefore being justified 
by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ.” You will get a hold of the Psalmist’s meaning when he 
said, “So He gives His beloved sleep.” You will rest in God’s 
love even as God rests in it! 


47 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Happy day! Happy day! For those who, by the eyes of faith, 
can look into the future after Christ shall come, who can behold 
the glad millennial age — they shall understand yet more fully 
the meaning of this prophecy, “Your eyes shall see Jerusalem a 
quiet habitation.” When everywhere Christ shall be known; 
when in every land the fifth and last empire shall rule; then, as 
in the days of Solomon, there shall be no war, but peace, peace 
forever! Till then, the God of all peace is with us, and we may 
be sure that all is well. Our quietness must continue, for the 
Church nesdes under the wings of God; how can she be 
disquieted? The mountains of His power are round about her; 
how can she be carried by storm? Her Lord is a wall of fire 
encircling her; who can touch her? He is the glory in the midst 
of her; how can she fear? He is all in all to her; He wears her 
on His breast; He has written her name on His hands; she is 
the jewel of His crown, and the bracelet of His arm. Oh, how 
blessed must she be! 

3. But, further, our text seems to indicate that there were 
some persons who doubted all this, and said, “Well, but you 
speak of this city as though it could stand an attack; it cannot — 
it is such a feeble place, it is like a tent — it can soon be stormed; 
a gust of wind can blow it over.” The Lord anticipates this 
difficulty, and shows that the feebleness of Jerusalem should be no 
reason why she should not still continue to exist. She is a tabernacle — 
a mere tent — but she is a tabernacle that shall not be taken 
down! It is true that to human eyes she seems to have no huge 
stones, no gates of brass, no bulwarks of solid masonry. But, 
though she has nothing but cords and stakes, yet her stakes 
shall not be loosed, nor shall her cords be snapped! Oh, 
beloved, one delights to think of the feebleness of the Church, 
as magnifying the power of Him who keeps her! What can be 
feebler than the Church of God? She has no carnal weapons. 
“My kingdom is not of this world, else would My servants fight.” 


48 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


The true Church has no great riches; the most of her followers 
are poor. She has no wisdom; they who use logic and cunning 
can soon overthrow her disciples, and ridicule her advocates. 
She understands not the wisdom of human speech, or, rather, 
she renounces it and speaks with simplicity, as she ought to 
speak. Philosophers laugh at her; kings hardly take her into 
account; they think the Church so insignificant that they can 
put out her candle when they will. But, ah, not so; the Church 
is still secure, despite her feebleness! It is amazing how during 
these last 19 centuries, God has been pleased to keep that spark 
alive, all the devils in hell have been spitting at this candle, but 
it still burns — they have sought to throw the whole of the 
floods of evil upon the heaven-kindled spark, but the spark still 
lives; they have tried to stamp it out, but it has blazed the more! 
The Church’s feebleness, because it drives her to God, is the 
Church’s strength! 1 pray God that our Church may never 
confide in wisdom, or wit, or eloquence, or riches, or rank, or 
fame. No, Lord, You are the reinforced pillar of Your Church’s 
sure support, and if we rest on You, we are secure; but if once 
we depend elsewhere, we fall to our confusion! 

4 . Further, to complete this part of the promise, the city, 
notwithstanding all her feebleness, is to be forever complete. If I 
understand the last two sentences — “Not one of the stakes 
thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords 
thereof be broken,” we learn here that all the true members of the 
Church are safe. Some of them may be driven into the earth as 
the stakes are driven, with a heavy mallet — but the strokes of 
tribulation shall only give them a better hold, and minister 
stability to the whole structure! Satan may seek to pull them up, 
and the winds may blow on the tent enough to tear up the 
stakes that hold it, but no hurricane or raging typhoon shall cast 
down the divine habitation! Cords are apt to be snapped, and 
if they are long used, the strands at last may rot and new cords 


49 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and new stakes may be required — but not so with the Church 
of God. If you are one of the cords or the stakes of the Church, 
you shall never be cast away, the Lord will take care, not only 
to preserve the Church as a whole, but each individual part of 
it! I need not enlarge here, for you are all sound in your belief 
of final perseverance. What would we do without that precious 
doctrine? Oh, brothers and sisters, if one cord could be 
snapped, surely it would be myself! If one stake could be 
removed, I think I hear you say, “It must be I; I must be moved, 
1 must be cast away!” But not one shall be! Just as the stones 
were taken out of the quarry and all shaped, to be put in their 
own position in Solomon’s temple, and no one stone could take 
another stone’s niche, so you have your place appointed you; 
and you are being quarried today to be made into the right 
shape for it, and you, and no one but you, can occupy that place 
in the temple of God in heaven! And you shall shine there as a 
polished stone forever! But I think, dear friends that this also 
relates to the doctrines of the gospel. Every day produces some 
improved divinity. Every now and then, to suit the times, a new 
edition of the gospel is issued. Young gentlemen at college are 
taught not to preach the common ordinary doctrines, such as 
John Calvin, St. Augustine, and the Aposde Paul preached; they 
must go to Germany and muddle their own heads, and then 
come forth to muddle others! They must have some 
philosophical divinity, some novelty, something more refined 
than that which would attract the mob and gather together the 
common people! Thinking people must be cared for! Sermons 
must be full of intellectual matter; the old aposdes were but 
fishermen, and of course, they could not preach more than 
fishermen’s education would enable them to comprehend! But 
these gentlemen have taken their degrees, and can climb to far 
greater heights, and descend into far more profound depths 
than plain Peter or illiterate John. Well, dear friends, we are 


50 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


content with the old wine since it is the best; Christ’s gospel is 
no new gospel; and moreover, we are old-fashioned enough to 
believe that not one doctrine is to be altered, nor half a doctrine, 
nor the thousandth part of a doctrine! No, nor yet the form of a 
doctrine! We would “hold fast the form of sound words” — not 
only the principle, mark — but the words. And not only the 
words, but the very form in which the words were molded. 
“Words, words, words,” says somebody, “what is the use of 
words, and forms, and creeds? Why, these are old musty, crusty 
documents, only sectarians care about them.” Yes, then, let us 
be sectarians! Let us hold with force and strength of mind the 
very form of sound words which have been delivered unto us! 
Not one of the stakes shall be removed, nor one of the cords 
be loosened. And so with the ordinances; we do not believe, for 
instance, that we have any power to change the immersion , which 
was practiced by the aposdes, into sprinkling — nor take infants 
instead of believers! We think that not one of the cords can be 
removed, nor one of the stakes be taken out of its place; we do 
not think we have any right to change the breaking of bread, 
and the drinking of wine into a “mass,” and thus make a new 
ceremony, instead of perpetuating that which was delivered 
unto us. No, let the old gospel be the old gospel! “To the law 
and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, 
it is because there is no light in them.” We must keep to the 
same practices, and believe the same truths of God even unto 
the end. 

Alas for you, you cities of earth, you have tottered to your 
fall! A heap of sand, a mountain of ruin is to be found where 
once Babylon lifted her proud head, and where Nineveh 
exalted her brazen brow! Even old Rome has crumbled, and 
her pillars lie prostrate! Her theatres are but a place of 
emptiness, and her temples but deserted buildings. But you, O 
Church of God, you still exist! Not one of your pillars has been 


51 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


shaken! Not a column has left its base or lost its capital! Riveted 
and held fast by more than iron bands, the whole of your fabric 
is as unmoved as the pillars of the universe! Every stone is as 
new and strong as when first Jehovah dug your deep 
foundations, and laid your stones in the fair red cement of Jesus’ 
precious blood! Still do your pinnacles glisten in the sun, O you 
bejeweled city! No change has tarnished you; time has no tooth 
to devour the glories, no foot to trample on your joys; you are 
the Eternal City and all things else are but shadow, mist and 
dream! Like the God who made you, you are immortal, 
invisible, the only true Church, as He is the only true God! 
Unto Him who built you, and who dwells in you, be glory both 
now and forever. Amen. 

II. The second part of our subject is THE PREEMINENT 
POSITION. 

It was a cause of lamenting to many of the sinners in Zion 
that Jerusalem was not better defended. The most approved 
method of ancient defense was to surround the city by a broad 
moat. Joab thought it no mean achievement when he took the 
“city of waters.” Hence, God here meets all the wishes of His 
people by telling them that He will be to them all that broad 
rivers and streams could possibly be. Jerusalem had nothing but 
its little brook Kidron, which was not worth the mentioning, 
for it could be no means of defense at all in a day of siege; but 
He, even Jehovah, will be to them all that broad rivers and 
streams would by comparison suggest! 

At the meaning of this promise, I must now very hastily 
glance. First, I think it means fertility. LTnderstand that especially 
in the East, broad rivers and streams are very necessary to 
fertilize the earth. Egypt owed all her harvests to the Nile. And 
the great plain of Mesopotamia, in which Nineveh and Babylon 
were situated, was watered by two great rivers — the Tigris and 
the Euphrates — and by innumerable streams which intersected 


52 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


the intervening country, and by canals and little brooks. It is 
now a desert because there is no irrigation, but then, it was the 
most fertile part of the world! We are told in the first chapters 
of Genesis concerning Eden, that there went a river through it; 
it had not been Eden without its Hiddekel. Well, now, 
Jerusalem had none of these broad rivers or streams, but her 
God is to be all that to her! O, beloved, how fertile God makes 
His Church! Let but the Lord Jehovah come among His people, 
and there are many conversions; her sons and daughters are as 
many as the sand of the sea, and her offspring like the gravel 
thereof. Only let the Lord be with the minister, and with the 
Church, and we shall have to say — “Who are these who fly as 
a cloud, and like doves to their windows?” Moreover, in your 
heart and mine, if we have Jehovah there, He will be to us a 
place of broad rivers and streams, and we shall be fertile in all 
divine graces! Perhaps this morning, you feel like a desert, 
bringing forth no fruit. Ah, but think of your glorious Lord! 
Think of the glory of all His attributes — especially think of the 
glory of His grace, the glory of His finished work for you, the 
glory of His cross, and of His throne. You will find that He will 
give you fertility — your faith shall grow and all your graces shall 
flourish! The glorious Lord can make us like a tree planted by 
the rivers of water so that we shall bring forth our fruit in our 
season. And as for good works, which are the true fruit of such 
as the Lord loves, let but Jehovah dwell in us, let His Spirit 
abide in us, let Christ be in constant fellowship with our souls, 
and we shall abound in every good work to the glory of God! 
We need no Tigris; we need no Euphrates; we seek no Nile — 
Jehovah is to us a place of broad rivers and streams! Our fruit 
surely blossoms and ripens in its time when God, the glorious 
Lord, is with us! Broad rivers signify not only fertile soil, but 
abundance to the inhabitants. Places near broad rivers produce a 
great variety of plants. We know that the children of Israel 


53 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


regretted that they had left the leeks, garlic, onions, cucumbers, 
and melons of Egypt — plants that grew by the rivers. Besides, 
where there are rivers, there is an abundance of fish of all kinds, 
and in the fat pastures, such as Goshen, which were well 
watered by the Nile, abundance of catde are reared; and the 
abundant harvests which are produced there through the 
admirable irrigation, make that land blessed which has broad 
rivers and streams! Well now, our God is all this to His Church. 
Having God, she has abundance. What can she ask for that He 
will not give her? What need can she have which He will not 
supply? Oh, you citizens of Zion, what are your needs this 
morning? My Master sends me out like a herald from a king, 
and He bids me cry in the streets of this Zion, “Ho, you who 
have any need, come to your king, and He will supply you.” Do 
you need the bread of life? It drops like manna from the sky! 
Do you need refreshing streams? The rock follows you, and 
that Rock is Christ! “In this mountain shall the Lord of hosts 
make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on 
the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well 
refined.” If you have any need, it is your own fault! If you are 
straitened, you are not straitened in Him, but in your own heart! 

Broad rivers and streams in like manner point to commerce. 
We know that in Holland, especially the broad rivers and 
streams make that nation what it is. The harbors are so safe, 
the rivers so broad, and the canals so innumerable, that 
commerce is easy in every place, and the ends of the earth are 
linked to the nation by its broad rivers and streams. In that 
country we find curious importations hardly known to any 
other people, because they have gathered up the treasures of 
the far-off lands! There was a time when their broad rivers and 
streams enabled them to engross the mercantile power of the 
whole universe. Well, beloved, our glorious Lord — keep the 
adjective as well as the noun — our glorious Lord is to be to us 


54 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


a place of commerce! Through God, we have commerce with 
the past; the riches of Calvary, the riches of the covenant, the 
riches of the old age of election, the riches of eternity — all 
come to us down the broad stream of our gracious Lord! We 
have commerce, too, with the future. What galleys, laden to the 
water’s edge, come to us from the millennium! What visions we 
have of the days of heaven upon earth; through our glorious 
Lord, we have commerce with angels, commerce with the 
bright spirits washed in blood that sing before the throne of 
God — no, better still, we have commerce with the Infinite One, 
with eternity, with self-existence, with immutability, with 
omnipotence, with omniscience — for our glorious Lord is to 
us a place of broad rivers and streams! I wonder how Unitarians 
find comfort, since they have no glorious Lord — they have an 
inglorious lord — and I think I may say of Linitarianism, as our 
prophet here says concerning Assyria, that, having no glorious 
Lord, “Their tacklings are loosed, they cannot well strengthen 
their mast, they cannot spread the sail; there is the prey of a 
great spoil taken from them, the lame take the prey.” But we, 
who have a glorious Lord, an Incarnate God, God in Christ 
Jesus, we, I say, have commerce with heaven! 

Finally, broad rivers and streams are specially intended to 
set forth security. We have already alluded to our own happy 
island. Dr. Watts has said of it — 

“Oh, Britain, praise your mighty God, 

And make His honors known abroad! 

He bade the ocean round you flow, 

Not bars of brass could guard you so.” 

In the memorable ‘88, when the Spanish Armada, as the 
old divines of that age said, “turreted the seas” till the high 
prows of the vessels hid the waves of the ocean, God blew with 


55 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


His winds and all Spain’s mighty hosts were broken, and God’s 
favored isle was free! We were doubtless spared the horrors of 
war under the first Napoleon through our narrow inlet. It was 
especially so in the old times of ancient warfare; then, a narrow 
trench was almost as useful as a broad channel would be now, 
for they had no ready means of crossing so well, although on 
old Assyrian sculptures, we see galleys with oars crossing over 
rivers, and we have one or two sculptures, I believe, in the 
British Museum, of the Assyrian king turning the river into 
another channel so that he might the more easily take the city. 
But still, rivers were for a defense. Oh, beloved, what a defense 
is God to His Church! Ah, the devil cannot cross this broad 
river of God! Between me and you, O fiend of hell, is my God! 
Do remember this, Christian; between you and your archenemy 
is your God! Satan has to stand on the other side and oh, how 
he wishes he could dry up that stream, but God is omnipotent! 
How Satan wishes he could change the current, but fear not, 
for God abides immutably the same! How Satan wishes he 
could get at you and me — but only once let us get safely in 
Zion — we may look over its walls, across the broad rivers and 
streams, and remember that we are out of gunshot of the 
enemy as far as our spiritual existence is concerned. He cannot 
destroy us! Worry us, he may — for we are such timid souls — 
but kill he cannot, for God, even our mighty God, keeps us safe 
beyond all possibility of destruction! 

III. We come now to offer one or two words on the last 
point, upon which we have already entrenched. The last point 
is ETERNAL SAFETY. 

I have already said that these broad rivers did not always 
answer the purpose of defending the city, because the Assyrian 
king carried galleys with him overland, and thus took the city. 
But concerning this broad river, it is written, “There shall go 


56 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ships pass thereby,” to 
come up to the walls to attack the bulwarks. 

Our text teaches us that to the eyes of faith the Church has no 
enemies at all. “Wherein shall go no galley with oars.” “No 
enemies at all.” “But,” says one, “there are enemies to the truth 
of God everywhere! We see the enemies of God creeping in 
everywhere; the whole world is in arms against us!” But faith 
so clearly perceives the feebleness and the frailty of man that, 
like her Lord, she takes up all the nations as a very litde thing, 
and counts all her adversaries to be but as a drop in the bucket. 
You ramble in your garden, perhaps, in the summer time, and 
a spider has spun its stoutest web across your path; you walk 
along, and you never think that there is anything to hinder you, 
and yet, there are those spiders’ strong webs, which would have 
caught a thousand flies, but they do not impede you! So is it 
with God’s glorious Church — there are barriers across her path, 
but they are only spider’s webs; on she walks — she has no 
adversaries, for she counts her adversaries to be nothing! “No 
weapon that is formed against you shall prosper, and every 
tongue that rises against you in judgment you shall condemn.” 
This is the heritage of the people of the Lord! “They that war 
against us shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nothing,” thus 
says the Lord. 

Further, mark, dear friends, that when we are compelled to 
see that the Church has adversaries, yet, according to the 
promise, those adversaries shall be put to confusion. They have 
launched the ship; the galley with oars is on the sea. The text 
does not say that no galley with oars shall ever be there, but “no 
galley with oars shall go there.” Now, in order to make it “go, ” 
they must fix the mast; they must gird the tacklings, or how 
shall they spread the sail, and how shall they proceed on their 
way? Ah, but they cannot, they cannot strengthen their mast! 
Their tacklings are loosed! They are like mariners reeling to and 


57 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


fro; they stagger like drunken men; they are at their wit’s end; 
they know not how to make the mast stand in its socket; it was 
shaped and fashioned at Nineveh; it has been used in other 
sieges, and it answered well, but this time, it will not fit into its 
socket! The wind blows furiously; they cannot fasten the 
tacklings in their proper places; they know not where to find 
the ropes and spars; they cannot strengthen the mast nor 
spread the sail! Oh, how glorious it is to see the confusion of 
God’s enemies! Some say the devil is wise, but he is a fool, and 
has been a fool from the very beginning; all he has ever done 
has been to throw stones in the sky which have fallen down 
upon his own head! He always shoots his arrows the wrong end 
foremost, and then, they come back again with their points 
toward him! Somehow or other, the crafty old fox, when 
undermining the Church’s fall, manages to cover himself with 
filth; when the whole of this world’s drama shall come to an 
end, there will be one tremendous laugh from earth and heaven 
against the devil, for they will say, “Aha! Aha! Aha! He has been 
God’s slave all the while. He has been but God’s dupe, working 
out God’s glory! He thought he was having his own way, and 
doing his own will, but he has been but a pitiful slave to carry 
the materials out of which God shall bring forth triumphs that 
shall shine throughout eternity.” O beloved, we need not be 
afraid! Our enemies are in confusion; they do not know how to 
attack us! 

And then, faith not only sees the confusion of her 
adversaries, but she also believes they are so utterly destroyed that 
she may go out and spoil them! They could not spread the sails; they 
could not fix the mast. Look! The wind has driven them on 
yonder rocks! How the ship breaks; how she splits! There, now, 
she divides in pieces, and her cargo is drifted on the shore — 
and the men and the women and lame men are leaning on their 
staves — and litde children all run down to the beach and gather 


58 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


the spoil from the wrecked ship! So it always has been in every 
attack that has been made on the Church — we have always seen 
the wreck of our adversaries, and gathered spoils from them. I 
see the ship launched once again. She has had her name altered; 
she has sailed from a distant port — not quite from the land 
from where Solomon derived his apes and peacocks, but 
almost as far. She has a proud helmsman who wears a miter on 
his head. This time there are terrible expectations that Zion’s 
city will be taken and destroyed. What will be the result, do you 
suppose, of the recent attack upon Christianity? Why, the result 
of it will be that we shall have the richest spoil we have had for 
years! The Pentateuch, the blessed old Pentateuch, which was 
the only Bible, you remember, David always had to read — the 
book which David used to spell over and say blessed was the 
man who searched it day and night — that old-fashioned 
Pentateuch — why, we had almost forgotten it! People said, 
“Ah, yes, all very well to preach on the gospels and sometimes 
on the Episdes, but the Pentateuch is an old-fashioned book of 
little importance!” Consequendy there are very few comments 
upon the Pentateuch, which is, perhaps, the most neglected 
part of all inspired writ. 

And what will be the effect of this new galley with oars? 
Why, we shall all read the Pentateuch more! I believe that the 
Pentateuch is the text of the entire Bible, that the Pentateuch is 
the law, the statute, the book; and if any part of Scripture has 
the preeminence, it is the five books of Moses! We shall look 
over those five books again. “In His law we will begin to 
meditate both day and night.” And then, there will be 
comments written, there will be sermons preached, and even 
those who are the feeblest in our Zion, even the litde children, 
will get some of the spoil! We shall gather some of the rich and 
rare treasures that have been hidden in Genesis, Exodus, 
Leviticus, Deuteronomy, and Numbers. We shall have to say, 


59 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“Thank God that ever the galley with oars came here, for the 
spoil is very great, and we are all made rich thereby.” I wish 
they would attack some other part of Scripture. Let some other 
portion of Scripture be attacked, and as silver tried in a furnace 
of earth, purified seven times, so shall the Word of God be! 
Wherever I see the devil’s black finger, I am obliged to him, for 
I feel inclined to think there must be something there that is 
good, or else he would not have pointed it out as an object of 
attack to his followers. Let us rest assured, dearly beloved, that 
the spoil shall surely come in, and that we shall not be destroyed! 
And what is to be the end of it all? Our text ascribes glory to a 
Triune God. The Church is, after all her attacks, and all her 
salvations, to ascribe glory to the three-in-one Jehovah. Read 
the verse, dear friends, “For the Lord is our judge; the Lord is 
our lawgiver; the Lord is our king” — three, yet one. O Lord, be 
You exalted! Our Father which are in heaven, You sit on the 
throne, and You are judge! Jesus, Son of Mary, and Son of God, 
You, by Your holy life, have set us such an example that You 
are our lawgiver! And You, indwelling Spirit, You are with us, 
and therefore, the shout of a king is in the midst of our camps! 
Instead of doubting, fearing, and trembling, let us betake 
ourselves to song. The hope of the Church does not rest in her 
ministers, but in her God; not in her wisdom, but in Him; not 
in her eloquence, but in His promise; not in her might or in her 
numbers, but in His great strength, and in the multitude of His 
loving-kindnesses. Dear friends, let us roll all our cares on God 
this morning! Look up to God alone! Remember, you are saved. 
Do not believe Satan’s lies. Hold fast to God’s truth; He is on 
your side; you have trusted yourselves in your Redeemer’s 
hands; you are a believer in Christ; you are, therefore, saved. 
Being saved, expect to see every temptation minister to your 
growth; expect that every trial shall make you richer in divine 


60 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


489 Broad Rivers and Streams - Isa. 

33:20-23 


grace; and go home and keep your heart in tune, singing unto 
God, praising and blessing and magnifying His name! 

Oh, I wish we were all citizens of Zion! I wish we were all 
members, and had rights of citizenship in this blessed city! The 
gates are open and aliens who enter become citizens at once. 
To become a citizen all that is needed is to be nothing , and to let 
Christ be everything! Trust Christ, and you are enrolled a free 
man — and then, from that day, all the glorious things that are 
spoken of Zion are spoken of you; you shall share her 
blessedness on earth and her triumph above! 

The Lord now seal these words with His own Spirit for His 
own sake. Amen. 


61 



490 Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, January 25th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Renew a right spirit within me.” — Psalm 51:10 

WE HAD a joyful meeting last Wednesday evening. As a 
Church, we all met together as a loving family, and it was a sight 
of the most encouraging kind, to see a great host, like the host 
of God, of brothers and sisters, all dwelling together in unity! 
That solemnly joyful sight suggested to my heart the propriety 
of addressing you today, upon the subject of the renewal of 
your consecration to Christ. I thought that the season, the 
annual season when we all meet together, would be but a fit 
and proper opportunity for our giving ourselves over again to 
Him whose we are, and whom we serve. In an honored 
sanctuary in the neighborhood, it is the custom, at the early part 
of the year, to have a solemn form of covenant read at 
communion, when the Church members all give their verbal 
assent with a solemn, “Amen.” There must be something very 
solemn, and at the same time, something very delightful, in the 
uttered consent of a multitude of persons to the will and law of 
Christ! Days of annual celebration should be days of solemn 
dedication! 

Dear friends, there are other occasions when you might 
very rightly, I think, renew your covenant with God. After 
recovery from sickness, when, like Hezekiah, you have had a new 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


term of years added to your life, and have risen from the bed 
of languishing to tread the green fields, and breathe the fresh 
air, then should you sing — 

“My life which You have made Your care, 

Lord, I devote to You.” 

After any extraordinary deliverance, when your troubles have a 
pause, when your joys bud forth anew, when after a season of 
deep depression of spirit, you can once again lift up your brow, 
and bathe it in the light of God — then, again, should you visit 
the foot of the cross of Christ — and by the blood that is 
sprinkled there, renew your consecration to your Lord. 
Especially will it be incumbent upon you to do this after any sin, 
after any such sin, I mean, as may have grieved the Holy Spirit, 
or brought dishonor upon the cause of God; then, like David, 
repair to your chamber, and, with bitter tears of penitence, look 
to the hyssop, and the blood which can make you whiter than 
snow — and, again offer yourself unto the Lord Most High as a 
teacher of sinners — or a singer of His praise. I think brothers 
and sisters, we should not only let our troubles confirm our 
dedication to God, but our prosperity should do the same. If we 
should ever meet with occasions which deserve to be called, in 
Oliver Cromwell’s words, “Crowning mercies,” then, surely, if 
He has crowned us, we ought also to crown our God! If He has 
been pleased to give you a wreath of loving-kindnesses and of 
tender mercies, then bring forth anew all the jewels of the 
divine regalia that have been stored in the jewel closet of your 
heart, and let your God sit upon the throne of your love, 
arrayed in royal apparel! If we would get good out of our 
prosperity, we should not need so much adversity; if we would 
gather from a kiss all the good it might confer upon us, we 
should not so often smart under the rod; if we will not gather 


63 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


wisdom from vines and fig trees, we must be taught it with 
briars and thorns. Our folly makes rods for its own back. Do 
any of you come here today with hearts leaping for joy? Have 
you received a valued favor which you little expected? Has the 
Lord put your feet in a large room? Oh, can you sing of mercies 
multiplied? Then, this is the day to put your hand upon the 
horns of the altar and say, “Bind me here, my God! Bind me 
here with cords, even forever.” I may also suggest that there 
are certain seasons in life when this fresh espousal is very comely — 
in arriving at manhood, at the birth of children, at the death of 
friends, in passing the anniversaries of our birth, in advancing 
from strength to gray hairs — we may read anew the memorials 
of our love. Inasmuch as we need the fulfillment of new 
promises from God, let us give fresh promises to God, or, rather, 
let us offer renewed prayers that the old ones may not be 
dishonored. 1 have known persons who have religiously set 
apart a certain day in the month, or year, when they would look 
anew over their obligations, survey their state before God, and 
determine to be the Lord’s forever. Let us commend their zeal, 
if we do not imitate their precision. Well, beloved, I suggest — 
and I am sure such a joyous act as this will never be out of 
season — I suggest that this morning, if God shall enable us, we 
renew our vows to Him! 

These were the thoughts which possessed my heart; but 
there was another which overrode them all, and prevented my 
following out my desire. You see my text deals not with renewing 
our vows before God, nor with our proclaiming anew in the 
courts of the Lord’s house; our surrender to Him — no, it goes 
deeper than all this — “Renew a right spirit within me.” Surely, 
if the Lord will do this, then our consecration will be renewed! 
If the fountain is filled, then the streams must flow; if the sun 
is made to shine, then the plants must bud; if the sap within the 
tree flows vigorously, then the fruit without will be plentiful. 


64 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


Perhaps we have done well to lay the axe at the root of the tree, 
by going to the very soul and core of this matter. We have our 
hand upon the lever now — it is a dead weight when a man tries 
to renew his own vows — but now, we have the lever under it, 
if we cry to God in prayer, “Renew a right spirit within me,” 
we shall accomplish our end none the less certainly, even 
though we do not so much preach upon the subject of 
consecration, as upon the power of God the Holy Spirit to 
renew our spirit, and bring us afresh to Himself! 

Come then, beloved. I want, not so much to preach, as to 
lead you now to the footstool of divine mercy in humble, 
earnest entreaty — that the Lord may renew within you a 
constant spirit, and invigorate the life of your piety. For this 
there are several reasons, which we will give at once. 

I. And, first, a valid motive of desiring the renewal of our 
graces is to be found in THE ABSOLUTE NECESSITY FOR IT, 
IF WE WOULD PERSEVERE. 

That we need renewal is very clearly seen, when we reflect 
that all created things need it. Nothing that God has made is self- 
existent. Self-existence belongs exclusively to the, “I AM 
THAT I AM.” Even the tall archangel, who stands nearest the 
eternal throne, can only claim a borrowed existence which is 
immortal only in the immortality of God. The very mountains 
crumble, rocks dissolve, and marble wears away. Those old 
rivers that have even been adored by idolaters for their 
antiquity, still need to be refreshed with the melted snows from 
the mountain’s brow. It is rumored of our mother earth herself, 
that her soil is losing its former fruitfulness; certain it is that the 
most fertile fields yield no perpetual harvests unless the labor 
of man fertilizes the soil! All things on earth need, perpetually, 
to be renewed. “You renew the face of the year,” said the 
Psalmist, for in winter earth sleeps like a wearied giant, as if 
gray with the decay of age, the snow covers its slumbering head. 


65 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


In winter, the world shows none of her youthful verdure; all 
her beauty lies buried beneath the sod. Are not all things 
hushed and quiet, in winter’s bedchamber of life? But spring 
comes leaping on! The song of birds arouses the slumbering 
earth, and she awakes refreshed; but were it not for the 
renewing of delicious spring, would not earth become 
everywhere as intolerable as at her frozen poles? Nor here, 
alone, is refreshing needed, for doubtless, the upper spheres 
require fresh fuel, for their ardent flames. The orb of day shines 
in radiance, lent him by the great Father of Lights, albeit that 
he is, in Milton’s noble phrase, “of this great world both eye 
and soul.” That eye must soon grow dim with age, and that soul 
must lose its overflowing life, if the allfilling God refuses His 
ever-flowing aid! No created thing stands by itself. It is only an 
infernal conceit that anything can be without the great Creator’s 
perpetual presence! And will you lend your soul to this 
blasphemy of hell? If your piety can live without God, it is not 
of divine creating; it lives not but in your imagination; it is but 
a dream — for if God has begotten it, it would wait upon Him 
as the flowers wait for the dew! 

Moreover, this truth of God is especially applicable to 
those creatures of God, which are endowed with life. Those without 
life need preserving — but the truth is not so clearly seen in their 
case as in living objects. But life, if God would sustain it, must 
often, no, constantly, receive renewal! What animal can live 
without the refreshment of sleep and food? Job’s war horse, 
whose neck is clothed with thunder, must humble himself to 
his stall and to his provender. The wild asses of the wilderness, 
whose bands the Lord has loosed, have the range of the 
mountains for their pasture. The deer abides not by the crib, 
neither will he harrow the valleys for the farmer — yet he grows 
weary and lies down to rest. Behemoth, whose bones are as 
bars of iron, eats grass as an ox, and leviathan, which makes the 


66 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


deep to boil like a pot, whose eyes are like the eyelids of the 
morning, receives the breath in his nostrils each hour from his 
Maker! Even the trees, those motionless things, which wear not 
themselves with care, nor shorten their lives with labor — these 
must drink of the rain of heaven, and suck from the hidden 
treasures of the soil! The cedars of Lebanon, which God has 
planted, only live because day by day they are full of sap fresh 
drawn from the earth. You and I, having life, cannot expect 
that it should be sustained without renewal from God. Our 
natural life needs constantly its bread and water. The strongest 
man who ever lived must soon yield to the weakness of death, 
unless he would be reinvigorated by nourishment. Samson 
himself must have a cleft opened in the rock that he may drink, 
for though he has slain the Philistines, yet will he perish, unless 
his thirst is quenched! Assuredly, it must be so in spiritual life, 
or else all the analogies of nature must be reversed. You must 
drink again of the living water; you must feed anew upon the 
living bread. What do those texts mean in Scripture that speak 
of waiting upon the Lord, and renewing our strength? What 
can be the meaning of, “renewing our strength like the eagles”? 
And what could be David’s meaning when, in his matchless 
pastoral, he sings, “You restore my soul,” if we do not need full 
often, the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord? 

But, I need not travel so far to fetch my arguments. In jour 
own inner consciousness, my brothers and sisters, you are aware that 
your piety requires constant renovation. What downward 
tendencies the thoughtful must perceive in themselves. We 
could travel downhill to hell how easily, but upwards to heaven 
with what difficulty! Downward, without a hand to help, but 
upward, no hand less than the omnipotent must speed our 
course! Do you not find, Christians that as we men must eat, 
so we must pray? Is there not a vacuum in your heart, and a 
pang within it, if you have neglected supplication? Do you not 


67 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


discover that as men must breathe, so you must exercise faith 
in Christ, for if your faith is suspended for a moment, there is 
a suffocation of all your hope, your joy, your love? No — of 
your very life! Have you not found that, as it is necessary to 
repair the waste of the body by the frequent meal, so you must 
repair the waste of the soul by feeding upon the Book of God, 
or by listening to the preached Word, or by the soul-fattening 
table of the ordinances? I will not give a farthing for your 
experience — it cannot be the experience of a child of God — 
unless you discover a hungering and a thirsting in your inner 
man, and what are these but proofs that renewal is needed — 
signs by which your new nature sets forth to you a secret 
necessity which moves it to these outward longings? Oh, how 
dull our love becomes, if we go for a little time, without a sight 
of Christ! How our faith flickers if we are for a little season 
absent from the cross! How depressed are our graces when 
means are neglected! What poor starvelings some saints are 
who live without the diligent use of the Word of God and 
secret prayer! You know you need renewal; you feel you do! Need 
I say more? 

Moreover, if you do not perceive this very apparent truth 
of God, let me remind you, that you may be made to see it, and that 
terribly, ly so?ne surprising sin. Just as this prayer was forced out of 
David by his adultery with Bathsheba, and his bloody murder 
of Uriah, so you — yes, you, my brothers and sisters, saints 
before the Lord — yes, you, preacher — you may be made to 
know it, by being suddenly overtaken in a fault, to your own 
shame forever! “Let him who thinks he stands, take heed lest 
he fall.” There are north winds in the hands of the Almighty, 
which He has not yet permitted to come forth upon men; but, 
when the whirlwind shall be loosened, woe, woe to the tree that 
has not sucked up fresh sap, and grasped the rock with many 
intertwisted roots! There are tempests yet to come forth from 


68 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


the secret treasuries of God. If they come, woe, woe to the 
mariners who have not yet strengthened their mast, nor cast 
their anchor, nor sought the haven! Without perpetual 
restoration, I say, we are not ready for the perpetual assaults of 
hell, or the stern afflictions of heaven, nor even, for the strife 
within us. If you suffer the good to grow weaker, the evil will 
surely gather strength and struggle desperately for the mastery 
over you, and so may you have a sad downfall, a painful 
desolation — and a lamentable disgrace may follow from your 
neglect of the renewing of your spirit before God! 

Once more here, and though this reason may not seem so 
forcible as the last, the wise man will understand it, and see that 
there is yet mighty power therein, ‘That unconscious backsliding 
from God, which is, perhaps, even more dangerous, though not 
so disgraceful as open sin, that unconscious apostasy from God. 
That unconscious apostasy from God, I say, will certainly be 
upon you, unless you have seasons of renewal. Does not Hosea 
speak of Ephraim as having gray hairs here and there upon him, 
but he knew it not? Oh, beloved, I do proclaim — I speak not 
in any severity against God’s saints — but I do believe that this 
is the sin in the Church of God at the present moment — that 
the most of us have gray hairs here and there and know it not. We walk 
so carelessly before God; we do not make such heartwork of 
religion as we should. I find indifference to be my own 
temptation. I do not know that I am assaulted with certain 
other sins which prevail over other men, but this indifference I 
find to be harder to meet than even a temptation to lust or 
covetousness! I do believe that the Church, to a great extent, is 
just now, where Bunyan’s Pilgrim was when he went through 
the Enchanted Ground, and the air was heavy, and the Pilgrim 
had much ado to keep himself from sleeping. The Church has 
rest nowadays; these are times of quietness; and therefore, we 
are in danger of being given to slumber. Perhaps it is a “false 


69 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


legend that the holidays of Rome mined the veterans of 
Hannibal,” but if it is a legend in his case, it is a fact in ours; the 
peace and quietness of the Church in these calm times bring on 
an idleness, a dullness, an indifference, a lethargy, as deadly and 
as damnable as outrageous sin itself, and unless the Holy Spirit 
awakens us and compels us to come back again to the simple 
earnestness of our first love, we shall slip and slide, and 
discover not how low we have fallen, till out of the depths we 
have to cry in agony, “Renew a right spirit within me.” Now, 
brothers and sisters, for these reasons, I do persuade you, and 
therein I do persuade myself — let us take with us words; let us 
turn unto the Lord; let us beg Him to heal our backslidings, and 
to receive us graciously; let us entreat Him to be as the dew 
unto our souls that we may grow as the lily, and cast out our 
roots as Lebanon. In the words of Jeremy in the Lamentations 
let us pray, “Turn You us unto You, O Lord, and we shall be 
turned; renew our days as of old.” If the crown is fallen from 
our head because we have sinned, let us seek the Lord with 
deep humiliation of soul; if the joy of our heart has ceased, if 
our dance is turned into mourning, let us return unto Him from 
whom we have erred, and renew our marriage covenant! “Thus 
says the Lord, I remember you, the kindness of your youth, and 
the love of your espousals.” My brothers and sisters, if thus He 
remembers us, let us remember Him, and offer this supplication, 
“Renew a right spirit within me.” 

This brings me now, to a second method of reasoning with 

you. 

II. Secondly, let us pray the brief, but very forcible, prayer 
of the text, because of our OWN POWERLESSNESS TO RENEW 
OUR OWN SPIRITS. 

It is a doctrine acknowledged by all orthodox Christians, 
and confessed in some form or other by all believers, that 
without the Spirit of God we are unable to do anything aright. 


70 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


Nevertheless, I question if any of us have given our full consent 
to the doctrine of Human Inability in its fullest bearings. 
“Without Me you can do nothing,” is a text upon which our 
life is the sermon — but until its very close, it is probable we 
shall not fully fathom the depth of our own weakness. Brothers 
and sisters, when a ship is in sailing order, and in good 
condition, she still cannot speed on her journey of herself! 
Even though the sails are spread, there is no hope of her 
making port unless the wind shall blow. If that is so, how much 
more is it true that if that ship leaks, if the worm has begun to 
eat her timbers, or if by grazing upon a rock, she has done 
serious damage to her bottom, it is impossible that she should 
repair her own damage! If her sails are tattered, how shall she 
mend them? If her masts are strained, if any injury whatever is 
done to her tackling, how shall she be able to recover herself? 
Beloved, you can see the analogy. If the child of God, even 
when in a healthy state, needs to cry for the divine Spirit, how 
much more when he has fallen under spiritual decay, or has 
grievously backslidden, does he need the divine hand of the 
Mighty Carpenter to set him right! As for ungodly men, the 
analogy might be pushed still farther if that were in the subject 
of this morning. If the ship built and manned cannot sail 
without the wind, how much less could the trees of the forest 
hew themselves, convey themselves to the shipwright’s yard, 
fashion themselves into timbers, keel, beam, and mast — and 
then arrange themselves into a ship and launch themselves 
upon the sea! Yet even this were less a miracle, than for an 
unconverted man to regenerate himself! But, we must return to 
our point, that the Christian, when his heart is out of order, has 
no power to put himself right again without the blessed Spirit. 
The disease of the living must be cured by the same Voice 
which removes the sleep of the dead. He who said, “Lazarus 
come forth!” is needed to say, “Take up your bed and walk!” 


71 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Indeed, if you will think for a moment, you will find the work 
of renewal to be a stern work. It is called in Scripture — conversion. 
Now, in conversion, the same power is exercised that was put 
forth in raising Jesus Christ from the dead! What power, then, 
must be required in the renewal of a soul! Besides, to renew a 
soul is to go directly opposite to nature. What power is necessary to 
make water leap uphill, to suspend the waterfall in midair, to 
compel a flame to blaze in the midst of the depths of the sea? 
Yet, such a power as this is absolutely needed to reverse the 
efforts of the flesh, and to make our old carnal corruptions, 
which had begun to get the mastery, resign it once more! The 
strong man armed keeps the house, till a stronger than he binds 
him; and sin, when it once prevails in a believer, would continue 
to prevail, unless the Mighty One, who first broke our chains, 
shall come to set us free! 

Do you not know, beloved, that in the renewal of our 
spirits, every divine grace is needed that was nestled for our first conversion ? 
We needed repentance in order to our first salvation — we 
certainly need it now, that we may be renewed. We needed faith 
that we might come to Christ at first — only the same grace can 
bring us to Jesus now! We needed a Word from the Most High, 
a Word from the lips of the Loving One, to end our fears 
then — we shall soon discover, when under a sense of present 
sin, that we need it now! No man can be renewed, I say, without 
as real and true an exercise of the Holy Spirit’s energy as he felt 
at first, because the work is as great! The same graces are 
needed, and flesh and blood, are as much in the way now, as 
ever they were. Let your powerlessness, O Christian, be an 
argument to make you pray earnestly to your God! Remember, 
David, when he felt himself powerless, did not fold his arms or 
close his lips, but he hastened to the mercy seat with, “Renew 
a right spirit within me.” Let not the doctrine that you, unaided 
can do nothing, fountain from which all streams must flow to 


72 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


satisfy your needs and plead it, plead it as though you pleaded 
for your very life — as though you pleaded for your only son — 
“Lord, renew a right spirit within me!” Nor pray this falsely. 
Prove that you mean it, by going forth to use the means. Continue 
much in prayer; live much upon the Word of God; attend 
constantly a soul-satisfying ministry; kill the lusts that have 
driven your Lord from you; be careful to watch over the future 
uprisings of sin — otherwise your prayers cannot be sincere! 
The man who prays to God to do a thing, must use the means 
through which God works! He is a hypocrite who asks the Lord 
to visit him, and then nails up his door, or asks for life, and 
then refuses to eat. The Lord has His own appointed ways, and 
sitting by the wayside you will be ready when He passes by. Oh, 
continue, then, in all those blessed ordinances, which will foster 
and nourish your dying graces; and strengthen the things which 
remain which are ready to die. Knowing that all the power must 
be from Him, cease not to cry, “Renew a right spirit within me.” 

III. But we change our note and come to a third point. I 
pray the Holy Spirit might honor the word this morning, and I 
should look upon it as no mean privilege, if I might stir up any 
of you, my beloved brothers and sisters in Christ, truly today 
to come afresh to the fountain filled with blood, and to renew 
again, your entire surrender and resignation of yourselves to 
your Lord! The argument I use shall be found in THE BLESSED 
RESULTS WHICH ARE SURE TO FOLLOW, if the Lord shall 
renew your spirit! 

Think what joy you will experience ! There are some things, 
beloved, that perhaps may need to be renewed, but they would 
bring no joy. The physician may require you to receive a new 
bottle of medicine; it may be possible that an operation once 
performed may have lost its potency; painful though it is, it may 
be required to be performed again. But, that of which I speak 
has no pain to the child of God! It is in itself so sweet that it 


73 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


ought to tempt you to perform it! What is it, my brothers and 
sisters? Is it not the renewal of a brotherly covenant, just as when 
Jonathan and David went into the woods and renewed their 
covenant? I do not believe it was a sorrowful hour to Jonathan; 
I can imagine that David shed tears when he parted from his 
beloved friend, tears of deep affection, perhaps, but oh, with 
what joy did they clasp each other in the woods! With what true 
love did they make a covenant when Jonathan loved David as 
Iris own soul! The prince stripped himself of the robe that was 
upon him, and gave it to David; and he even gave his garments, 
even to his sword, and to his bow, and to Iris belt; and surely 
you will not object to renew your embrace of your David today! 
Can it be a hard matter to you, once more, to go outside the 
camp bearing His reproach, to clasp the man once again, who 
is better to you than all the treasures of Egypt? Besides, there 
is a sweeter figure. The covenant we have with Christ is a 
marriage covenant. I believe in Sweden it is common, when a 
happy pair have been wedded for 25 years, to have what they 
call, “A silver wedding.” And if they should be spared to old 
age, until their children’s children are round about them, on the 
50th year, they have, “A golden wedding.” Who would not wish 
to have a repetition of the happy day! Let us celebrate today, 
dear friends, a silver wedding with the Christ whom we married 
years ago, and oh, we will wait awhile longer, and anticipate our 
golden wedding, in the year of jubilee, when we shall see Him 
as He is and be like He is! What? Will you not give Him the kiss 
that is the token of continued affection? Do you refuse to give 
Him fresh pledges of your love, which is the fruit of His 
everlasting love to you? Why, the thing is so joyous, that I 
cannot refrain from crying, “Let the marriage bells be rung 
again! Bring forth the wedding dainties once more, and let us 
sit at the table of the marriage festival!” Jesus, we do embrace 
You! We are Yours! It is happiness, it is heaven, it is superlative 


74 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


bliss, to renew our vows to You, and to receive fresh tokens of 
Your regard to us! 

Do you remember, beloved, that in our early days, besides 
having an abundance of joy, how full of heavenly light our 
graces were, and how real everything appeared to our faith at 
the first? Now, if we can have our spirit renewed, and made as 
it was at first, why, then we shall have back the same 
satisfactory reality in our emotions! I speak for one. I know that 
when my eyes first looked to Christ, He was a very real Christ 
to me, and when my burden of sin rolled from off my back, it 
was a real pardon, and a real release from sin to me; and when 
that day I said for the first time, “Jesus Christ is mine,” it was a 
real possession of Christ to me. When I went up to the 
sanctuary then in that early dawn of youthful piety, every song 
was really a psalm, and when there was a prayer, oh, how I 
followed every word! It was prayer, indeed! And so was it, too, 
in silent quietude, when I drew near to God. Oh it was no 
mockery, no routine, no matter of mere duty; it was a real 
talking with my Father who is in heaven. And oh, how I loved 
my Savior Christ then! I can talk about loving Him now, and I 
think if He said to me, as He did to Simon Peter — “Do you 
love Me?” I would dare to answer, ‘You know all things, You 
know that I love You.” But still, my consciousness of loving 
Christ is not always as vivid, now, as it once was. Why, then I 
was quite sure I loved Him; I know I could have burned for 
Him, or suffered anything for His dear sake! Was it not so with 
you? Well, beloved, if we will come now, and put afresh our 
hand within His hand, which will be the effect of His renewing 
our spirit, then we shall have back again all the fullness and 
reality that distinguished our early, new-born piety. Oh, how 
blessed this will be! 

Moreover, at that time how active all our graces were! Do you 
not remember? Why, you had no doubts then, your faith was 


75 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


so strong; you had no lukewarmness then, your zeal was so 
burning! You remember, some of you, when first the Lord met 
with you? Perhaps it was in this house, or in the Surrey Music 
Hall. You would stand in the crowd till you were almost ready 
to drop, but there were no sleepy eyes, no dull, lethargic spirits. 
Oh, how you used to drink in the Word of God! It was marrow 
and fatness to you when you fed upon it; if anybody would have 
bribed you to stay away from a prayer meeting or from a 
weeknight lecture, they might have offered the world, but it 
would have been a bribe too low! But now, too often, if there 
is a litde discomfort in getting in the gate; if you happen not to 
get the very seat you want; or if you happen to be seated 
uncomfortably, or in a cramped position — you cannot worship 
as once you did. I know it may be the fault of the minister — 
perhaps he does not preach as he did in your younger days — 
when you were first converted. That is possible, I suppose. Still, 
I think it is more likely that you have lost the ears you once had, 
or that your ears are become dull of hearing. I think it is more 
likely that your eyes have lost their quickness of sight, or that 
your hearts may be less tender and sensitive. Certainly your 
graces are not in such active exercise as they were! Well now, if 
we come back to our Master, we shall have our youthful force 
and vigor renewed! To my mind, it is always a pleasant sight to 
see lambs skipping in the meadows, because it shows they have 
more strength than they well know what to do with — and so 
they do a great many things that are improper for sheep to do! 
What odd, fantastic gestures they have! It is even so with young 
Christians — they will often do many rash things just because 
they have an excess of liveliness! They have such a full tide of 
love and zeal, that they do not know how to put it into action; 
young life demands exercise. O, that some of you who are old 
in years, and others of you upon whose graces there are signs 
of decay, could but recover some of this juvenile effervescence! 


76 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


Ah, and you can have it! In the answer to this prayer you will 
find it, “Renew a right spirit within me.” 

A subject like this grows upon me while speaking of it. I 
cannot doubt that you will find it equally enlarge upon you in 
thinking it over. But on no account let us forget the practical 
ends that ought to be kept in view. 

Dear friends, your usefulness to others will be increased, if the 
Lord should graciously visit you with times of refreshing. You 
need the renewal of your own spirit in your Sunday school class, 
in the district where you distribute tracts, in the little room 
where you preach — or in your family, with your own children. 
You need to have more divine grace in your own hearts, that 
you may have power with them. Well, you must get this by 
coming anew to your Lord! 

Ah, and some of you came up here this morning complaining 
of the world and its trials. The world is very hard with you, and 
troubles are multiplied; how little weight the sorrows of this life 
will have in the scale, if balanced against the joy of your heart 
when the Lord renews your spirit! What did you care when you 
were first converted, whether you were rich or poor? It seemed 
no matter to you! Like Peter, you left the net, and the fishes, 
that you might get at your Lord. Like the woman at the well, 
you left the water pot that you might go and tell others, that 
you had seen a man who told you all things that ever you did! 
Well, now, if your former piety comes back; if the zeal of your 
young days shall be restored to you, the world will be just as 
much a trifle to you, and you will tread it beneath your feet with 
just as much heroic contempt, as you did when first you 
received the gospel, not in word only, but in power! 

Since all these blessed results will follow, let me therefore 
beseech you — by your love to your own souls, by your care to 
grow in divine grace, by your anxiety to prosper in the Lord’s 
Way, and by your interest in the welfare of others — pray with 


77 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


me this prayer, “Renew a right spirit within me.” And You, O 
Lord, hear it in heaven, Your dwelling place. Let Your eyes be 
open unto the supplication of Your servants, to hearken unto 
us in all that we call for unto You! 

IV. One other argument only, where many might be given. 
Do not GOSPEL OBLIGATIONS irresistibly compel us by the 
means of this, our prayer, to renew our covenant with God? 

Legal motives I would disdain to urge you with, but gospel 
motives I may, and must. Did you do right in giving your soul 
to Christ at first? Was it a mistake? Was it the effect of a juvenile 
excitement, misled by some fanatical speech? No, you cannot 
say that! You believe it was the best thing you ever did in your 
life; you have often regretted you never did it before; there are 
a thousand things you repent of, but this one thing, that you 
gave yourself to God, is a subject of perpetual congratulations 
with you! Very well, then, if it was well to do it then, do it now! If 
you would not make out yourself to have been a fool, and your 
faith to have been a lie; if you would not, before the eyes of 
men and of angels, declare that the whole thing is a farce — this 
day, even this day — let us go into Gilgal, and there let us renew 
the kingdom before the Lord! Oh, once again, do what you did 
at the first — if it were a wise, if it were a good thing. 

Moreover, brothers and sisters, remember how often Jesus 
renewed His covenant with His people. It was not enough to have 
spoken it in the ear of Adam, and whispered it to the heart of 
Eve; Enoch must testify of it; Abraham must understand it on 
the plains of Mamre, as Noah adores the time, when floating 
securely in the ark. There must be a renewed revelation to Isaac, 
and to Jacob, and to Moses, and to Joshua! Symbols of the 
renewed covenant must be seen in the tabernacle, and in the 
temple; each day, each week, each month, each year, each 
jubilee must give some fresh form of Christ, setting His seal 
anew to the love which He bore to His people, and His purpose 


78 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


to redeem His Church by blood! Does Christ do this, and will 
you blush to do it? Oh, do as Jesus did to you — as you would 
that “the man” should do to you, do you also unto Him! 

And moreover, He has renewed His covenant with you. Come, 1 
want you to look back at your old diaries. You have not burned 
your pocketbooks, in which you set down in some mysterious 
marks, that others could not read, some mementoes of your 
Tabors, your Mizars, and the hills of the Hermonites. I want 
you to look back. Has not Christ renewed His covenant with 
some of us many times? My soul looks back and sees some 
joyous seasons, some days marked with the red Dominical 
letter among the days of my history, when He said to me afresh, 
‘You are Mine. I have redeemed you by blood.” It may be it 
was on a bed of sickness; perhaps it was when you were walking 
in the streets; it may be it was in a season of holy retirement, or 
it may be in a moment when you were brought down to the 
earth. Oh, He has renewed His covenant with us many and 
many a time with such sweet reassuring words, that our soul, 
which was tired of this world, has been willing to stay here 
three-score years and ten, because her Husband had visited her! 
You have stayed me with flagons; You have comforted me with 
apples; You have made me sick with love; Your left hand has 
been under my head, and Your right hand did embrace me; 
therefore will I renew my vows unto You even as You did unto 
me! 

Yet farther, dear friends, and I shall not stay longer than 
this, though it is a very wide field. Let us be moved today to 
renew our covenant with Christ, or rather to ask Him to renew 
our spirit, because every covenant transaction binds us to it. You 
believe in the doctrine of election. We do not blush to preach 
it, and you love to hear it. What does election mean? It means 
that God has chosen you! Very well, if it is so, then you will 
acknowledge it anew today, by choosing His way and word! 


79 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


You believe in a special and efficacious redemption, that you 
were redeemed from among men. Very well, then, you are not 
your own, you are bought with a price! You believe in effectual 
calling; you know that you were called out. If it is so, recognize 
your distinction and separateness as a sacred people set apart 
by God! You believe that this distinction in you is perpetual, 
for you will persevere to the end — if you are to be God’s 
forever, be His today! And are you not looking for a heaven, 
from which selfishness shall be banished? Are you not 
expecting a heaven, where glory shall consist in being wholly 
absorbed in Christ? Well then, this day, by all that is coming, as 
well by all that is cast, let your soul be bound, as with cords that 
cannot be snapped, to the altar of your God! 

Backsliders, you who have gone astray, pray this prayer 
today! He bids you pray it, and He will, therefore, answer it. 
The text in the margin reads “Renew a constant spirit within 
me.” You have been obstinate, wayward, unstable, and fickle. 
Poor backslider, He has put this prayer here for you — “Renew 
a constant spirit within me.” My brothers and sisters, the 
Church has had to cast you out, but if there is still a desire in 
your soul toward God, return! Return! Return! Your Father 
waits to meet you! The Church, your mother, longs for you! 
Your brothers and sisters desire to see your face again! Say it, 
and we will say it with you, “Renew a right spirit within me,” 
and it shall be done! And you, Christians, that have not 
backslidden, you, my brothers and sisters, whose heads are 
covered with the gray honors of long service, offer today this 
prayer, for you need to pray it as well as the youngest of us, 
“Renew a right spirit within me.” Ask the Master, who has kept 
you in your youth, to preserve you till, in life’s latest hour, you 
bow, “and bless in death a bond so dear.” You strong men and 
fathers, who are struggling with the world, battling day by day 
with business and its cares, forget not your God through being 


80 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49° Gracious Renewal - Ps. 51:10 


mindful of many things. Today, in this little pause in the noise 
and turmoil and strife of the world’s bustle, come now and 
renew your vows. You, young men and maidens, you little ones 
in God’s Israel, whose portion it is to be the lambs carried in 
His bosom, you, also, say, “Renew You, O God, a right spirit 
within me.” Come, renew the dedication so lately made, you 
who are brought, like Samuels, to God’s house, that you may 
wear the vestments of prophets before you wear the garments 
of manhood — give yourselves anew to the Lord! Let your 
youthful voices, so full of sweet music, unbroken as yet to the 
deeper bass which the world’s care is sure to give them by-and- 
by, sing unto the Lord, and let this be your cry — “Lord, I am 
Your servant, and the son of Your handmaiden, You have 
loosed my bonds!” 

May the Lord, the Holy Spirit, so dwell in us, that each of 
us may renew our vows, through His renewing, a right spirit 
within us. Amen. 


81 



49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, October 26th, 1862, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous run 

into it, and are safe.” — Proverbs 18:10 

STRONG TOWERS were a greater security in a bygone age 
than they are now. Then when troops of marauders invaded 
the land, strong castles were set upon the various hilltops, and 
the inhabitants gathered up their little wealth and fled there at 
once. Cashes were looked upon as being very difficult places to 
attack; and ancient troops would rather fight a hundred battles 
than endure a single siege! Towns which would be taken by 
modern artillery in 12 hours held out for 12 years against the 
most potent forces of the ancient times. He who possessed a 
casde was lord of the entire region round about, and made their 
inhabitants either his clients who sought his protection, or his 
dependents whom he ruled at will. He who owned a strong 
tower felt, however potent might be his adversary, his walls and 
bulwarks would be his sure salvation. Generous rulers provided 
strongholds for their people — mountain fastnesses where the 
peasantry might be sheltered from marauders. Transfer your 
thoughts to a thousand years ago, and picture a people, who 
after plowing and sowing, have gathered in their harvest, but 
when they are about to make merry with the harvest festival, a 
startling signal banishes their joy — a trumpet is blown from 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


yonder mountain, the bell answers it from the village tower, 
hordes of ferocious robbers are approaching, their corn will be 
devoured by strangers! Burying their corn and furniture, and 
gathering up the litde portable wealth they have, they hasten 
with all their might to their tower of defense which stands on 
yonder ridge. The gates are shut; the drawbridge is pulled up; 
the iron grating is let down; the warders are on the battlements, 
and the inhabitants within feel that they are safe. The enemy 
will rifle their deserted farms, and search for hidden treasure, 
and finding that the inhabitants are quite beyond their reach, 
they will depart to some other place. Such is the figure which 
is in the text. “The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the 
righteous run into it and are safe.” 

I. Of course we all know that by the name of God is meant 
the character of the Most High, so that our first lesson is that 
THE CHARACTER OF GOD FURNISHES THE RIGHTEOUS 
WITH ABUNDANT SECURITY. The character of God is the 
refuge of the Christian, in opposition to other refuges which godless 
men have chosen. Solomon suggestively puts the following 
words in the next verse — “The rich man’s wealth is his strong 
city, and as an high wall in his own conceit.” The rich man feels 
that his wealth may afford him comfort; should he be attacked 
in law, his wealth can procure him an advocate; should he be 
insulted in the streets, the dignity of a full purse will avenge him; 
should he be sick, he can hire the best physicians; should he 
need ministers to his pleasures, or helpers of his infirmities, 
they will be at his call. Should famine stalk through the land, it 
will avoid his door; should war itself break forth, he can 
purchase an escape from the sword, for his wealth is his strong 
tower. In contradistinction to this, the righteous man finds in 
his God all that the wealthy man finds in his substance and a 
vast deal more! “The Lord is my portion, says my soul, 
therefore will I trust in Him.” God is our treasure; He is to us 


83 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


better than the heaviest purse, or the most magnificent income; 
broad acres yield not such peace as a well attested interest in 
the love and faithfulness of our heavenly Father! Provinces 
under our sway could not bring to us greater revenues than we 
possess in Him who makes us heirs of all things by Christ Jesus! 
Other men who trust not in their wealth, nevertheless make 
their own names a strong tower. To say the truth, a man’s good 
name is no mean defense against the attacks of his fellow men. 
To wrap one’s self about in the garment of integrity is to defy 
the chill blast of calumny, and to be well-armed against the 
arrows of slander. If we can appeal to God, and say, “Lord, 
You know that in this thing I am not wicked” — then let the 
mouth of the liar pour forth his slanders, let him scatter his 
venom where he may — we bear an antidote within before 
which his poison yields its power! 

But this is only true in a very limited sense. Death soon 
proves to men that their own good name can afford them no 
consolation, and under conviction of sin a good reputation is 
no shelter. When conscience is awake, when the judgment is 
unbiased, when we come to know something of the law of God, 
and of the justice of His character, we soon discover that self- 
righteousness is no hiding place for us! It is nothing but a 
crumbling battlement which will fall on the neck of him who 
hides behind it — a pasteboard fortification yielding to the first 
shock of the law of God — a refuge of lies to be beaten down 
with the great hailstones of eternal vengeance — such is the 
righteousness of man! The righteous trusts not in this — not his 
own name — but the name of his God; not his own character, 
but the character of the Most High is his strong tower! 
Numberless are those castles in the air to which men hasten in 
the hour of peril — ceremonies lift their towers into the 
clouds — professions pile their walls high as mountains, and 
works of the flesh paint their delusions till they seem substantial 


84 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


bulwarks. But all, all, shall melt like snow, and vanish like a mist! 
Happy is he who leaves the sand for the rock, the phantom for 
the substance. 

The name of the Lord is a strong tower to the Christian, 
not only in opposition to other men’s refuges but as a matter of 
fact and reality. Even when he is not able to perceive it by 
experience, yet God’s character is the refuge of the saint. If we 
come to the bottom of things, we shall find that the basis of 
the security of the believer lies in the character of God. I know 
you will tell me it is the covenant — but what is the covenant 
worth, if God were changeable, unjust, and untrue? I know you 
will tell me that the confidence of the believer is in the blood 
of Christ — but what would be the blood of Christ if God were 
false? If after Christ had paid the ransom, the Lord should deny 
Him the ransomed; if after Christ had been the substitute, the 
judge of men should yet visit upon our heads, for whom He 
suffered, our own guilt; if Jehovah could be unrighteous, if He 
could violate His promise and become faithless as we are — 
then, I say, that even the blood of Christ would afford us no 
security! You tell me that there is His promise, but again I 
remind you that the value of a man’s promise must depend on 
Inis character. If God were not such that He cannot lie, if He were 
not so faithful that He cannot change His mind, if he were not 
so mighty that He cannot be frustrated when He intends to 
perform — then His promises were but waste paper! His Words 
like our words, would be but wind, and afford no satisfactory 
shelter for a soul distressed and anxious. 

But you will tell me He has sworn with an oath. Brothers 
and sisters, I know He has. He has given us two immutable 
things in which it is impossible for Him to lie, that we may have 
strong consolation, but still, what is a man’s oath worth 
irrespective of his character? Is it not, after all, what a man is that 
makes his assertions to be eminently mistrusted or profoundly 


85 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


believed? And it is because our God cannot by any means 
foreswear Himself but must be true, that His oath becomes of 
value to you and to me! brethren, after all, let us remember that 
the purpose of God in our salvation is the glorifying of His own 
character, and this it is that makes our salvation positively sure! 
If everyone who trusts in Christ is not saved, then is God 
dishonored, the Lord of hosts has hung up His escutcheon, and 
if in the face of the whole earth He accomplishes not that which 
He declares He will perform in this Book, then is His 
reputation stained. I say it, He has flung down the gauntlet to 
sin, death, and hell — and if He is not the conqueror over all 
these in the heart of every soul that trusts in Him, then He is 
no more the God of victories, nor can we shout His everlasting 
praise as the Lord mighty in battle! His character, then, you see, 
when we come to the basis of all, is the granite formation upon 
which must rest all the pillars of the covenant of grace, and the 
sure mercies thereof. His wisdom, truth, mercy, justice, power, 
eternity, and immutability are the seven pillars of the house of 
sure salvation! If we would have comfort, we can surely find it 
in the character of God! This is our strong tower, we run into 
it and we are safe! 

Mark, beloved, not only is this true as a matter of fact, but 
it is true as a matter of experience. I hope I shall now speak the 
feelings of your hearts, while I say we have found the character 
of God to be an abundant safeguard to us. We have known full 
well the trials of life! Thank God we have, for what would any 
of us be worth if we had no troubles? Troubles, like files, take 
away our rust — like furnaces, they consume our dross — like 
winnowing fans they drive away the chaff. And we should have 
had but little value, we should have had but little usefulness — 
if we had not been made to pass through the furnace! But in all 
our troubles we have found the character of God a comfort. 
You have been poor — very poor — I know some of you here 


86 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


have been out of work a long time; you have wondered where 
your bread would come from, even for the next meal. Now 
what has been your comfort? Have you not said, “God is too 
good to let me starve; He is too bountiful to let me want.” And 
so, you see, you have found His character to be your strong 
tower. Or else you have had personal sickness — you have long 
lain on the bed of weariness, tossing to and fro, and then the 
temptation has come into your heart to be impatient — “God 
has dealt harshly with you,” the evil one whispers. But how do 
you escape? Why you say, “No, He is no tyrant, I know Him to 
be a sympathizing God.” “In all their afflictions He was 
afflicted, the angel of His presence saved them.” 

Or else you have had losses — many losses and you have 
been apt to ask, “How can these things be? How is it I have to 
work so long, and plod so hard, and have to look about me 
with all my wits to earn but litde, and yet when I have made 
money, it melts? I see my wealth, like a flock of birds upon the 
fields — here one moment, and gone the next — for a passerby 
claps his hands, and everything takes to itself wings and flies 
away!” Then we are apt to think that God is unwise to let us 
toil for nothing, but lo, we run into our strong tower and we 
feel it cannot be. No, the God who sent this affliction could 
not have acted in a thoughdess, reckless, unwise manner! There 
must be something here that shall work for my good. You 
know, brothers and sisters, it is useless for me to attempt to 
describe the various ways in which your trials come. 1 am sure 
they who know Jehovah’s name will put their trust in Him. 
Perhaps your trial has been want, and then you have said, “His 
name is Jehovah-Jireh, the Lord will provide.” Or else you have 
been banished from friends, perhaps from country, but you 
have said, “Ah, His name is Jehovah-Shammah, the Lord is 
there.” Or else you have had a disturbance in your family. There 
has been war within, and war without, but you have run into 


87 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


your strong tower, for you have said, “His name is Jehovah- 
Shalom, the Lord sends peace.” Or else the world has slandered 
you, and you, yourself, have been conscious of sin, but you 
have said, “His name is Jehovah-Tsidkenu, the Lord our 
righteousness.” And so you have gone there and been safe. Or 
else many have been your enemies, then His name has been 
“Jehovah-Nissi, The Lord my banner.” And so He has been a 
strong tower to you. Defy, then, brothers and sisters — defy, in 
God’s strength, tribulations of every sort and size! Say, with the 
poet — 

“There is a safe and secret place 
Beneath the wings divine, 

Reserved for all the heirs of grace, 

That refuge now is mine! 

The least and feeblest here may hide 
Uninjured and unawed; 

While thousands fall on every side, 

I rest secure in God.” 

But, beloved, besides the trials of this life, we have the sins 
of the flesh, and what a tribulation these are! But the name of our 
God is our strong tower then, too. At certain seasons we are 
more than ordinarily conscious of our guilt. And I would give 
little for your piety, if you do not sometimes creep into a corner 
with the poor publican and say, “God be merciful to me a 
sinner.” Broken hearts and humble walkers — these are dear in 
Jesus’ eyes! There will be times with all of us when our saintship 
is not very clear, but our sinnership is very apparent. Well, then, 
the name of our God must be our defense — “He is very 
merciful.” “For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and 
their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more.” Yes, 
in the person of Christ we even dare to look at His justice with 


88 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


confidence, since, “He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” Possibly it is not 
so much the guilt of sin that troubles you, as the power of sin. 
You feel as if you must one day fall by the hand of this enemy 
within; you have been striving and struggling, but the old Adam 
is too much for you! It is a stern conflict, and you fear that the 
sons of Anak will never be driven out; you feel you carry a 
bombshell within your heart; your passions are like a powder 
magazine — you are walking where the flakes of fire are flying, 
and you are afraid a spark may fall, and then there will be a 
terrible destruction of everything! Ah, then there is the power 
of God, there is the truth of God, there is the faithfulness of 
God, and, despite all the desperate power of sin, we find a 
shelter here in the character of the Most High! Sin sometimes 
comes with all the terrors of the law of God. Then if you know 
not how to hide yourself behind your God, you will be in an 
evil plight. It will come at times with all the fire of the flesh, 
and if you cannot perceive that your flesh was crucified in 
Christ, and that your life is a life in Him and not in yourself, 
then you will soon be put to the rout. But he who lives in his 
God and not in himself; he who wraps Christ’s righteousness 
about him, and is righteous in Christ — such a man may defy all 
the attacks of the flesh, and all the temptations of the world! 
He shall overcome through the blood of the Lamb. “This is the 
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.” 

Then, beloved, there are the temptations of the devil, and 
these are very dreadful. But how sweet it is, still, to feel that the 
character of God is our strong tower. Without walls of divine 
grace, and bulwarks of mercy, how can a tempted soul escape 
the clutches of the destroyer? But where the soul lies in the 
entrenchments of divine promise, all the devils in hell cannot 
carry it by storm. I saw this week, one whom many of you 
greatly respect, the former pastor of this Church, Mr. James 


89 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Smith, of Cheltenham — [since departed, to be with Christ, 
which is far better] — a name well-known by his innumerable 
litde works which are scattered everywhere, and cannot fail to 
do good. You will remember that about a year ago he was 
struck with paralysis, and one half of his body was dead. But 
yet, when I saw him on the bed, I had not seen a more cheerful 
man in the full heyday of strength! I had been told that he was 
the subject of very fearful conflicts at times, so after I had 
shook hands with him, I said, “Friend Smith, I hear you have 
many doubts and fears!” “Who told you that?” he said, “for I 
have none.” “Never have any? Why I understood you had 
many conflicts.” “Yes,” he said, “I have many conflicts, but I 
have no doubts. I have many wars within, but I have no fears. 
Who could have told you that? I hope I have not led anyone to 
think that. It is a hard batde, but I know the victory is sure; 
after I have had an ill night’s rest — of course, through physical 
debility — my mind is troubled, and then that old coward, Satan, 
who would be afraid to meddle with me, perhaps, if I were 
strong, attacks me when I am weak. But I am not afraid of 
him — don’t you go away with that opinion! He does throw 
many fiery darts at me, but I have no doubt as to my final 
victory.” 

Then he said, in his own way, “I am just like a packet that 
is all ready to go by train, packed, corded, labeled, paid for, and 
on the platform, waiting for the express to come by and take 
me to glory. I wish I could hear the whistle now,” he said. “I 
had hoped I would have been carried to heaven long ago, but 
still I am fine. And then,” he said, “I have been telling your 
George Moore, over there, that I am not only on the rock, but 
that I am cemented to the rock, and that the cement is as hard as 
the rock, so there is no fear of my perishing! Unless the rock 
falls, I cannot; unless the gospel perishes, I cannot perish.” 
Now, here was a man attacked by Satan — he did not tell me of 


90 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


the bitter conflicts he had within, I know they were severe 
enough, but he was anxious to bear a good testimony to the 
faithfulness of his gracious Lord — but you see, it was his God 
who was his stronghold. He ran to this — the immutability, the 
faithfulness, the truthfulness, the mightiness of that God upon 
whose arm he leaned! If you and I will do the same, we can 
always find an attribute of God to oppose each suggestion of 
the Evil One. “God will leave you,” says the Evil One. “You 
old liar, He cannot, for He is a faithful God.” “But you will 
perish after all.” “O you vile deceiver! That can never be, for 
He is a mighty God and strong to deliver.” “But one of these 
times He will abhor you.” “No, you false accuser, and father of 
lies, that cannot be, for He is a God of love.” “The time shall 
happen when He shall forget you.” “No, traitor! That cannot 
be, for He is a God omniscient, and knows and sees all things.” 
I say, thus we may rebut every mischievous slander of Satan, 
running still into the character of God as our strong tower! 

Brothers and sisters, even when the Lord Himself chastens 
us, it is most blessed to appeal against God to God! Do you 
understand what I mean? He smites us with His rod, but then 
to look up and say, “Father, if I could believe what Your rod 
seems to say, I would say You love me not; but I know You are 
a God of love, and my faith tells me that You love me none the 
less because of that hard blow.” See here, brothers and sisters, 
I will put myself in the case a moment — Lo, He spurns me as 
though He hated me! He drives me from His presence, gives 
me no caresses, denies me sweet promises; He shuts me up in 
prison, and gives me the water of affliction, and the bread of 
distress. But my faith declares, “He is such a God that I cannot 
think harshly of Him; He has been so good to me that I know 
He is good now, and in the teeth of all His providences, even 
when He puts a black mask over His face, I still believe that — 


91 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“Behind a frowning providence, 

He hides a smiling face!” 

But, friends, I hope you know, I hope each of us may know 
by experience, the blessed are running into the bosom of God 
and hiding there! This word to the sinner who has not yet found 
peace: Do not you see, sinner, the Christian is not saved by 
what he is, but by what his God is? And this is the groundwork 
of our comfort — that God is perfect — not that we are perfect! 
When I preached last Thursday night about the snuffers of the 
temple, and the golden snuffer trays, and the necessity there 
was for the lamps in the sanctuary to be trimmed, one foolish 
woman said, “Ah, you see, according to the minister’s own 
confession, these Christians are as bad as the rest of us, they 
have many faults. Oh,” she said, “I dare say I shall be as well 
off at the last as they will.” Poor soul! She did not see that the 
Christian’s hope does not lie in what he is, but in what Christ is! 
Our trust is not in what we suffer, but in what Jesus suffered; 
not in what we do, but in what He has done. It is not our name, 
I say again, that is a strong tower to us, it is not even our prayers, 
it is not our good works — it is the name, the promise, the truth, 
the work, the finished righteousness of our God in Christjesus! 
Here the believer finds his defense and nowhere besides! Run 
sinner, run, for the casde gate is free to all who seek a shelter, 
be they who they may. 

II. By your leave I shall turn to the second point. How 
THE RIGHTEOUS AVAIL THEMSELVES OF THIS STRONG 
TOWER. They run into it. Now, running seems to me to imply 
that they do not stop to make any preparation. You will remember 
our Lord Jesus Christ said to His disciples that when the 
Romans surrounded Jerusalem, he who was on the housetop 
was not to come down into his house, but to run down the 
outer staircase, and escape. So the Christian, when he is 


92 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


attacked by his enemies, should not stop for anything, but just 
run into his God and be safe! There is no need for you to tarry 
until you have prepared your mind, until you have performed 
sundry ablutions, but run, man, straight away, at once! When 
the pigeons are attacked by the hawk, their better plan is not to 
parley, nor to stay, but swifdy as they can, cut the air and fly to 
the dovecote. So should it be with you. Leave fools, who will, 
to parley with the fiend of hell — but as for you, fly to your God 
and enter into His secret places till the tempest is over, past. A 
gracious hint, this, to you anxious souls who are seeking to fit 
yourselves for Jesus — away with such legal rubbish, run at once! 
You are safe in following the good example of the righteous. 

This running appears to me to imply that they have nothing 
to carry. A man who has a load, the heavier the load may be, 
the more will he be impeded in his flight. But the righteous run, 
like racers in the games, who have thrown off everything; their 
sins they leave to mercy, and their righteousness to the moles 
and bats! If I had any righteousness I would not carry it, but 
run to the righteousness of Christ without it — for my own 
righteousness must be a drag upon me which I could not bear, 
sinners, I know, when they come to Christ, want to bring tons 
of good works, wagon loads of good feelings, and fitness, and 
repenting and such like — but the righteous do no such thing! 
They just foreswear everything they have of their own, and 
count it but dross and dung, that they may run to Christ, and 
be found in Him. Gospel righteousness lies all in Jesus, not in 
the believer. 

It seems to me that this expression not only implies a lack 
of preparation, and having nothing to carry, but it implies that 
fear quickens them! Men do not run to a castle unless they are 
afraid, but when the avenger of death is close behind, then 
swifdy they fly! It is marvelous how godly fear helps faith. 
There is a man sinking there in the river. He cannot swim, he 


93 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


must be drowned! Look! He is going down! We push him a 
plank — with what a clutch he grasps it! And the more he is 
convinced that he has no power to float, the more firmly does 
he grip at this one hope. Fear may even drive a man, I say, to 
faith, and lend him wings to fly, where otherwise he might have 
crept with laggard feet. The fight is the flight of fear, but the 
refuge is the refuge of faith! O, sinner, if the righteous fly, what 
ought your pace to be? Again, it seems to me that there is great 
eagerness here, as if the Christian did not feel safe till he had 
entered into his God. As the stag pursued by the hounds 
quickens its flight by reason of the baying of the dogs, as the 
clamor grows louder and louder, see how the stag leaps from 
crag to crag! He dashes through the stream, flies over yonder 
hill, is lost in yonder brake, and soon springs through the valley! 
So the Christian flies to his dear God for safety, when the 
hounds of hell and the dogs of temptation are let loose against 
him. Eagerness! Where indeed shall the like be found? “As the 
hart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after You, 

0 God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall 

1 come and appear before God?” O convicted sinner, what 
should your eagerness be if thus the righteous pant for God? 

Brethren, I may add here, that there is an absence of all 
hesitation. He runs. You know, if we want somebody to help us, 
we put our hand to our brow and consider, “Let us see, where 
shall we go? I am in great straits, to whom shall I fly? Who will 
be the best friend to me?” The righteous never ask that 
question, at least when they are in a right mind they never do. 
The moment their trouble comes they run at once to their God, 
for they feel that they have full permission to go to Him. And 
again they feel they have nowhere else to fly. “To whom, or 
where should I go, if I could turn from You,” is a question 
which is its own answer. Then understand, in our text there is 
eagerness, the absence of all hesitation; there is fear, and yet 


94 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


there is courage; there is no preparation, there is the flinging 
aside of every burden. “The righteous run into His high tower, 
and are safe.” 

Beloved, I will leave that point, when I have said please 
remember that when a man gets into a casde, he is safe because 
of the impregnability of the castle — he is not safe because of 
the way in which he entered into the casde. You hear some man 
inside saying, “I shall never be hurt, because I came into the 
casde the right way.” You will tell him, “No, no, no; it is not 
the way you came into the castle, but the casde itself is our 
defense.” So some of you may be thinking, “I do come to 
Christ, but I am afraid that I do not come aright.” But it is not 
your coming it is Christ that saves you! If you are in Christ, I do 
not care a pin how you got in; for I am sure you could not get 
in except by the door! If you are once in, He will never throw 
you out; He will never drive away a soul that comes unto Him, 
for any reason whatever. Your safety does not lie in how you 
came, for in very truth, your safety is in Him! If a man should 
run into a casde and carry all the jewels of a kingdom with him, 
he would not be safer because of the jewels; and if another man 
should run in with hardly a fresh suit of clothes with him, he 
would not be any the more in danger because of his raggedness. 
It is the castle; it is the castle , not the man! The solid walls, the 
strong bastions, the frowning ramparts, the mighty 
munitions — these make up the defense — not the man! Nor the 
man’s wealth, nor the way the man came! Beloved, it is most 
true that salvation is of the Lord, and whoever shall look out 
of self tonight, whoever shall look to Christ only, shall dnd Him 
to be a strong tower! You may run into your Lord and be safe. 

III. And now for our third and closing remark. You who 
have Bibles with margins, just look at them, and you will find 
that the second part of the text is put in the margin thus — “The 
righteous run into it and are set aloft.” Our first rendering is, 


95 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“The righteous run into it and are safe” — there is the matter of 
fact. The other rendering is, “He is set aloft” — there is the 
matter of joyous experience ! 

1. Now, first, let us see to the matter of fact. The man who is 
sheltered in his God — a man who dwells in the secret places of 
the tabernacle of the Most High, who is hidden in His pavilion, 
and is set upon a rock, he is safe, for, first, who can hurt him ? The 
Devil? Christ has broken his head. Life? Christ has taken his 
life up to heaven, for we are dead, and, “our life is hid with 
Christ in God.” Death? No. The last enemy that shall be destroyed 
is death. “O death, where is your sting? O grave, where is your 
victory?” The law? That is satisfied, and it is dead to the believer, 
and he is not under its curse. Sin? No — that cannot hurt the 
believer, for Christ has slain it! Christ took the believer’s sins 
upon Himself, and therefore they are not on the believer any 
more. Christ took the believer’s sins and threw them into the 
Red Sea of His atoning blood! The depths have covered them, 
not one of them is left; all the sin the believer has ever 
committed is now blotted out, and a debt that is cancelled can 
never put a man in prison; a debt that is paid, let it be ever so 
heavy, can never make a man an insolvent — it is discharged, it 
has ceased to be. “Who shall lay anything to the charge of 
God’s elect? It is God who justifies. Who is he who condemns? 
It is Christ who died, yes, rather, who is risen again, who is even 
at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.” 
Who can harm us? Let him have permission to do what he will, 
what is there that he can do? Who, again, has the power to reach us? 
We are in the hands of Christ! What arrow shall penetrate His 
hands to reach our souls? We are under the skirts of Deity! 
What strength shall tear away the mande of God to reach His 
children? Our names are written on the hands of Jesus — who 
can erase those everlasting lines? We are jewels in Immanuel’s 
crown. What thievish fingers shall steal away those jewels? We 


96 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


are in Christ! Who shall be able to rend us from His innermost 
heart? We are members of His body, who shall mutilate the 
Savior? “I bore you,” says God, “as on eagles’ wings.” Who 
shall smite through the breast of the Eternal One, heaven’s 
great eagle? He must first do it before he can reach the eaglets, 
the young sons of God, begotten unto a lively hope. Who can 
reach us? God interposes — Christ stands in the way. And the 
Holy Spirit guards us as a garrison! Who shall stand against the 
Omnipotent? Tens of thousands of created powers must fall 
before Him, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength! 
What weapon is there that can be used against us? Shall they kill us? 
Then we begin to live. Shall they banish us? Then we are but 
nearer to our home. Shall they strip us? How can they rend 
away the garment of imputed righteousness? Shall they seize 
our property? How can they touch our treasure since it is all in 
heaven? Shall they scourge us? Sweet shall be the smart when 
Christ is present with us! Shall they cast us into a dungeon? 
Where shall the free spirit find a prison? What fetters can bind 
the man who is free in Christ? Shall the tongue attack us? Every 
tongue that rises against us in judgment, we shall condemn! I 
know not what new weapon can be formed, for certain it is that 
the anvil of the Church has broken all the hammers that were 
ever used to smite it, and remains uninjured, still. The believer 
is — he will be safe. 

I said this morning that if the believer in Christ is not saved 
forever, then, beloved, there is no meaning whatever in God’s 
Word. And I say it once again, and I say it without any word of 
apology for so doing — I could never receive that book as the 
book of God at all, if it could be proved to me that it did not 
teach the doctrine of the safety of those who trust in Christ. I 
could never believe that God would speak in such a manner as 
to make tens of thousands of us, yes, millions of us, believe that 
He would keep us, and yet after all, He should cast us away! 


97 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Nor do I believe that He would use words which, to say the 
very least, seem to teach final perseverance if He had not 
intended to teach us the doctrine. All the Arminian divines that 
ever lived cannot prove the total apostasy of believers! They 
can attack some other points of the Calvinistic doctrine. There 
are some points of our form of doctrine which apparently are 
far more vulnerable. God forbid we should be so foolish as to 
deny that there are difficulties about every system of theology! 
But about the perseverance of the saint there is no difficulty! It 
is as easy to overthrow an opponent, here, as it would be to 
thrust through, with a spear, a shield of pasteboard. Be 
confident, believer, that this is God’s truth that they who trust 
in God shall be as Mount Zion which shall never be removed, 
but live forever! 

2. But now we conclude by noticing that our text not only 
teaches us our safety, but our experience of it. “He shall set him 
up aloft.” The believer in his high days, and they ought to be 
every day, is like an eagle perched aloft on a towering crag. 
Yonder is a hunter, down below, who would desire to strike the 
royal bird. He has his rifle with him — but Iris rifle would not 
reach one third of the way — so the royal bird looks down upon 
him. He sees him load and prime, and aim; he looks in quiet 
contempt on him, not intending even to take the trouble to 
stretch one of his wings. He sees him load again, hears the 
bullet down below, but he is quite safe, for he is up aloft! Such 
is the faithful Christian’s state before God. He can look down 
upon every trial and temptation, upon every adversary, and 
every malicious attack — for God is his strong tower, and, “he 
is set up aloft.” Some people go to the newspaper and write a 
very sharp, bitter, and cutting letter against the minister, “Oh,” 
they think, “How he will feel that! How that will cut him to the 
quick!” And yet, if they had seen the man read it through, 
double it up, and throw it into the fire, saying, “What a mercy 


98 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


it is to have somebody taking notice of me.” If they could see 
the man go to bed and sleep all the better because he thinks he 
has had a high honor conferred on him for being allowed to be 
abused for Christ, surely they would see that their efforts are 
only “hate’s labor lost!” I do not think our enemies would take 
so much trouble to make us happy, if they knew how blessed 
we are under their malice. “You have prepared a table before 
me in the presence of my enemies,” said David. Some soldiers 
never eat so well as when their enemies are looking on — for 
there is a sort of gusto about every mouthful which they eat, as 
they seem to say — “snatched from the jaw of the lion, and from 
the paw of the bear, and in defiance of you all, in the name of 
the Most High God I feast to the full, and then set up my 
banner.” The Lord sets His people up aloft. But there are many 
who do not appear to be much up aloft. You meet them in the 
corn market and they say, “Wheat does not pay as they used to. 
Farming is no good to anybody.” Hear others, after those gales, 
those violent gales, when so many ships have gone down, say, 
“Ah, you may well pity us poor fellows that have to do with 
shipping; dreadful times these, we are all sure to be ruined.” See 
many of our tradesmen — “This Exhibition has given us a little 
spurt, but as soon as this is over, there will be nothing doing; 
trade never was so dull.” Trade has been dull ever since I have 
been in London, and that is nine years! I do not know how it 
is, but our friends are always losing money, yet they get on 
pretty comfortably. Some I know began with nothing; and they 
are getting pretty rich now, but, it is all by losing money, if I am 
to believe what they tell me! Surely this is not sitting up aloft! 
Surely this is not living up on high! This is a low kind of life for 
a child of God! We would not have liked to see the Prince of 
Wales in his boyhood playing with the children in the street, 
and I do not suppose you would like to see him now among 
coal heavers at a wrestling match. Nor should the child of God 


99 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


be seen pushing and grasping as if this world were all, always 
using that muckrake to scrape together the things of this world! 
Instead he should be in full satisfaction, being content with 
such things as he has, for God has said, “I will never leave you 
nor forsake you.” 

I am not a little ashamed of myself that I do not live more 
on high, for I know when we get depressed in spirits, and 
downcast, and doubting, we say many unbelieving and God- 
dishonoring words. It is all wrong! We ought not to stay here 
in these marshes of fleshly doubts; we ought never to doubt 
our God! Let the heathen doubt his god, for well he may, but 
our God made the heavens. What a happy people we ought to 
be! When we are not, we are not true to our principles. There 
are 1 0,000 arguments in Scripture for happiness in the Christian, 
but I do not know that there is one logical argument for misery! 
Those people who draw their faces down, and like the 
hypocrites, pretend to be of a sad countenance, these, I say, cry, 
“Lord, what a wretched land is this, that yields us no supplies.” 
I should think they do not belong to the children of Israel! The 
children of Israel find in the wilderness a rock following them 
with its streams of water, and manna dropping every day; and 
when they need them, there are the quails, and so the wretched 
land is filled with good supplies. Let us rather rejoice in our 
God! I should not like to have a serving man who always went 
about with a dreary countenance, because do you know people 
would say, “What a bad master that man has.” And when we 
see Christians looking so sad, we are apt to think they cannot 
have a good God to trust to. Come, beloved, let us change our 
notes, for we have a strong tower, and are safe! Let us take a 
walk upon the ramparts. I do not see any reason for always 
being down in the dungeon. Let us go up to the very top of the 
ramparts, where the banner waves in the fresh air, and let us 
sound the clarion of defiance to our foes! And let it ring across 


100 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


49 i Our Stronghold - Prov. 18:10 


the plain, where yonder pale white-horsed rider comes, bearing 
the lance of death. Let us defy even him! Ring out the note 
again! Salute the evening, and make the outgoings of the 
morning rejoice! Wander upon the casde top, shout to your 
companion, yonder, and let every tower and every turret of the 
grand old battlements be vocal with the praise of Him who has 
said — 


“Munitions of stupendous rock, 

Your dwelling place shall be. 

There shall your soul without a shock 
The wreck of nature see!” 

Sinner, again I say the door is open! Run to the mercy of 
God in Christ, and by His grace, be safe! 


101 



492 Nominal Christians - Real Infidels - 
John 8:46 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, February 1 st, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“If I say the truth, why do you not believe Me?” — John 8:46 

As WE MEET this evening to commune at the table of the 
Lord, it will then be necessary for me to seek the edification of 
God’s people. I, therefore, think it best to occupy our time this 
morning with an exhortation to those who are out of the way. 
May the Holy Spirit make our words like arrows from the bow 
of a mighty man; may He graciously direct them to the chosen 
hearts, which He has ordained to bless, and may this hallowed 
hour be a time of salvation to many among you! Whatever may 
be lacking in the human instrument, I trust there will be no 
absence of true affection and solemn earnestness, and O, may 
the Holy Spirit use those infirmities, under which I labor this 
morning, to magnify His own strength! 

You know, dear friends, there has been a great deal of talk 
lately about the infidelity, which like a whirlwind, shakes the 
Establishment. We felt a very stiff breeze caused by certain, 
“Essays and Reviews,” and before that could blow over, a 
perfect hurricane from the African shore astonished many, and 
alarmed a few. Everybody agrees to censure the inconsistency 
of a man who wears a miter and quarrels with Moses; professes 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


to be a minister of the church and undermines her foundations. 
Too much importance has been attached to the poor attempts 
of the Arithmetical Unbeliever, and what was in reality, nothing 
more than a storm in a teacup, has been exaggerated, until all 
the sea of Christendom is tossed with tempest! To my mind, 
there is a terrible enemy abroad, far more worthy of our steel 
than the unfaithful prelate and his Zulu teachers! Spare your 
voices, O watchmen of Zion, for a mightier enemy, and reserve 
your swords, for a sterner adversary of our Israel! Secret 
unbelief, as the mother and foster parent of all open infidelity, 
requires to be watched and wept over. Let us mourn over the 
professed unbelief of the age; but, there is an unbelief more 
gross than this, more dishonest, more inconsistent, more 
widely spread, and more deceptive in its character! It is an 
infidelity so intangible, that we cannot readily arrest it and drag 
it into the court of conscience; it is so unreasonable, that 
argument is out of place in contending with it. This “pestilence 
which walks in darkness,” broods frightfully over our 
congregations, and smothers, beneath its death-bearing wings, 
not a few of you, whose souls I would win for Christ! Into the 
battle with this destroyer of souls, I enter this day. Oh, may my 
Lord and Master give me power to strike home! Solemnly, I 
protest against that dishonest, inconsistent infidelity, of which 
some of you are the victims. You tell me that you believe the 
Bible to be inspired of God; no suspicions as to its divine 
authority linger in your mind; you have faith in the gospel 
which we preach, that it is genuine, true, and sound. But, here 
lies your inconsistency or dishonesty — you say it is true — but, 
you do not believe it! You admit that it came from God, but 
practically, you reject it! You will not deny that it is worthy of 
all acceptation — it must be so if it came from God, since you 
admit it deals with all-important matters — and yet, you 
practically say it is not worthy of your attention, since many of 


103 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you are still in disobedience to the voice of love, neglecting the 
great salvation! 

Before charging home upon your consciences, my hearers, 
I feel impelled to remark, that many professors of religion 
deserve the rebuke of the text, for they say they believe the 
Bible, but they do not act in accordance with it. We have been 
boasting, in the language of Chillingworth, that, the Bible, and 
the Bible alone, is the religion of Protestants — but, the boast 
requires a little examination! Do we not tolerate many things 
among Protestants which can never be vindicated from 
Scripture? You tell me that the Bible is your religion, and yet, 
bring your infants for baptism! You sprinkle their brows, or 
sign their foreheads with a cross; and where do you find your 
warrant, for thus profaning an ordinance which sets forth the 
burial of believers with their Lord? Tradition may lend a forced 
and lame support to baby sprinkling, but to the Bible, it is an 
unknown novelty. Moreover, I ask you where comes 
confirmation? Will anyone be bold enough to assert that there 
is anything in God’s Word like it? Yes, and more — where do 
you find a State Establishment? Verily, not in the New 
Testament, since our Lord has said, “My kingdom is not of this 
world,” and this unworldly gospel, is a standing protest against 
the spiritual fornication, which State religion involves! 
Everywhere, in all sects, I see inventions of men, claiming the 
place of the commandments of God! Let us sweep our temples, 
and return unto the Word of the Lord! Say not that you believe 
the Book, when you act as though it were not true — when you 
advocate practices, and set up rites and ceremonies, unknown 
to apostolic times, and Scriptural records. Brethren, again I say 
it, our churches require to be brought face to face with the 
Infallible Word. By this test try them all — they say the thing is 
true — will they believe it? Will they practice it? Will they abide 
by the standard? High professors, the love of this world is 


104 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


enmity against God! You profess to love God, but you are as 
worldly, as fond of fashion and its frivolities, as pleased with 
pomp and its fooleries, as hungry for honor and its pretensions, 
as you can be, and yet, you say this Book is true! Verily, by your 
acts you prove that you believe it not! I might draw up today, a 
dreadful bill of indictment against the visible church of this age. 
I might prove to a demonstration, that it is not delivered from 
this present evil world, according to the will of God, even the 
Father, and that it teaches for doctrines the commandments of 
men — so that, it deserves to be met with the unanswerable 
question and faithful rebuke of our Lord Jesus — “If I say the 
truth, why do you not believe Me?” 

Although fidelity to my Lord required these few remarks, 
which are not meant as an angry discovery of a brother’s faults, 
but as the faithful wounds of a friend, I turn to the matter 
which has most to do with you, the people of my charge. 
Having shown you the many giants’ heads which might be 
smitten by this smooth stone, taken out of the brook, I shall 
now take aim at your hearts, O you who believe not on my Lord! 

I. Unbelievers in Christ, MY TEXT SETS FORTH VERY 
PITHILY AND PERTINENTLY YOUR INCONSISTENCY. 

“If I say the truth, why do you not believe Me?” If you 
boldly meet me by saying, “I am not converted, for I do not 
believe in the mission of Christ,” your position is a consistent, 
though a terrible one! If you tell me you have suspicions about 
the inspiration of Scripture, and therefore, you do not believe 
in Christ, your position is certainly dangerous, if it is not 
despicable! But, when you tell me that you believe Jesus Christ 
was sent from heaven, and that His gospel is the revelation of 
God to man — and you are still at this day unconverted — your 
position, besides its tremendous responsibility and danger, is 
extraordinarily inconsistent, so inconsistent, that an honest 
man would blush to remain in it for an hour! Were you rightly 


105 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


to weigh the matter, you would say, “I will not, I will not be 
thus a liar unto my soul any longer; I will not contradict myself, 
but I will be consistent, and since the thing is true, I will believe 
it.” 

Remember, first of all, that Jesus Christ has revealed to you your 
need. He has told you in express words that you need 
regeneration. “Except a man is born-again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God.” Enlarging upon the doctrine, He adds — 
“Except a man is born of water and of the Spirit he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of heaven.” He has laid the new birth 
before you, as an imperative necessity; you admit that this is 
true; your admission that this Book came from God, is clearly 
an assent to this teaching. Why, then, is it that you have never 
passed from death unto life? Why do you remain contented 
without that divine change, and are satisfied with moral 
reformation or outward respectability, while the Book assures 
you, that these will never do? The Great Master assures you 
that you must be converted! Hear His express words — “Except you 
are converted and become as little children, you shall in no wise 
enter into the kingdom of heaven.” This you allow to be correct, 
for it is in the Book which you agree to reverence. Oh, sinner, 
how then, can you be at ease in an unconverted state? How is 
it that you can remain so careless, when heaven is barred against 
you because you are not converted? You cannot delude 
yourself with the thought that perhaps all will be well with you, 
when Christ assures you it cannot be well with you, except you 
experience His converting grace! Has He not told you, too, in 
many a passage of prophetic and apostolic Scripture, that you 
must return unto the God from whom you have wandered, and leave 
your sins, and give your heart to Him? What meant that 
gracious parable concerning the prodigal? Did it not set you 
forth; you who have spent your living with harlots, and are 
brought to the degradations of sin? Did He not teach you, that 


106 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


your only hope lies in quick return to your offended, but loving 
Father in heaven? “I will arise and go to my Father” — is not 
this fit language for you? The citizens of this country — what 
can they do for you? They send you into their fields to feed 
swine, but you cannot fill your belly with the husks which the 
swine eat! Does not Jesus, in that loving parable, say 
affectionately to you, “Return unto your God”? Oh, if this is 
true, and you say it is, then believe it — and sure I am your heart 
will yearn towards your Father’s house, and you will run 
towards your home at once! Is it not true, that we must abhor 
that which is evil, and turn with full purpose of heart unto the 
Lord? “True,” you answer, “certainly it is.” Why then, I reply, 
do you not believe it, and act upon the belief? Dear friends, if 
any physician, well-known and honored, should meet you today 
on your way home, and if he should most affectionately and 
solemnly, inform you that you bear about in your person a 
dreadful disease, I think if you should profess to believe his 
warning, and yet you should seek no remedy for it, but remain 
totally unaffected by the dreadful assurance, it might well be 
asked of you, “How can you say it is true, for you evidently do 
not believe it?” O my hearers, as though Christ spoke to you 
by me, so I ask you this question — How can you, as candid 
persons, how can you as honest men and women, admit this 
Book to be true, when it tells you that your whole head is sick, 
and your whole heart faint? When it warns you that, dying as 
you now are, without a work of divine grace in you, you are lost 
to all eternity — how can you, I say, admit these things to be 
true, and yet, prove by your apathy and carelessness, that you 
do not believe them? May God press that inquiry home upon 
you! 

Our Lord Jesus Christ came not only to reveal your need, 
but also to set forth His claims! The claims of Jesus of Nazareth 
are briefly stated by Peter, “Repent and be converted, every one 


107 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of you, that your sins may be blotted out when the times of 
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.” He 
demands repentance — that is, a change of mind — the changing 
of your mind with reference to sin, caring no more for its 
pleasures, despising it, and turning away from it; a change of 
mind with regard to holiness — seeking your happiness in it; a 
change of mind with regard to Christ Himself, so that you shall 
no longer look upon Him as without form or comeliness, but 
as a most precious Savior, such as you need! Sinner, Christ 
demands of you that you should take your ornaments of self- 
righteousness from you, and wrap yourself in the sackcloth of 
humiliation, and cast the ashes of penitence upon your head, 
and cry, “LTnclean! Unclean! LTnclean!” Moreover, He requires 
faith of you. “Repent and believe the gospel.” “This is the 
commandment that you believe on Jesus Christ whom God has 
sent.” The Jews said, “What shall we do that we may do the 
work of God?” Christ said, “This is the work of God that you 
believe on Jesus Christ whom He has sent.” He demands that 
faith which will accept Him to be the sole cleanser from sin, and 
to be the sole possessor, as He is the sole Redeemer, of the heart. 
Friend, you believe that no less a person than the Son of God, 
thus bids you look unto Him and be saved; you believe that the 
Son of God was nailed to the cross, and that out of love to you, 
He demands that you forsake the sin which will destroy you! 
And, He demands you believe in His blood which will cleanse 
you. Does Jesus thus speak? Are these demands the hard 
inventions of a tyrannical priesthood, or the mild and tender 
claims of love? Is it a mere man who bids you, believe and live, 
or is it the Redeemer, “in whom dwells all the fullness of the 
Godhead bodily,” who commands you to believe and be 
baptized? If the claim to faith is true and just, why do you not 
accede to it? Why harden your hearts? Why stand out against 
incarnate love, pleading and persuading you? Oh, strange 


108 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


inconsistency, to know the Savior’s truth, but not to believe 
Him! Oh, shameful dishonesty, to grant the validity of His 
claim, but to be careless concerning the discharge of it! To grant 
the justness of the requirement, and refuse to accede to it with 
your hearts, is to write yourselves down as deceitful and 
unrighteous! “If I say the truth, why do you not believe Me?” 

Further, Christ came to provide the remedy for jour soul. Christ 
did not preach an impossible gospel — one out of the reach of 
sinners. He provided a real, ready, and available salvation. No, 
beloved, He came to preach glad tidings of great joy to men, a 
gospel worthy of all acceptation, in which even the vilest have 
a share! And this is it — that God wills not the death of the 
sinner, but had rather that he should turn unto Him and live; 
that, in order that mercy and justice might both meet, Christ, 
God’s own dear Son, was sacrificed on Calvary for the ungodly, 
the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, and that 
whoever believes in Him shall not perish, but have everlasting 
life! This is the gospel — a gospel to be preached to every 
creature, from the cold snows of Lapland, to the balmy plains 
of the torrid zone — a gospel to be published among every 
people, wherever sinners are found — that Jesus Christ came 
into the world to save sinners, even the very chief, and that an 
act of faith in Him saves the soul; a simple trusting in Him, and 
the soul is delivered from all sin! My friends, you profess that 
this is true. O my hearers, very few among you doubt that this 
gospel is divine. The most of you, who sit in these seats Sunday 
after Sunday, never raise any difficulties of that sort. You say, 
“Our minister has preached the gospel to us.” But oh, if this is 
true, why do you not believe it? If there is a remedy, a sure one, 
a God-appointed one, why do you not receive it? O sirs, this 
damnable inconsistency of yours will ruin your souls forever, 
unless you repent of it! Deny it altogether, and I can understand 
your position, though 1 weep over it; but say that it is true, and 


109 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


yet reject it, and your folly is so glaring, that it shall be a theme 
for laughter in hell, when fiends shall be your companions, and 
the eternal burnings your perpetual abode! How can it be? You 
are hanging over the jaws of hell, the flames flash into your face, 
a strong hand that can save you is stretched out, and you refuse 
its grasp, and will refuse it, still, unless it lays hold on you by 
force. Perishing! The very medicine offered you which will cure 
you, and you will not receive it, although you know its healing 
virtue! You do not believe it; there is infidelity in your heart, 
and before you condemn open unbelievers, search your own 
hearts, for how are you better than they? May not your sins be 
less excusable, and your state less hopeful than theirs? 

Dear friends, our blessed Lord came also to reveal the freeness 
of His grace. Oh, what freeness was there in the gospel when 
Christ preached it! No cold theology froze His lips; words did 
not hang like icicles there, but out of His mouth there flowed 
rivers of living water! What can be freer than this — “Come 
unto Me all you who labor and are heavy-laden, and I will give 
you rest”? Or what more wide than this — “If any man thirst let 
him come unto Me and drink”? Or what more gracious than 
this, by the lips of His servant John — “Whoever will, let him 
come and take of the water of life freely”? Oh, I need not repeat 
these invitations! I shall rather remind you, that you admit them 
to be true, hearty, divine invitations — why then, oh, why do 
you not believe them? You say, ‘Yes, it is freely presented; I 
have not a doubt about that.” Then why do you stand shivering 
and refusing to lay hold on eternal life? Soul, if this gospel were 
hedged with thorns or guarded with bayonets, I would 
recommend you to fling yourself upon their very points to 
reach it, but when the door is opened, and when Christ Himself, 
dressed in bleeding love, woos you to come — how shall I make 
an excuse for you, when you can say it is true, and yet you do 


no 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


not believe it? May God give you wisdom, and teach you 
reason — right reason. 

Furthermore, Jesus Christ in His preaching gave a very 
clear description of the danger of unregenerate souls. Hear how He 
puts it — “Where their worm dies not, and their fire is not 
quenched.” Mark how He speaks of the unprofitable servant — 
“Cast him into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth.” Observe how He describes the goats on the 
left hand, these are the thundering accents of the Judge of all — 
“Depart from Me, you cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared 
for the devil and his angels.” No preacher was ever so awfully 
explicit upon future punishment as Jesus of Nazareth! No 
human ministry ever gave such graphic and harrowing 
descriptions of hell as Christ has given! You say you believe the 
words of Jesus — you do not suspect a loving Savior of 
exaggeration, do you? Oh, my hearers, I ask you now, in the 
name of God — if it is true, why do you not believe it? You do 
not believe it — that is clear enough! Would you sit quiedy in 
your seat this morning, young man, if you really believed that 
within one instant you may be in hell? Old man! Old in years 
and old in sin — would you be as quiet in your soul today as you 
are if you knew and believed that there is but a step between 
you and the flames? Oh, all of you who can make merry while 
yet you have no hope in Jesus, could it be so with you, if you 
really believed in the wrath of God which abides on you? So 
near the lake of fire, and yet so full of levity! Death and 
damnation at your doors, and yet jesting and unconcerned! My 
soul is full of horror at your madness! My heart is ready to burst 
with anguish, at the ruin which will so soon overtake you! What 
shall I say to you? How shall I reason with you? Surely if the 
thunders of an angry God do not awaken you, you will sleep 
yourselves into the lowest hell ! 


111 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Brothers and sisters, let me add, Christ has brought to light the 
hope of immortality, eternal life and heaven. What glowing pictures 
does the Word of God give, of the state of the blessed in the 
land of the hereafter! What music streams from angels’ harps! 
What joy illuminates every celestial brow! What hallowed 
blessedness floats along the river of the water of life, in the 
midst of every street of the new Jerusalem! You admire the 
poetry of the Book of God, and marvel at its matchless painting 
of scenes beyond the flood; you believe that Jesus has revealed 
that which eye had not seen, and ear had not heard — then why 
do you not believe it? If you believed it, you would seek after 
it, you would strive to enter in at the strait gate; you would labor 
for the meat which perishes not; the Spirit of God would lead 
you to prize the world to come; you would tread this present 
fleeting world beneath your feet, and be looking for, and 
hastening unto the glories which are yet to be revealed in those 
who love the Lord! The sum of all this is the weighty inquiry of 
our Lord Jesus. “If I say the truth, why do you not believe Me?” 
If Christ is no liar, if His word is no fiction, how can you remain 
as you now are — ungodly, unthinking, unconverted men and 
women? May the Holy Spirit compel you to give heed to this 
searching question! 

II. YOU OFFER SOME DEFENSE OF YOUR 
INCONSISTENCY, BUT I ANSWER THAT YOUR APOLOGIES 
DO NOT MEET THE CASE. 

I hear one say, “Sir, I do not feel myself entided to come 
to Christ; the revelation of God is true, but I do not believe in Christ 
because I do not feel my need that I should. ” I answer that this is no 
excuse — this is rather a proof of guilt; you do not believe that 
which Christ has told you concerning yourself! The Word of 
God informs you in many places, that your case is an awful, 
and a lamentable one; if you believed this, you would never 
have to complain that you did not feel it. In matters relating to 


112 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


the body, we feel first, and then believe; my hand smarts, and 
therefore, I believe that it has been wounded. But, in things 
relating to the soul, you believe first, and feel afterwards. A 
woman cannot feel grief on account of the loss of her child, till 
she believes she has lost it; a young man cannot feel joy at the 
inheritance of a large estate, till he believes he has inherited it; 
but, it is impossible for a loving mother to believe that her child 
is lost, and not to weep, or for an ambitious young man to 
believe himself suddenly made rich, and not to rejoice! Now, if 
you really believed your heart to be as deceitful as the Bible says 
it is; if you really believed sin to be as dreadful a thing as God 
regards it to be, you would necessarily feel repentance and 
conviction. Alas, it is only when the Spirit of God gives you a 
real belief in these things that you repent in earnest! The real 
root of your hardness of heart lies in your not believing what 
you admit to be true! You say the Bible is true, but, you say 
what you do not mean. Oh, 1 would that this inconsistency 
would strike you! You say it is true, but you cannot believe it, 
or you would be at once awakened to anxious conviction. 

But, you make a second apology. “But, sir, I do not see how 
faith can save me. ” Here, again, there is no excuse, because the 
basis of your doubt, after all, is this — you do not believe what 
Scripture reveals! If you speak honestly, you really mean to say, 
“The testimony of the Bible concerning salvation through faith 
is not true.” Let me affectionately remove this stumbling block, 
if it is ignorance, and not willful unbelief. You say you cannot 
see how faith can save you. Do you not know that faith, in itself 
does not save? Faith saves by reason of that which it lays hold of. 
Christ stood in the place of every man living, that ever did or 
will believe on Him. He took the sins of those persons, and was 
punished for them; and those who trust Him receive the effect 
of what He suffered. To say that faith could save, would be an 
unreasonable thing — but, that the object of faith, the Divine 


113 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


suffering Savior can save — is no unreasonable doctrine! Now, 
if you do really believe what Scripture tells you concerning this, 
you cannot again raise this objection, that you do not see how 
faith can save. But, you say you prefer works — but Scripture 
tells you, times without number, that by the works of the law 
there shall no flesh be justified! And, it adds that all your 
righteousnesses are but as filthy rags! So all hope in that quarter 
is destroyed. You admit that Scripture is true, and yet you want 
to be saved by your works! This is to say that black is white! 
This is to make God a liar, and yet, to make you bow, and 
compliment Him as the God of truth at the same time. Sinner, 
if you believe the Bible, it is as clear as noonday, that he who 
believes on Him is not condemned, and that he who believes 
not is condemned already, because he has not believed on the 
Son of God! 

Perhaps you meet me by saying that you have long thought that 
the good things promised in the gospel, simply and only to faith, are too 
good to be true; that, conscious of being a lost sinner, and a very 
wretched offender, you have not the presumption to believe, 
that if you were to trust Christ this very morning, all your sins 
would be forgiven. Well friend, come now, you talk like a 
humble man, but it is very likely you are very proud! Let me get 
ahold of you by the button. What does all this mean, my dear 
friend, but just this — that you think very meanly of God? I do 
not believe you think so meanly of yourself as you think you 
do; you think meanly of God! You think that He has but little 
mercy, at least not so much mercy as you need, and so you limit 
the Holy One of Israel! But, I shall meet you on the ground of 
my text. You allow that this Book is true — very well — has not 
the Lord declared, both by instances, and by express words of 
promise, that though your sins are as scarlet they shall be as 
wool? And though they are red like crimson they shall be whiter 
than snow? However aggravated guilt may be, it can damn no 


114 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


man who believes in Christ! I pray you read the gospel aright. 
You cannot then make the greatness of its grace a ground of 
doubt. The thing is great, but it is not too great for God! As 
high as the heavens are above the earth, so high are His ways 
above your ways, and His thoughts above your thoughts! 

But do I hear you answer that you are not quite sure that the 
promise is made toyou? Sinner, I must not lose patience with you, 
but I wish you would lose patience with yourself, for this is 
trifling! You say the Bible is true. Sir, if you say it is true, you 
know that the very object for which it was sent toyou was that 
it might save you. What is said in the 20th chapter of the gospel 
byjohn? — “These are written that you might believe that Jesus 
is the Christ, and that believing you might have life through His 
name.” God did not send this book to you, I am sure, to play 
with you! He sent it that you might be saved! But how can you 
say the invitations do not include you? “Whoever will.” Does 
that shut you out? The gospel not sent to you? Why, does it not 
say, “Go you into all the world and preach the gospel to every 
creature ?” Are you not a creature? Can you escape there? Soul, 
you know that, inasmuch as the gospel is to be preached to 
every creature, and inasmuch as you are condemned already for 
not believing on the Son of God, therefore, the gospel must 
have been sent toyou! You say you do not feel your need and 
you are not prepared. No preparation was ever asked! “This He 
gives you — it is His Spirit’s rising beam.” You say you do not feel 
this, and you do not feel that — He never asked you to feel 
anything as a preparation for Him; all this is the gift of His 
divine grace! You know we preach here every Sunday to you a 
gospel which meets you as you are, not as quickened sinners, but 
as sinners! Not as convicted sinners, but as sinners — naked, poor 
and helpless! You know we speak the truth of God! Why do 
you not believe us, when we tell you that, to you, even to you, 


115 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


is the Word of this gospel sent — for he who comes to Christ, 
He will in no wise cast out? 

Ah, you will think about this, but the time has not yet come. I 
answer, again, that you do not believe the Bible to be true! If 
you believed, as the Bible describes, that life is short, and death 
is certain, and eternity is near, and there is a dreadful hell into 
which you will be plunged, and a bright and glorious heaven 
which you will lose, you would cry out, “Lord, save me, or I 
perish!” As when the hand of the angel hastened Lot from the 
burning city, so would a full conviction of these things hasten 
you to the cross for shelter! 

Ah, I repeat what I commenced with, I would care but litde 
for open infidelity if this secret unbelief could be killed. You 
know why men are infidels openly? It is because they want to 
find an excuse for their inward infidelity. When men with some 
few grains of honesty, and a litde pride mingled with it, begin 
to reason with themselves, they argue thus — “Now 1 love my 
sins too well to give them up; the Bible is true, but it demands 
of me repentance, faith, and other things not at all palatable. If 
I say the old Book is true and do not heed it, I shall be 
inconsistent; I will at least show I have one virtue — I will be 
consistent. I will deny the authority of the Scriptures, and then, 
though conscience may prick me, yet before men I shall earn a 
reputation for daring consistency, my actions and my words 
agreeing.” Well, sir, I like you not for this, but I must say this, 
that we have seen some of the greatest unbelievers converted 
to God in this house of prayer, while others remain unblest. 
We have seen many baptized into Christ who once did not 
believe His Deity, and who doubted the inspiration of Scripture; 
but all the while, there are some of you who say the Word is 
true, but do not believe it, and I am almost ready to give you 
up! You are like some persons we visit on their sick beds. They 
say, ‘Yes, sir,” “Yes, sir,” to all we say, and they die and are 


116 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


damned with, “Yes, sir,” on their tongue, but with, “No, sir” in 
their heart! This is what you are doing. You say, “Yes, sir,” “Yes, 
sir,” “Yes, sir,” but you do not repent, you do not believe. You 
live, and I fear some of you will die, without God! 

III. Again, I would aim at your consciences from another 
quarter. 

Friend, friend, be not offended with me while I tell you 
now a piece of solemn truth. In the 45th verse Jesus gives the 
reason why some did not believe on Him. It is a most 
unreasonable reason. It is this — “Because I tell you the truth 
you believe Me not.” Why, that should be the very reason why 
they would believe Him! Now, I fear some of you do not 
believe the truth of God, simply because it is the truth of God. Some 
of you, my hearers, hate the truth of God. You say, “That is 
too severe. It is not true.” 1 would not be untrue, even with a 
good design, for I do not think we should tell a lie, even to save 
a soul. But it is true, solemnly true. Now, I will tell one part of 
the truth as it is taught in Scripture — “Whatever a man sows, 
that shall he also reap.” Well now, that teaches that if you 
continue to sow sin, you will have to reap the result of it, and 
unless, through divine grace, you are led to give up your right- 
eye sins, and to cut off your right-arm lusts, you will perish! 
Now this is a truth of God which you hate. That man who 
comes here on Sundays and often has pangs of conscience, but 
is a still drunk, still a secret drunk — he hates this truth! Where 
shall I find that other man who listens to the Word, yes, and 
often with tears, but he has his midnight crime when he thinks 
no man sees him, and even now, when I press harshly upon his 
vice, he likes it not. You who are here this morning listening to 
me, and this afternoon will be busy with your shops on God’s 
own day, beware! And you, too, who so trade in business, that 
you no more dare to show your books than you dare to look at 
the flames of hell — you hate the truth of God — I am sure you 


117 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


do! You abhor the doctrine that all this must be given up! You 
prove you do not like it, because you do not practice it! Some 
of you will even say — “Ah, the preacher is Puritanical — he is 
too severe — he cuts too close.” No! Here it is, you believe it 
not because it is the truth of God! The Pharisees, my friends, hated 
God’s truth deliberately. I think I hear one of you say, “I do not 
do that. I may hate the truth in the sense you have explained, in 
rejecting it, and going on in my sins, but I do not do it 
deliberately.” Ah, but how long does it take to make an action 
deliberate? I have preached to some of you nine years now — 
nine years! And you are still what you were! Is not that 
deliberate? Some of you have heard the gospel 40 years, and 
you are still unregenerate — and hate the truth of God — and 
prove you do, by living in sin! Is not that deliberate? And you, 
young man, the other Sunday you were so impressed, that you 
felt as if you must yield to God that very day; you stood on 
those steps under those pillars, and you said to your soul — “To 
be or not to be, that is the question.” A companion met you 
and asked you — asked you before the impression had died 
away, to go with him to a haunt of sin. And you stood and 
poised it in the balance thus — which shall it be? And you did 
deliberately choose your own damnation when you chose sin! 
Take care, lest God shall say, ‘You have chosen your own 
delusions, and I will give you up unto them, and that forever.” 
I lay this charge with all the boldness of a Nathan, at the door 
of some of you, that, you have chosen deliberately, to despise 
the truth of God! 

But the Pharisees, you will tell me, scoffed at it. Yes, and I lay 
that, too, at the door of some of you. There may be here the 
regular scoffer, who mocks at everything sacred. With him I 
have little to do this morning; he shall measure out his iniquities 
and receive vengeance for them. But you who sit here Sunday 
after Sunday, and hear appeals which you reject; have Christ 


118 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


preached to you and will not look at Him; have His sufferings 
set forth as we try to paint Him, dipping the pencil in His own 
blood, and yet He is nothing to you — do you not despise Him? 
I do not know any contempt that is more sorrowful to the man 
who is smitten by it, than the contempt of utter silence. Do we 
not say, “We pass you by in silent contempt?” Thus you treat 
my Lord! We have another expression — we say of some people, 
that they are beneath our contempt, and some of you have not 
enough esteem for my Master, to treat Him with open 
contempt! You think religion such a trifle, that, it is not worth 
your sneering at it; you so despise it, that you think, it is not 
worth your despising. Oh, is it so? Is it so? Then are you of 
your father, the devil, and you do his works! May God bring 
you out of that black family, and translate you into the kingdom 
of His own dear Son! 

IV. Having spoken feebly, but yet desiring the Master to 
make what I have said mighty, I close by asking these 
questions — 

If these things are true, why do you not believe them ? Is there anything 
to hinder you? Is the doctrine unreasonable? You say the Bible is 
true. Now, the Bible contains many things which are harder to 
believe than that Jesus Christ died for the ungodly. If you can 
believe that Jonah was in the whale’s belly; if you can believe 
all the marvelous miracles of Scripture, you cannot say that the 
doctrine of the cross is unreasonable! To believe that Christ 
stood as a substitute, and that through His substitution God 
can pardon sin, is no tax upon faith. Nor can you tell me that 
the precept is intolerable. “His yoke is easy, and His burden is 
light.” It is your sin that is intolerable, not the precept; He only 
bids you give up that which will ruin you! He only asks you to 
do that which will make you happy! 

But, there is one answer you will give. You will tell me you 
cannot believe. How do you know you cannot? “Well,” says one, 


119 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“I cannot believe without the Spirit of God.” That is true, but 
are you sure the Spirit of God is not with you? Let me ask you 
whether you can now trust Jesus Christ. This is what I am about 
to experiment upon. Jesus Christ, who took the sin of men, 
declares that whoever will trust Him to save them shall be saved. 
Now Christ is God; He is a mighty Savior; He has suffered as 
man, therefore, He has all that is necessary for the office. Do 
you think you can now trust Christ to save you? I think I hear 
one say, “Yes, I could trust such a Savior as that.” Then you 
can do it, you see, and inasmuch as you can do it, the Spirit of 
God is with you! Do not expect to see the Spirit of God! He is 
a great mystery; you cannot know His operations except by 
their effects. Faith is the effect of His secret operation; if you can 
now believe in Christ, then doubtless the Spirit of God is with 
you, and I doubt not the Spirit of God is often with you, when 
you know it not! If you can now believe, He is with you! Do I 
hear one say, “Well, I have often thought I could trust Christ, 
but I thought if I could do it, then it was not the work of the 
Spirit of God, but the work of the creature.” No, verily, 
beloved, there is no such thing as a simple trust in Christ that 
comes of the creature! It is always the work of the Spirit of 
God — and if you can trust in Christ, you need not question 
about the Spirit — the Spirit of God must be in you, or else your 
trust in Christ would never have been there. Only, if now the 
thing seems right and reasonable to you, cast yourself on Jesus, 
and you are saved! 

I might multiply words, but I might not, perhaps, increase 
the force of the text, and therefore, let me entreat you, who 
stand to the Scriptures as being true, and yet deny their veracity, 
by remaining unregenerate — let me entreat you to decide one 
way or the other! Do be consistent. “How long halt you 
between two opinions?” Say the Book is false, and then we shall 
know what you are, and where you stand, and you yourselves 


120 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


492 Nominal Christians - Real 
Infidels - John 8:46 


will, probably, begin to be alarmed at your position! Say the 
Book is false, and then you will be openly numbered with the 
disciples and slaves of hell! And, it may be your conscience will 
then begin to work. But, oh, if you are not prepared to take that 
side, if Baal is not God, and, you will not serve him, then if 
God is God — and that is the only other conclusion — serve Him! 
I bring you to that awful place where the two roads meet — the 
right, the left — to heaven, to hell — to righteousness, to sin — 
to God, to fiends! There you stand. I am glad to have made you 
stand there. If it is a thing that needs consideration, consider. 
Put your hand to your brow, now, and turn this matter over. 
And I do trust that through the word which we have spoken to 
you, the Spirit of God will work on your conscience and on 
your heart, and you will say, “For God! For Christ! For holiness! 
For everlasting life!” But mark you, I had sooner you would say, 
“For the devil. For sin. For hell,” than say nothing; for if you 
say nothing, you will go on and be as careless and as indifferent 
as ever; but if you make this last choice deliberately, it may be 
that then God will alarm your conscience, and stir your soul, so 
that you may see your danger and may fly to Jesus! 

May He bless you, now, and guide your heart into the way 
of truth, and to His name be glory forever. Amen. 


121 



493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, February 8th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“And being in an agony He prayed more earnestly: and His 
sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood falling down to the 
ground.” — Luke 22:44 

FEW HAD fellowship with the sorrows of Gethsemane. 
The majority of the disciples were not there. They were not 
sufficiendy advanced in divine grace to be admitted to behold 
the mysteries of “the agony.” Occupied with the passover feast 
at their own houses, they represent the many who live upon the 
letter, but are mere babes and sucklings as to the spirit of the 
gospel. The walls of Gethsemane fidy typify that weakness in 
grace which effectually shuts in the deeper marvels of 
communion from the gaze of ordinary believers. To twelve, no, 
to eleven only was the privilege given to enter Gethsemane, and 
see this great sight. Out of the eleven, eight were left at some 
distance; they had fellowship, but not of that intimate sort to 
which the greatly beloved men are admitted. Only three highly 
favored ones, who had been with Him on the mount of 
transfiguration, and had witnessed the life-giving miracle in the 
house of Jairus — only these three could approach the veil of 
His mysterious sorrow — within that veil even these must not 
intrude; a stone’s throw distance must be left between. He must 
tread the winepress alone, and of the people, there must be 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


none with Him. Peter and the two sons of Zebedee represent 
the few eminent, experienced, grace-taught saints who may be 
written down as “Fathers.” These having done business on 
great waters, can in some degree, measure the huge Adantic 
waves of their Redeemer’s passion; having been much alone 
with Him, they can read His heart far better than those who 
merely see Him amid the crowd. To some selected spirits it is 
given, for the good of others, and to strengthen them for some 
future, special, and tremendous conflict — to enter the inner 
circle — and hear the pleadings of the suffering High Priest! 
They have fellowship with Him in His sufferings, and are made 
conformable unto His death. Yet, I say, even these, the elect 
out of the elect — these choice and peculiar favorites among the 
king’s courtiers — even these cannot penetrate the secret places 
of the Savior’s woe, so as to comprehend all His agonies. ‘Your 
unknown sufferings,” is the remarkable expression of the 
Greek liturgy — for there is an inner chamber in His grief, shut 
out from human knowledge and fellowship. Was it not here 
that Christ was more than ever an, “Unspeakable gift” to us? Is 
not Watts right when he sings — 

“And all the unknown joys He gives, 

Were bought with agonies unknown”? 

Since it would not be possible for any believer, however 
experienced, to know for himself all that our Lord endured in 
the place of the olive press, when He was crushed beneath the 
upper and the nether millstone of mental suffering and hellish 
malice, it is clearly far beyond the preacher’s capacity to set it 
forth to you. Jesus Himself must give you access to the wonders 
of Gethsemane — as for me, I can but invite you to enter the 
garden, bidding you take your shoes off, for the place whereon 
we stand is holy ground! I am neither Peter, nor James, nor 


123 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


John, but one who would wish, like they, to drink of the 
Master’s cup, and be baptized with His baptism. I have up to 
now advanced only so far as yonder band of eight, but there I 
have listened to the deep groans of the man of sorrows. Some 
of you, my venerable friends, may have learned far more than 
I, but you will not refuse to hear again the roaring of the many 
waters which strive to quench the love of the Great Husband 
of our souls! 

Several matters will require our brief consideration. Come 
Holy Spirit, breathe the light of God into our thoughts, life into 
our words. 

I. Come here and behold the SAVIOR’S UNUTTERABLE 
WOE. 

The emotions of that sorrowful night are expressed by 
several words in Scripture. John describes Him as saying four 
days before His passion, “Now is My soul troubled.” As He 
marked the gathering clouds, He hardly knew where to turn 
Himself, and cried out, “What shall I say?” Matthew writes of 
Him, “He began to be sorrowful and very heavy.” Upon the 
word ademonein translated “very heavy,” Goodwin remarks that 
there was a distraction in the Savior’s agony since the root of 
the word signifies, “Separated from the people — men in 
distraction, being separated from mankind.” What a thought, 
my brothers and sisters, that our blessed Lord should be driven 
to the very verge of distraction by the intensity of His anguish! 
Matthew represents the Savior Himself as saying, “My soul is 
exceeding^ sorrowful, even unto death.” Here the word perilupos 
means encompassed, encircled, overwhelmed with grief. “He 
was plunged head and ears in sorrow, and had no breathing 
hole,” is the strong expression of Goodwin. Sin leaves no 
cranny for comfort to enter, and therefore, the sin-bearer must 
be entirely immersed in woe. Clark records that He began to be 
sorely amazed, and to be very heavy. In this case, thambeisthai , with 


124 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


the prefix ek, shows extremity of amazement like that of Moses 
when he did exceedingly fear and quake. O blessed Savior, how 
can we bear to think of You as a man astonished and alarmed! 
Yet was it even so when the terrors of God set themselves in 
array against You! Luke uses the strong language of my text — 
“being in an agony.” These expressions, each of them worthy 
to be the theme of a discourse, are quite sufficient to show that 
the grief of the Savior was of the most extraordinary 
character — well justifying the prophetic exclamation, “Behold, 
and see if there are any sorrows like unto My sorrow which was 
done unto Me.” He stands before us peerless in misery. None 
are molested by the powers of evil as He was — as if the powers 
of hell had given commandment to their legions, “Fight neither 
with small nor great, but only with the king, Himself.” 

Should we profess to understand all the sources of our 
Lord’s agony, wisdom would rebuke us with the question, 
“Have you entered into the springs of the sea? Or have you 
walked in search of the depths?” We cannot do more than look 
at the revealed causes of grief. It pardy arose from the horror 
of His soul when fully comprehending the meaning of sin. Brothers and 
sisters, when you were first convicted of sin, and saw it as a 
thing exceedingly sinful, though your perception of its 
sinfulness was but faint compared with its real heinousness, yet 
horror took hold upon you! Do you remember those sleepless 
nights? Like the Psalmist, you said, “My bones waxed old 
through my roaring all the day long, for day and night Your 
hand was heavy upon me. My moisture is turned into the 
drought of summer.” Some of us can remember when our 
souls chose strangling rather than life — when if the shadows of 
death could have covered us from the wrath of God, we would 
have been too glad to sleep in the grave that we might not make 
our bed in hell. Our blessed Lord saw sin in its natural 
blackness; He had a most distinct perception of its treasonable 


125 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


assault upon His God, its murderous hatred to Himself, and its 
destructive influence upon mankind. Well might horror take 
hold upon Him, for a sight of sin must be far more hideous 
than a sight of hell, which is but its offspring! 

Another deep fountain of grief was found in the fact that 
Christ now assumed more fully His official position with regard to sin. 
He was now made sin. Hear the word! He, who knew no sin, 
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of 
God in Him! In that night, the words of Isaiah were fulfilled — 
“The Lord has laid on Him the iniquity of us all.” Now, He 
stood as the sin-bearer, the substitute accepted by Divine 
justice to bear — that we might never bear — the whole of wrath 
divine! At that hour, heaven looked on Him as standing in the 
sinner’s place, and treated as sinful man had richly deserved to 
be treated! Oh, dear friends, when the immaculate Lamb of 
God found Himself in the place of the guilty; when He could 
not repudiate that place because He had voluntarily accepted it 
in order to save His chosen, what must His soul have felt? How 
must His perfect nature have been shocked at such close 
association with iniquity! 

We believe that at this time, our Hord had a very clear view of 
all the shame and suffering of His crucifixion. The agony was but one 
of the first drops of the tremendous shower which discharged 
itself upon His head. He foresaw the speedy coming of the 
traitor, Judas — the seizure by the officers, the mock trials 
before the Sanhedrin — and Pilate, and Herod. He foresaw the 
scourging and buffeting, the crown of thorns, the shame, the 
spitting; all these rose up before His mind, and, as it is a general 
law of our nature that the foresight of trial is more grievous 
than the trial itself, we can conceive how it was that He who 
answered not a word when in the midst of the conflict, could 
not restrain Himself from strong crying and tears in the 
prospect of it! Beloved friends, if you can imagine before your 


126 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


mind’s eyes the terrible incidents of His death — the hounding 
through the streets of Jerusalem, the nailing to the cross, the 
fever, the thirst and, above all, the forsaking of His God — you 
cannot marvel that He began to be very heavy, and was sorely 
amazed. 

But possibly a yet more fruitful tree of bitterness was 
this — that now His Father began to withdraw His presence from Him. 
The shadow of that great eclipse began to fall upon His spirit 
when He knelt in that cold midnight amidst the olives of 
Gethsemane. The sensible comforts which had cheered His 
spirit were taken away; that blessed application of promises 
which Christ Jesus needed as a man was removed; all that we 
understand by the term, “consolations of God,” were hidden 
from His eyes! He was left single- handed in His weakness to 
contend for the deliverance of man! The Lord stood by as if 
He were an indifferent spectator, or rather, as if He were an 
adversary — He wounded Him — “with the wound of an enemy, 
with the chastisement of a cruel one.” 

But in our judgment the fiercest heat of the Savior’s 
suffering in the garden lay in the temptations of Satan. That hour 
above any time in His life, even beyond the 40 days’ conflict in 
the wilderness, was the time of His temptation. “This is your hour 
and the power of darkness.” Now could he emphatically say, 
“The prince of this world comes.” This was His last hand-to- 
hand fight with all the hosts of hell, and here must He sweat 
great drops of blood before the victory can be achieved. 

We have glanced at the fountains of the great deep which 
were broken up when the floods of grief deluged the 
Redeemer’s soul. Brothers and sisters, this one lesson before 
we pass from the contemplation — “We have not an High Priest 
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but 
was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us 
therefore come boldly unto the Throne of grace that we may 


127 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.” Let us 
reflect that no suffering can be unknown to Him! We do but 
run with footmen — He had to contend with horsemen; we do 
but wade up to our ankles in shallow streams of sorrow — He 
had to buffet with the swellings of Jordan. He will never fail to 
succor His people when tempted. Even as it was said of old, 
“In all their affliction, He was afflicted. And the angel of His 
presence saved them.” 

II. We turn next to contemplate THE TEMPTATION OF 

our Lord. 

At the outset of His career, the serpent began to nibble at 
the heel of the promised deliverer. And now as the time 
approached when the Seed of the woman should bruise the 
serpent’s head, that old dragon made a desperate attempt upon 
his great destroyer. It is not possible for us to lift the veil where 
Revelation has permitted it to fall, but we can form some faint 
idea of the suggestions with which Satan tempted our Lord. Let 
us, however, remark by way of caution, before we attempt to 
paint this picture, that whatever Satan may have suggested to 
our Lord, His perfect nature did not in any degree whatever 
submit to it so as to sin! The temptations were, doubtless, of 
the very foulest character, but they left no speck or flaw upon 
Him, who remained still the fairest among ten thousand. The 
prince of this world came, but he had nothing in Christ; he 
struck the sparks, but they did not fall, as in our case, upon dry 
tinder! They fell as into the sea, and were quenched at once. He 
hurled the fiery arrows, but they could not even scar the flesh 
of Christ; they smote upon the buckler of His perfectly 
righteous nature, and they fell off with their points broken, to 
the discomfiture of the adversary. 

But what do you think were these temptations? It strikes 
me, from some hints given, that they were somewhat as 
follows — there was, first, a temptation to leave the work unfinished. 


128 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


We may gather this from the prayer — “If it is possible, let this 
cup pass from Me.” “Son of God,” Satan said, “is it so? Are 
You really called to bear the sin of man? Has God said, ‘I have 
laid help upon one that is mighty,’ and are You He, the chosen 
of God, to bear this entire load? Look at Your weakness! You 
sweat, even now, great drops of blood! Surely You are not He 
whom the Father has ordained to be mighty to save — or if You 
are — what will You win by it? What will it avail You? You have 
glory enough already! See what degenerates they are for whom 
You are to offer up Yourself a sacrifice? Your best friends are 
asleep about You when most You need their comfort; Your 
treasurer, Judas, is hastening to betray You for the price of a 
common slave; the world for which You sacrifice Yourself will 
cast out Your name as evil, and Your Church, for which You 
do pay the ransom price, what is it worth? A company of 
mortals! Your divinity could create the same any moment it 
pleases You! Why do You need, then, to pour out Your soul 
unto death?” Such arguments would Satan use; the hellish craft 
of one who had then been thousands of years tempting men, 
would know how to invent all manner of mischief; he would 
pour the hottest coals of hell upon the Savior. It was in 
struggling with this temptation, among others, that, being in an 
agony, our Savior prayed more earnestly. 

Scripture implies that our Lord was assailed by the fear that 
His strength would not be sufficient. “He was heard in that He feared.” 
How, then, was He heard? An angel was sent unto Him 
strengthening Him. His fear, then, was probably produced by 
a sense of weakness. I imagine that the foul fiend would 
whisper in His ear — “You! You endure to be smitten of God, 
and abhorred of men! Reproach has broken Your heart 
already — how will You bear to be publicly put to shame, and 
driven outside the city as an unclean thing? How will You bear 
to see Your weeping kinsfolk, and Your broken-hearted 


129 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


mother standing at the foot of Your cross? Your tender and 
sensitive spirit will quail under it. As for Your body, it is already 
emaciated; Your long fasts have brought You very low; You 
will become a prey to death long before Your work is done; 
You will surely fail! God has forsaken You! Now will they 
persecute and take You; they will give up Your soul to the lion, 
and Your darling to the power of the dog.” Then would he 
picture all the sufferings of crucifixion and say, “Can Your 
heart endure, or can Your hands be strong in the day when the 
Lord shall deal with You?” The temptation of Satan was not 
directed against the Godhead, but the manhood of Christ, and 
therefore the fiend would probably dwell upon the feebleness 
of man. “Did You not say Yourself, ‘I am a worm and no man, 
the reproach of men, and the despised of the people? How will 
You bear it when the wrath-clouds of God gather about You? 
The tempest will surely shipwreck all Your hopes. It cannot be! 
You cannot drink of this cup, nor be baptized with this 
baptism.” In this manner, we think, was our Master tried. But 
look, He yields not to it! Being in an agony, which word means 
in a wrestling ring, He struggles with the tempter like Jacob 
with the angel. “No,” He says, “I will not be subdued by taunts 
of My weakness; I am strong in the strength of My Godhead, I 
will overcome you yet.” Yet was the temptation so awful, that, 
in order to master it, His mental depression caused Him to, 
“sweat as it were, great drops of blood falling down to the 
ground.” 

Possibly, also, the temptation may have arisen from a 
suggestion that He was utterly forsaken. 1 do not know — there may 
be sterner trials than this, but surely this is one of the worst, to 
be utterly forsaken. “See,” said Satan, as he hissed it out 
between his teeth — “See, You have a friend nowhere! Look up 
to heaven, Your Father has shut up the heart of His 
compassion against You. Not an angel in Your Father’s courts 


130 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


will stretch out his hand to help You! Look yonder, not one of 
those spirits, who honored Your birth, will interfere to protect 
Your life! All heaven is false to You; You are left alone. And as 
for earth, do not all men thirst for Your blood? Will not the 
Jew be gratified to see Your flesh torn with nails? And will not 
the Roman gloat himself when You, the King of the Jews, are 
fastened to the cross? You have no friend among the nations; 
the high and mighty scoff at You, and the poor thrust out their 
tongues in derision. You had no where to lay Your head when 
You were in Your best estate; You have no place, now, where 
shelter will be given You. See the companions with whom You 
have taken sweet counsel, what are they worth? Son of Mary, 
see there Your brother James, see there Your beloved disciple 
John, and your bold Apostle Peter? — They sleep, they sleep! 
And yonder eight, how the cowards sleep when You are in 
Your sufferings! And where are the 400 others? They have 
forgotten You! They will be at their farms and their 
merchandize by morning. Lo! You have no friend left in heaven 
or earth! All hell is against You! I have stirred up my infernal 
den; I have sent my missives throughout all regions summoning 
every prince of darkness to set upon You this night, and we will 
spare no arrows! We will use all our infernal might to 
overwhelm You! And what will You do, You solitary one?” It 
may be this was the temptation. I think it was, because the 
appearance of an angel unto Him, strengthening Him, removed 
that fear. “He was heard in that He feared.” He was no more 
alone, but heaven was with Him. It may be that this is the 
reason of His coming three times to His disciples — as Hart 
puts it — 

“Backwards and forwards thrice He ran 
As if He sought some help from man. ” 


131 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


He would see for Himself whether it was really true that all 
men had forsaken Him. He found them all asleep, but perhaps 
He gained some faint comfort from the thought that they were 
sleeping, not from treachery, but from sorrow. The spirit 
indeed was willing, but the flesh was weak. 

We think Satan also assaulted our Lord with a bitter taunt, 
indeed. You know in what guise the tempter can dress it, and 
how bitterly sarcastic he can make the insinuation — “Ah, You 
will not be able to achieve the redemption of Your people; Your grand 
benevolence will prove a mockery, and Your beloved ones will 
perish! You shall not prevail to save them from my grasp; Your 
scattered sheep shall surely be my prey. Son of David, I am a 
match for You! You cannot deliver out of my hands! Many of 
Your chosen have entered heaven on the strength of Your 
atonement, but I will drag them from there and quench the 
stars of glory! I will thin the courts of heaven of the choristers 
of God, for You will not fulfill Your suretyship! You cannot do 
it; You are not able to bring up all this great people — they will 
perish yet. See, are not the sheep scattered now that the 
Shepherd is smitten? They will all forget You! You will never 
see of the travail of Your soul; Your desired end will never be 
reached; You will be forever the man that began to build but 
was not able to finish.” Perhaps this is more truly the reason 
why Christ went three times to look at His disciples. You have 
seen a mother. She is very faint, weary with a heavy sickness, 
but she labors under a sore dread that her child will die; she has 
started from her couch, upon which disease had thrown her, to 
snatch a moment’s rest; she gazes anxiously upon her child; she 
marks the faintest sign of recovery. But she is so sick herself 
she cannot remain more than an instant from her own bed. She 
cannot sleep; she tosses painfully, for her thoughts wander. She 
rises to gaze again — “How are you, my child, how are you? Are 
those palpitations of your heart less violent? Is your pulse 


132 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


gentler?” But, alas, she is faint, and she must go to her bed again, 
yet she can get no rest. She will return again and again to watch 
the loved one. So, I think, Christ looked upon Peter and James 
and John, as much as to say, “No, they are not all lost yet; there 
are three left,” and, looking upon them as the type of all the 
Church, He seemed to say — “No, no, I will overcome. I will 
get the mastery. I will struggle even unto blood. I will pay the 
ransom price, and deliver My darlings from their foe.” 

Now these, 1 think, were His temptations. If you can form 
a fuller idea of what they were than this, then right happy shall 
1 be. With this one lesson I leave the point — ‘Vray that you enter 
not into temptation. ” This is Christ’s own expression — His own 
deduction from His trial. You have all read, dear friends, John 
Bunyan’s picture of Christian fighting with Apollyon. That 
master painter has sketched it to the very life; he says, though, 
“This sore combat lasted for above half a day, even till 
Christian was almost quite spent. I never saw him all the while 
give so much as one pleasant look, till he perceived he had 
wounded Apollyon with his two-edged sword. Then indeed, he 
did smile and look upward! But it was the most dreadful sight 
I ever saw.” That is the meaning of that prayer, “Lead us not 
into temptation.” Oh, you who go recklessly where you are 
tempted, you who pray for afflictions — and I have known 
some silly enough to do that — you who put yourselves where 
you tempt the devil to tempt you, take heed from the Master’s 
own example! He sweat great drops of blood when He was 
tempted. Oh, pray God to spare you such trial! Pray this 
morning, and every day, “Lead me not into temptation.” 

III. Behold, dear brothers and sisters, THE BLOODY 
SWEAT. 

We read, that, “He sweat as it were, great drops of blood.” 
For this reason, a few writers have supposed that the sweat was 
not actually blood, but had the appearance of it. That 


i33 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


interpretation, however, has been rejected by most 
commentators, from Augustine downward, and it is generally 
held that the words, “as it were,” do not only set forth likeness 
to blood, but signify that it was actually and literally blood! We 
find the same idiom used in the text — “We beheld His glory, 
the glory as of the onlybegotten of the Father.” Now, clearly, 
this does not mean that Christ was like the only-begotten of the 
Father, since He is really so; so that generally this expression of 
Holy Scripture sets forth, not a mere likeness to a thing, but the 
very thing itself! We believe, then, that Christ did really sweat 
blood. This phenomenon, though somewhat unusual, has been 
witnessed in other persons. There are several cases on record, 
some in the old medicine books of Galen, and others of more 
recent date, of persons who, after long weakness, under fear of 
death, have sweat blood. But this case is altogether one by itself 
for several reasons. If you will notice, He not only sweat blood, 
but it was in great drops. The blood coagulated and formed large 
masses. I cannot better express what is meant than by the word, 
“clots” — big, heavy drops. This has not been seen in many 
cases. Some slight effusions of blood have been known in cases 
of persons who were previously enfeebled, but great drops, 
never! When it is said, “falling to the ground” — it shows their 
copiousness, so that they not only stood upon the surface and 
were sucked up by His garments till He became like the red 
heifer which was slaughtered on that very spot, but the drops 
fell to the ground! Here He stands unrivalled; He was a man in 
good health, only about 30 years of age, and was laboring under 
no fear of death, but the mental pressure arising from His 
struggle with temptation, and the straining of all His strength, 
in order to baffle the temptation of Satan, so forced His frame 
to an unnatural excitement, that His pores sent forth great 
drops of blood which fell to the ground. This proves how 
tremendous must have been the weight of sin when it was able 


i34 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


so to crush the Savior that He distilled drops of blood! This 
proves too, my brothers and sisters, the mighty power of His 
love! It is a very pretty observation of old Isaac Ambrose that 
the gum which exudes from the tree without cutting is always 
the best. This precious camphire tree yielded most sweet spices 
when it was wounded under the knotty whips, and when it was 
pierced by the nails on the cross. But see, it gives forth its best 
spice when there is no whip, no nail, and no wound! This sets 
forth the voluntariness of Christ’s sufferings, since, without a 
lance, the blood flowed freely. No need to put on the leech, or 
apply the knife — it flows spontaneously! No need for the rulers 
to cry, “Spring up, O well.” Of itself it flows in crimson torrents! 
Dearly beloved friends, if men suffer some frightful pain of 
mind — I am not acquainted with the medical matter — 
apparendy the blood rushes to the heart, the cheeks are pale, a 
fainting fit comes on. The blood has gone inward, as if to 
nourish the inner man while passing through its trial. But look 
at our Savior in His agony — He is so utterly oblivious of self 
that instead of His agony driving His blood to the heart to 
nourish Himself, it drives it outward to bedew the earth! The 
agony of Christ, inasmuch as it pours Him out upon the ground, 
pictures the fullness of the offering which He made for men. 

Do you not perceive, my brothers and sisters, how intense 
must have been the wrestling through which He passed, and 
will you not hear His voice tojou ? — “You have not yet resisted 
unto blood, striving against sin.” It has been the lot of some of 
us to have terrible temptations — otherwise we would not know 
how to teach others — so terrible that in wrestling against them, 
the cold, clammy sweat has stood upon our brow! The place 
will never be forgotten by me — a lonely spot — where, musing 
upon my God, an awful rush of blasphemy went over my soul, 
till I would have preferred death to the trial! I fell on my knees 
then and there, for the agony was awful, while my hand was at 


i35 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


my mouth to keep the blasphemies from being spoken. Once 
let Satan be permitted really to try you with a temptation to 
blasphemy, and you will never forget it, though you live till your 
hairs are white! Or let him attack you with some lust, and 
though you hate and loathe the very thought of it, and would 
lose your right arm sooner than indulge in it, yet it will come 
and hunt and persecute and torment you! Wresde against it 
even unto sweat, my brothers and sisters, yes, even unto blood! 
None of you should say, “I could not help it, I was tempted.” 
Resist till you sweat blood rather than sin! Do not say, “I was 
so pressed with it, and it so suited my natural temperament, 
that I could not help falling into it.” Look at the great Aposde 
and High Priest of your profession, and sweat even to blood 
rather than yield to the great tempter of your souls! Pray that 
you enter not into temptation, so that when you enter into it, 
you may with confidence say, “Lord, I did not seek this, 
therefore, help me through it, for Your name’s sake.” 

IV. I want you, in the fourth place, to notice THE 

Savior’s prayer. 

Dear friends, when we are tempted and desire to overcome, 
the best weapon is prayer. When you cannot use the sword, and 
the shield, take to yourself the famous weapon of All-prayer! 
So did your Savior. Let us notice His prayer. It was a lonely prayer. 
He withdrew even from His three best friends about a stone’s 
throw. Believer, especially in temptation, be much in solitary 
prayer. As private prayer is the key to open heaven, so is it the 
key to shut the gates of hell! As it is a shield to prevent, so is it 
the sword with which to fight against temptation! Family prayer, 
social prayer, prayer in the church will not suffice; these are 
very precious, but the best beaten spice will smoke in your 
censer in your private devotions, where no ear hears but God! 
Take yourselves to solitude, if you would overcome. 


136 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


Mark, too, it was humble prayer. Luke says He knelt, but 
another evangelist says He fell on His face. What? Does the 
King fall on His face? Where, then, must be your place, you 
humble servant of the great Master? Does the Prince fall flat to 
the ground? Where, then, will you lie? What dust and ashes shall 
cover your head? What sackcloth shall gird your loins? Humility 
gives us good foothold in prayer; there is no hope of any real 
prevalence with God, who casts down the proud, unless we 
abase ourselves that He may exalt us in due time. 

Further, it was filial prayer. Matthew describes Him as 
saying, “O My Father.” Mark puts it, “Abba, Father.” You will 
find this always a stronghold in the day of trial to plead your 
adoption! Hence that prayer, in which it is written, “Lead us 
not into temptation, but deliver us from evil,” begins with, 
“Our Father which are in heaven.” Plead as a child. You have 
no rights as a subject. You have forfeited them by your treason, 
but nothing can forfeit a child’s right to a father’s protection! 
Be not, then, ashamed to say, “My Father, hear my cry.” 

Again, observe that it was perseveringprayer. He prayed three 
times, using the same words. Be not content until you prevail. 
Be as the persistent widow, whose continued coming earned 
what her first supplication could not win. Continue in prayer 
and watch in the same with thanksgiving. 

Further, see how it glowed to a red-hot heat — it was earnest 
prayer. “He prayed more earnesdy.” What groans were those 
which were uttered by Christ! What tears, which welled up 
from the deep fountains of His nature! Make earnest 
supplication if you would prevail against the adversary. 

And last, it was the prayer ofi resignation. “Nevertheless, not as 
I will, but as You will.” Yield and God yields; let it be as God 
wills, and God will will it that it shall be for your best! Be 
perfectly content to leave the result of your prayer in His hands, 
who knows when to give, and how to give, and what to give, and 


i37 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


what to withhold. So pleading earnestly, persistendy, yet 
mingling with it humility and resignation, you shall prevail. 

Dear friends, we must conclude — turn to the last point 
with this as a practical lesson — “Rise and pray.” When the 
disciples were lying down, they slept. Sitting was the posture 
that was congenial to sleep. Rise! Shake yourselves! Stand up in 
the name of God! Rise and pray; and if you are tempted, be 
more in prayer than you ever were in your life — instant, 
passionate, persistent with God that He would deliver you in 
the day of your conflict. 

V. As time has failed us, we close with the last point, which 

is, the Savior’s prevalence. 

The cloud has passed away. Christ has knelt, and the prayer 
is over. “But,” says one, “did Christ prevail in prayer?” beloved, 
could we have any hope that He would prevail in heaven if He 
had not prevailed on earth? Should we not have had a suspicion 
that if His strong crying and tears had not been heard then, He 
would fail now ? His prayers did speed, and therefore, He is a 
good Intercessor for us. “How was He heard?” The answer 
shall be given very briefly, indeed. He was heard, I think, in 
three respects. The first gracious answer that was given Him 
was that His mind was suddenly rendered calm. What a difference 
there is between, “My soul is exceedingly sorrowful” — His 
hurrying to and fro, His repetition of the prayer three times, 
the singular agitation that was upon Him — what a contrast 
between all these, and His going forth to meet the traitor with, 
“Betray you the Son of Man with a kiss?” Like a troubled sea 
before, and now as calm as when He, Himself said, “Peace, be 
still,” and the waves were quiet! You cannot know a more 
profound peace than that which reigned in the Savior when 
before Pilate He answered Him not a word. He is calm to the 
last, as calm as though it were His day of triumph rather than 
His day of trouble. Now, I think this was granted to Him in 


138 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


answer to His prayer. He had sufferings perhaps more intense, 
but His mind was now quieted so as to meet them with greater 
deliberation. Like some men, who when they first hear the 
firing of the shots in a battle are all trepidation, but as the fight 
grows hotter, and they are in greater danger, they are cool and 
collected; they are wounded, they are bleeding, they are dying — 
yet are they quiet as a summer’s eve! The first young flush of 
trouble is gone, and they can meet the foe with peace — so the 
Father heard the Savior’s cry, and breathed such a profound 
peace into His soul that it was like a river and His righteousness 
like the waves of the sea! 

Next, we believe that He was answered bj God strengthening 
Him through an angel. How that was done we do not know. 
Probably it was by what the angel said, and equally likely is it 
that it was by what he did. The angel may have whispered the 
promises — pictured before His mind’s eye the glory of His 
success — sketched His resurrection, portrayed the scene when 
His angels would bring His chariots from on high to bear Him 
to His throne. The angel may have revived before Him the 
recollection of the time of His advent, the prospect when He 
should reign from sea to sea, and from the river even to the 
ends of the earth, and so have made him strong. Or, perhaps, 
by some unknown method God sent such power to our Christ, 
who had been like Samson with his locks shorn, that He 
suddenly received all the might and majestic energy that were 
needed for the terrific struggle. Then He walked out of the 
garden no more a worm, and no man, but made strong with an 
invisible might that made Him a match for all the armies that 
were round about Him! A troop had overcome Him, like Gad 
of old, but He overcame at last; now, He can dash through a 
troop! Now, He can leap over a wall. God has sent, by His angel, 
force from on high, and made the man Christ strong for batde 
and for victory! 


i39 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


And I think, we may conclude with saying that God heard 
Him in granting Him now, not simply strength, but a real victory 
over Satan. I do not know whether what Adam Clarke supposes 
is correct, that in the garden, Christ did pay more of the price 
than He did even on the cross, but I am quite convinced that 
they are very foolish who get to such refinement that they think 
the atonement was made on the cross, and nowhere else at all. 
We believe that it was made in the garden as well as on the 
cross. And it strikes me that, in the garden, one part of Christ’s 
work was finished, wholly finished, and that was His conflict 
with Satan. I conceive that Christ had now rather to bear the 
absence of His Father’s presence, and the reviling of the people, 
and the sons of men, than the temptations of the devil. I think 
that these were over when He rose from His knees in prayer, 
when He lifted Himself from the ground where He marked His 
visage in the clay in drops of blood. The temptation of Satan 
was then over, and He might have said, concerning that part of 
the work — “It is finished, broken is the dragon’s head — I have 
overcome him.” Perhaps in those few hours that Christ spent 
in the garden, the whole energy of the agents of iniquity was 
concentrated and dissipated. Perhaps in that one conflict, all 
that craft could invent, all that malice could devise, all that 
infernal practice could suggest, was tried on Christ — the devil 
having his chain loosened for that purpose, having Christ given 
up to him, as Job was, that he might touch Him in His bones 
and in His flesh. Yes, touch Him in His heart, and His soul — 
and vex Him in His spirit! It may be that every devil in hell and 
every fiend of the pit were summoned, each to vent his own 
spite, and to pour their united energy and malice upon the head 
of Christ. And there He stood, and He could have said, as He 
stood up to meet the next adversary — a devil in the form of 
man — Judas — “I come this day from Bozrah, with garments 
dyed red from Edom. I have trampled on My enemies, and 


140 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


493 Gethsemane - Luke 22:44 


overcome them once and for all; now I go to bear man’s sin, 
and My Father’s wrath, and to finish the work which He has 
given Me to do.” If this is so, Christ was then heard, in that He 
feared — He feared the temptation of Satan — and He was 
delivered from it! He feared His own weakness, and He was 
strengthened! He feared His own trepidation of mind, and He 
was made calm! 

What shall we say, then, in conclusion, but this lesson. 
Does it not say, “Whatever you shall ask in prayer, believing, 
you shall have”? Then if your temptations reach the most 
tremendous height and force, still lay hold of God in prayer and 
you shall prevail! Convicted sinner! That is a comfort for you. 
Troubled saint! That is a joy for you. To one and all of us is this 
lesson of this morning — “Pray that you enter not into 
temptation.” If in temptation, let us ask that Christ may pray 
for us that our faith fail not. And when we have passed through 
the trouble, let us try to strengthen our brothers and sisters, 
even as Christ has, by His grace, strengthened us this day. 
Amen. 


141 



494 The Betrayal - Luke 22 : 47-48 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, February 15th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“And while He yet spoke, behold a multitude, and he that 
was called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them and drew 
near unto Jesus to kiss Him. But Jesus said unto him, Judas, 
betray you the Son of Man with a kiss?” — Luke 22:47-48 

WHEN Satan had been entirely worsted in his conflict 
with Christ in the garden, the man-devil Judas came upon the 
scene. As the Parthian in his flight turns round to shoot the 
fatal arrow, so the archenemy aimed another shaft at the 
Redeemer, by employing the traitor into whom he had entered. 
Judas became the devil’s deputy, and a most trusty and 
serviceable tool he was. The Evil One had taken entire 
possession of the apostate’s heart, and, like the swine possessed 
of devils, he ran violendy downwards towards destruction! Well 
had infernal malice selected the Savior’s trusted friend to be His 
treacherous betrayer, for thus he stabbed at the very center of 
His broken and bleeding heart; but, beloved, as in all things, 
God is wiser than Satan, and the Lord of goodness outwitted 
the Prince of Evil, so, in this dastardly betrayal of Christ, 
prophecy was fulfilled, and Christ was the more surely declared 
to be the promised Messiah! Was not Joseph a type? And, lo, 
like that envied youth, Jesus was sold by His own brethren. Was 
He not to be another Samson, by whose strength the gates of 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


hell should be tom from their posts? Lo, as Samson, He is 
bound by His countrymen, and delivered to the adversary! 
Know you not that He was the antitype of David? And was not 
David deserted by Ahithophel, his own familiar friend and 
counselor? Brothers and sisters, do not the words of the 
Psalmist receive a literal fulfillment in our Master’s betrayal? 
What prophecy can be more exacdy true than the language of 
the 41st and 55th Psalms? In the first we read, “Yes, my own 
familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, 
has lifted up his heel against me.” And in the 55th the Psalmist 
is yet more clear, “For it was not an enemy that reproached me; 
then I could have borne it: neither was it he that hated me that 
did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself 
from him: but it was you, a man my equal, my guide and my 
acquaintance. We took sweet counsel together and walked unto 
the House of God in company. He has put forth Iris hands 
against such as are at peace with him: he has broken his 
covenant. The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, 
but war was in his heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were 
they drawn swords.” Even an obscure passage in one of the 
lesser prophets must have a literal fulfillment, and for 30 pieces 
of silver, the price of a base slave, must the Savior be betrayed 
by His choice friend! Ah, you foul fiend, you shall find at the 
last, that your wisdom is but intensified folly! As for the deep 
plots and plans of your craft, the Lord shall laugh them to scorn; 
after all, you are but the unconscious drudge, of Him whom 
you abhor, in all the black work you do so greedily, you are no 
better than a lowly scullion in the royal kitchen of the King of 
kings! 

Without further preface, let us advance to the subject of 
our Lord’s betrayal. First, concentrate your thoughts upon 
Jesus, the betrayed one. And when you have lingered awhile there, 
solemnly gaze into the villainous countenance of Judas, the 


i43 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


betrayer — he may prove a beacon to warn us against the sin 
which genders apostasy. 

I. LET US TARRY AWHILE, AND SEE OUR LORD 
UNGRATEFULLY AND DASTARDLY BETRAYED. 

It is appointed that He must die, but how shall He fall into 
the hands of His adversaries? Shall they capture Him in conflict? 
It must not be, lest He appear an unwilling victim. Shall He flee 
before His foes until He can hide no longer? It is not meet that 
a sacrifice should be hunted to death. Shall He offer Himself 
to the foe? That would be to excuse His murderers, or be a 
party to their crime! Shall He be taken accidentally or unawares? 
That would withdraw from His cup the necessary bitterness 
which made it wormwood mingled with gall. No — He must be 
betrayed by His friend that He may bear the utmost depths of 
suffering, and that in every separate circumstance there may be 
a well of grief! One reason for the appointment of the betrayal 
lay in the fact that it was ordained that man’s sin should reach its 
culminating point in His death. God, the great owner of the 
vineyard, had sent many servants, and the farmers had stoned 
one, and cast out another. Last of all, He said, “I will send My 
Son; surely they will reverence My Son.” When they slew the 
heir to win the inheritance, their rebellion had reached its 
height. The murder of our blessed Lord was the extreme of 
human guilt — it developed the deadly hatred against God 
which lurks in the heart of man. When man became a deicide, 
sin had reached its fullness; and in the black deed of the man 
by whom the Lord was betrayed, that fullness was all displayed. 
If it had not been for a Judas, we had not known how black, 
how foul our human nature may become! I scorn the men who 
try to apologize for the treachery of this devil in human form, 
this son of perdition, this foul apostate! I would think myself a 
villain if I tried to screen him, and I shudder for the men who 
dare extenuate his crimes! My brothers and sisters, we should 


144 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


feel a deep detestation of this master of infamy; he has gone to 
his own place, and the anathema of David, part of which was 
quoted by Peter, has come upon him, “When he shall be judged, 
let him be condemned, and let his prayer become sin. Let his 
days be few; and let another take his office.” Surely, as the devil 
was allowed unusually to torment the bodies of men, even so 
was he let loose to get possession of Judas, as he has seldom 
gained possession of any other man — that we might see how 
foul, how desperately evil, is the human heart! Beyond a doubt, 
however, the main reason for this was that Christ miglot offer a 
perfect atonement for sin. We may usually read the sin in the 
punishment. Man betrayed his God. Man had the custody of 
the royal garden, and should have kept its green avenues sacred 
for communion with his God; but he betrayed the trust; the 
sentinel was false; he admitted evil into his own heart, and so 
into the paradise of God. He was false to the good name of the 
Creator, tolerating the insinuation which he should have 
repelled with scorn. Therefore must Jesus find man a traitor to 
Him! There must be the counterpart of the sin, in the suffering 
which He endured. You and I have often betrayed Christ; we 
have, when tempted, chosen the evil, and forsaken the good; 
we have taken the bribes of hell, and have not followed closely 
with Jesus. It seemed most fitting, then, that He who bore the 
chastisement of sin should be reminded of its ingratitude and 
treachery, by the things which He suffered. 

Besides, brothers and sisters, that cup must be bitter to the last 
degree which is to be the equivalent for the wrath of God. There must be 
nothing consolatory in it; pains must be taken to pour into it all 
that even Divine wisdom can invent of awful and unheard of 
woe, and this one point — “He that eats bread with Me has 
lifted up his heel against Me,” was absolutely necessary to 
intensify the bitterness! Moreover, we feel persuaded that by 
thus suffering at the hand of a traitor, the Cord became a faithful 


i45 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


High Priest, able to sympathize with us when we fall under the 
like affliction. Since slander and ingratitude are common 
calamities, we can come to Jesus with full assurance of faith; 
He knows these sore temptations, for He has felt them in their 
very worst degree! We may cast every care and every sorrow 
upon Him, for He cares for us, having suffered with us. Thus, 
in our Lord’s betrayal, Scripture was fulfilled, sin was developed, 
atonement was completed, and the great all-suffering High 
Priest became able to sympathize with us in every point! 

Now let us look at the treason itself. You perceive how black 
it was. Judas was Christ’s servant. What if I call him His 
confidential servant? He was a partaker in apostolic ministry, 
and in the honor of miraculous gifts. He had been most kindly 
and indulgently treated. He was a sharer in all the goods of his 
Master — in fact he fared far better than his Lord — for the Man 
of Sorrows always took the lion’s share of all the pains of 
poverty and the reproach of slander. He had food and raiment 
given him out of the common stock and the Master seems to 
have indulged him very greatly. The old tradition is, that next 
to the aposde Peter, he was the one with whom the Savior most 
commonly associated. We think there must be a mistake there, 
for surely John was the Savior’s greatest friend; but Judas, as a 
servant, had been treated with the utmost confidence. You 
know, brothers and sisters, how sore is that blow which comes 
from a servant in whom we have put unlimited trust. But Judas 
was more than this — he was a friend, a trusted friend. That litde bag 
into which generous women cast their small contributions had 
been put into his hands, and very wisely, too, for he had the 
financial vein. His main virtue was economy, a very necessary 
quality in a treasurer. As exercising a prudent foresight for the 
little company, and watching the expenses carefully, he was, as 
far as men could judge, the right man in the right place. He had 
been thoroughly trusted. I read not that there was any annual 


146 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


audit of his accounts; I do not discover that the Master took 
him to task as to the expenditure of his privy purse; everything 
was given to him, and he gave, at the Master’s direction, to the 
poor, but no account was asked. This is vile, indeed, to be 
chosen to such a position, to be installed purse-bearer to the 
King of kings, Chancellor of God’s treasury, and then to turn 
aside and sell the Savior! This is treason in its uttermost degree! 
Remember, that the world looked upon Judas as colleague and 
partner with our Lord! To a great extent, the name of Judas was 
associated with that of Christ. When Peter, James, or John had 
done anything amiss, reproachful tongues threw it all on their 
Master. The 12 were part and parcel of Jesus of Nazareth. One 
old commentator says of Judas — “He was Christ’s alter ego” — 
to the people at large there was an identification of each apostle 
with the leader of the band. And oh, when such associations 
have been established, and then there is treachery, it is as 
though our arm should commit treason against our head, or as 
if our foot should desert the body! This was a stab, indeed! 
Perhaps, dear brothers and sisters, our Lord saw in the person 
of Judas a representative man, the portraiture of the many 
thousands who in later ages imitated his crime. Did Jesus see in 
Iscariot all the Judases who betray truth, virtue and the cross? 
Did He perceive the multitudes of whom we may say that they 
were, spiritually, in the loins of Judas? Hymenaeus, Alexander, 
Hermogenes, Philetus, Demas, and others of that tribe, were 
all before Him as He saw the man — His equal, His 
acquaintance — bartering Him away for 30 pieces of silver. 

Dear friends, the position of Judas must have tended 
greatly to aggravate his treason. Even the heathens have taught 
us that ingratitude is the worst of vices. When Caesar was 
stabbed by his friend Brutus, the world’s poet writes — 


i47 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“This was the unkindest cut of all; 

For when the noble Caesar saw him stab, 

Ingratitude, more strong than traitor’s arms, 

Quite vanquished him; then burst his mighty heart; 

And, in his mande muffling up his face, 

Even at the base of Pompey’s statue — 
great Caesar fell.” 

Many ancient stories, both Greek and Roman, we might 
quote to show the abhorrence which the heathens entertain 
towards ingratitude and treachery. Certain, also, of their own 
poets, such, for instance, as Sophocles, have poured out 
burning words upon deceitful friends; but we have no time to 
prove what you will all admit, that nothing can be more cruel, 
nothing more full of anguish, than to be sold to destruction by 
one’s bosom friend. The closer the enemy comes, the deeper 
will be the stab he gives; if we admit him to our heart, and give 
him our close intimacy, then can he wound us in the most vital 
part. 

Let us notice, dear friends, while we look at the breaking 
heart of our agonizing Savior, the manner in which He met this 
affliction. He had been much in prayer — prayer had overcome 
His dreadful agitation — He was very calm. And we need to be 
very calm when we are forsaken by a friend. Observe His 
gentleness; the first words He spoke to Judas, when the traitor 
had polluted His cheek with a kiss, was this — “FRIEND!” 
FRIEND!! Note that! Not, “You hateful villain,” but “Friend, 
why have you come?” Not, “Wretch, why do you dare to stain 
My cheek with your foul and lying lips?” No, “Friend, why have 
you come?” Ah, if there had been anything good left in Judas, 
this would have brought it out; if he had not been an 
unmitigated, incorrigible, thrice-dyed traitor, his avarice would 
have lost its power at that instant, and he would have cried — 


148 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


“My Master! I came to betray You; but that generous word has 
won my soul. Here, if You must be bound, I will be bound with 
You; I make a full confession of my infamy!” Our Lord added 
these words — there is reproof in them, but notice how kind 
they are, still, how much too good, for such a despicable 
coward — “Judas, betray you the Son of Man with a kiss?” I can 
conceive that the tears gushed from His eyes, and that His 
voice faltered, when He thus addressed His own familiar friend 
and acquaintance — “Betray you,” My Judas, My treasurer, 
“Betray you the Son of Man, ” your suffering, sorrowing friend, 
whom you have seen naked and poor, and without a place 
whereon to lay His head? Betray you the Son of Man — and do 
you prostitute the fondest of all endearing signs — a kiss — that 
which should be a symbol of loyalty to the King, shall it be the 
badge of your treachery — that which was reserved for affection 
as her best symbol — do you make it the instrument of My 
destruction? Betray you the Son of Man with a kiss?” Oh, if he 
had not been given up to hardness of heart, if the Holy Spirit 
had not utterly left him, surely this son of perdition would have 
fallen prostrate, yet again, and weeping out his very soul, would 
have cried — “No, I cannot betray You, You suffering Son of 
Man! Forgive, forgive me! Spare Yourself, escape from this 
bloodthirsty crew, and pardon Your treacherous disciple!” But 
no, no word of compunction, while the silver is at stake! 
Afterwards came the sorrow that works death, which drove 
him, like Ahithophel, his prototype, to court the gallows to 
escape remorse. This, also, must have aggravated the woe of 
our beloved Lord, when He saw the final impenitence of the 
traitor, and read the tearful doom of that man of whom He had 
once said, it would be better for him that he had never been 
born. 

Beloved, I would have you fix your eyes on your Lord in 
your quiet meditations, as being thus despised and rejected of 


149 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


men, a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and gird up 
the loins of your minds, counting it no strange thing if this fiery 
trial should come upon you, but be determined, that though 
your Lord should be betrayed by His most eminent disciples, 
yet, through His divine grace you will cling to Him in shame, 
and in suffering, and will follow Him, if necessary, even unto 
death. God give us grace to see the vision of His nailed hands 
and feet, and remembering that all this came from the treachery 
of a friend, let us be very jealous of ourselves, lest we crucify 
the Lord afresh — and put Him to an open shame, by betraying 
Him in our conduct, or in our words, or in our thoughts! 

II. Grant me your attention, while we make an estimate of 
the man, by whom the Son of Man was betrayed — -JUDAS THE 
BETRAYER. 

I would call your attention, dear friends, to his position and 
public character. Judas was a preacher — no, he was a foremost 
preacher! “He obtained part of this ministry,” said the Apostle 
Peter. He was not simply one of the seventy. He had been 
selected by the Lord, Himself, as one of the twelve, an 
honorable member of the college of the aposdes. Doubtless, 
he had preached the gospel so that many had been gladdened 
by his voice, and miraculous powers had been vouchsafed to 
him — so that, at his word the sick had been healed, deaf ears 
had been opened, and the blind had been made to see. There is 
no doubt that he who could not keep the devil out of himself, 
had cast devils out of others. Yet how are you fallen from 
heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! He who was as a 
prophet in the midst of the people, and spoke with the tongue 
of the learned, whose word and wonders proved that he had 
been with Jesus, and had learned of Him — he betrays his Master! 
LTnderstand, my brothers and sisters, that no gifts can guarantee 
divine grace, and that no position of honor or usefulness in the 
Church, will necessarily prove our being true to our Lord and 


150 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


Master. Doubtless, there are bishops in hell, and crowds of 
those who once occupied the pulpit are now condemned 
forever to bewail their hypocrisy. You, who are Church officers, 
do not conclude that because you enjoy the confidence of the 
Church, that therefore, of an absolute certainty, the grace of 
God is in you! Perhaps, it is the most dangerous of all positions, 
for a man to become well known and much respected by the 
religious world, and yet to be rotten at the core. To be where 
others can observe our faults is a healthy thing, though painful; 
but to live with beloved friends, who would not believe it 
possible for us to do wrong, and who, if they saw us err, would 
make excuses for us — this is to be where it is next to impossible, 
for us ever to be awakened if our hearts are not right with God! 
To have a fair reputation and a false heart is to stand upon the 
brink of hell! 

Judas took a very high degree officially. He had the distinguished 
honor of being entrusted with the Master’s financial concerns, 
and this, after all, was no small degree to which to attain. The 
Lord, who knows how to use all sorts of gifts, perceived what 
gift the man had; He knew that Peter’s unthinking impetuosity 
would soon empty the bag and leave the company in great 
straits. And if He had entrusted it to John, his loving spirit 
might have been cajoled into unwise benevolence, towards 
beggars of unctuous tongue. John might even have spent the 
litde moneys in buying alabaster boxes, whose precious 
ointments should anoint the Master’s head! He gave the bag to 
Judas, and it was discreetly, prudently and properly used; there 
is no doubt, he was the most judicious person, and fitted to 
occupy the post. But oh, dear friends, if the Master shall choose 
any of us who are ministers or Church officers, and give us a 
very distinguished position; if our place in the ranks shall be 
that of commanding officers, so that even our brother 
ministers look up with esteem, and our fellow elders or deacons 


151 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


regard us as being fathers in Israel — oh, if we turn, if we prove 
false — how damnable shall be our end at the last! What a blow 
shall we give to the heart of the Church, and what derision will 
be made in hell! 

You will observe that the character of Judas was openly an 
admirable one. I find not that he committed himself in any way. 
Not the slightest speck defiled his moral character, so far as 
others could perceive. He was no boaster, like Peter. He was 
free enough from the rashness which cries, “Though all men 
should forsake You, yet will I not!” He asks no place on the 
right hand of the throne — his ambition is of another sort — he 
does not ask idle questions. The Judas who asks questions is, 
“not Iscariot.” Thomas and Philip are often prying into deep 
matters, but not Judas. He receives the truth of God as it is 
taught him, and when others are offended, and walk no more 
with Jesus, he faithfully adheres to Him, having golden reasons 
for so doing! He does not indulge in the lusts of the flesh or in 
the pride of life. None of the disciples suspected him of 
hypocrisy. They said at the table, “Lord, is it I?” They never 
said, “Lord, is it Judas?” It was true he had been stealing for 
months, but then, he did it by small amounts, and covered his 
crimes so well by financial manipulations, that he ran no risk of 
detection from the honest, unsuspecting fishermen with whom 
he associated. Like some merchants and traders we have heard 
of — invaluable gentlemen as chairmen of speculating 
companies, and general managers of swindling banks — he 
could abstract a decent percentage and yet make the accounts 
exactly tally. The gentlemen, who have learned of Judas, 
manage to cook the accounts most admirably for the 
shareholders, so as to get a rich roast for their own table, over 
which they, no doubt, entreat the divine blessing! Judas was, in 
his known life, a most admirable person; he would have been 
an alderman before long, there is no doubt, and being very 


152 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


pious and richly gifted, his advent at churches or chapels would 
have created intense satisfaction. “What a discreet and 
influential person,” say the deacons. “Yes,” replies the minister, 
“what an acquisition to our councils. If we could elect him to 
office, he would be of eminent service to the Church.” I believe 
that the Father chose him as aposde on purpose, that we might 
not be at all surprised, if we find such a man a minister in the 
pulpit, or a colleague of the minister, working as an officer in 
Christ’s Church. These are solemn things, my brothers and 
sisters; let us take them to heart, and if any of us wear a good 
character among men and stand high in office, let this question 
come home close to us — “Lord, is it I? Lord, is it I?” Perhaps, 
he who shall last ask the question is just the man who ought to 
have asked it first! 

But, secondly, I call your attention to his real nature and sin. 
Judas was a man with a conscience. He could not afford to do 
without it. He was no Sadducee who could fling religion 
overboard; he had strong religious tendencies. He was no 
debauched person; he never spent a two-pence on vice in his 
life, not that he loved vice less, but that he loved the two-pence 
more. Occasionally he was generous, but then it was with other 
people’s money. Well did he watch his lovely charge, the bag. 
He had a conscience, I say, and a ferocious conscience it was, 
when it once broke the chain, for it was his conscience which 
made him hang himself! But then, it was a conscience that did 
not sit regularly on the throne — it reigned by fits and starts. 
Conscience was not the leading element; avarice predominated 
over conscience; he would get money, if honesdy — he liked 
that best, but if he could not get it conscientiously, then 
anyhow in the world. He was but a small trader — his gains were 
no great things, or else he would not have sold Christ for so 
small a sum as that — ten pounds at the outside, of our money, 
at its present value — some three or four pounds, as it were, in 


i53 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


those days. It was a poor price to take for the Master; but then, 
a little money was a great thing to him. He had been poor; he 
had joined Christ with the idea that He would soon be 
proclaimed King of the Jews, and that then, he should become 
a nobleman and be rich. Finding Christ a long while in coming 
to His kingdom, he had taken little by litde, enough to lay by in 
store; and now, fearing that he was to be disappointed in all his 
dreams, and never having had any care for Christ, but only for 
himself, he gets out of what he thinks to have been a gross 
mistake, in the best way he can, and makes money by his 
treason against his Lord! Brothers and sisters, I do solemnly 
believe that of all hypocrites, these are the persons of whom 
there is the least hope — whose god is their money! You may 
reclaim a drunkard — thank God — we have seen many 
instances of that; and even a fallen Christian, who has given 
way to vice, may loathe his lust and return from it; but I fear 
that the cases, in which a man who is cankered with 
covetousness has ever been saved, are so few, that they might 
be written on your fingernail. This is a sin which the world does 
not rebuke; the most faithful minister can scarcely smite its 
forehead. God knows what thunders 1 have launched out 
against men who are all for this world and yet pretend to be 
Christ’s followers; but yet, they always say, “It is not for me.” 
What I would call stark naked covetousness, they call prudence, 
discretion, economy, and so on; and actions which I would 
scorn to spit upon, they will do, and think their hands quite 
clean after they have done them, and still sit as God’s people 
sit, and hear as God’s people hear, and think, that after they 
have sold Christ for paltry gain, they will go to heaven! O souls, 
souls, souls, beware, beware, and beware most of all of greed! 
It is not money, nor the lack of money, but the love of money, 
which is the root of all evil! It is not getting it — it is not even 
keepings — it is lovingit\ It is making it your God; it is looking at 


i54 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


that as the main chance, and not considering the cause of Christ, 
nor the truth of Christ, nor the holy life of Christ — but being 
ready to sacrifice everything for gains’ sake! Oh, such men 
make giants in sin; they shall be set up forever as butts for 
infernal laughter; their damnation shall be sure and just! 

The third point is, the warning which judas received, and the way 
in which he persevered. Just think — the night before he sold his 
Master — what do you think the Master did? Why, He washed 
his feet! And yet he sold Him! Such condescension! Such love! 
Such familiarity! He took a towel, and girded Himself, and 
washed Judas’ feet! And yet, those very feet brought Judas as a 
guide to them who took Jesus! And you remember what He 
said when He had washed his feet — “Now you are clean, but 
not all.” And He turned a tearful eye on Judas; what a warning 
for him! What could be more explicit? Then, when the Supper 
came, and they began to eat and drink together, the Lord said — 
“One of you shall betray Me.” That was plain enough. And a 
little farther on He said explicitly — “He that dips with Me in 
the dish, the same is he.” What opportunities for repentance! 
He cannot say he had not a faithful preacher; what could have 
been more personal? If he does not repent now, what is to be 
done? Moreover, Judas saw that which was enough to make a 
heart of adamant bleed — he saw Christ with agony on His face, 
for it was just after Christ had said, “Now is my soul troubled,” 
that Judas left the feast, and went out to sell his Master. That 
face, so full of grief, ought to have turned him, mustYiwz turned 
him, if he had not been given up and left alone — to deliver over 
his soul unto his own devices. What language could have been 
more thundering, than the words of Jesus Christ, when He said, 
“Woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed; it 
had been good for that man if he had not been born”? He had 
said, “Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil.” 
Now, if while these thunders rolled over his head, and the 


i55 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


lightning flashes pointed at his person, if, then, this man was 
not awakened, what a hell of infernal persistence and guilt must 
have been within his soul! Oh, but if any of you, if any of you 
shall sell Christ, for the sake of keeping the shop open on 
Sunday; if you shall sell Christ, for the extra wages you may 
earn for lies — oh, if you shall sell Christ, for the sake of the 
hundred pounds that you may lay hold of by a villainous 
contract — if you do that, you do not perish unwarned! I come 
into this pulpit to please no man among you! God knows if I 
knew more of your follies, you would have them pointed out 
yet more plainly! If I knew more of the tricks of business, I 
would not flinch to speak of them! But, O sirs, I do entreat you, 
by the blood of Judas, who hanged himself at last, turn — if such 
there are — turn from this evil, if by chance your sin may be 
blotted out! 

Let us for one minute notice the act itself. He sought out his 
own temptation. He did not wait for the devil to come to 
him — he went after the devil; he went to the chief priests and 
said, “What will you give me?” One of the old Puritan divines 
says, “This is not the way people generally trade — they state 
their own price.” Judas says, “What will you give me? Anything 
you like.” The Lord of life and glory sold at the buyer’s own 
price! “What will you give me?” And another very prettily puts 
it, “What could they give him? What did the man want? He did 
not want food and raiment. He fared as well as his Master and 
the other disciples; he had enough; he had all that his needs 
could crave, and yet he said, ‘What will you give me? What will 
you give me? What will you give me?’” Alas, some people’s 
religion is grounded on that one question — “What will you give 
me?” Yes, they would go to church if there are any charities 
given away there — but if there were more to be had by not 
going — they would do that. “What will you give me?” Some of 
these people are not even as wise as Judas. Ah, there is a man 


156 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


over yonder who would sell the Lord for a crown, much more 
for ten pounds, as Judas did! Why, there are some who will sell 
Christ for the smallest piece of silver in our currency; they are 
tempted to deny their Lord, tempted to act in an unhallowed 
way, though the gains are so paltry, that a year’s worth of them 
would not come to much! No subject could be more dreadful 
than this, if we really would but look at it carefully. This 
temptation happens to each of us. Do not deny it. We all like 
to gain; it is but natural that we should; the propensity to 
acquire is in every mind, and under lawful restrictions it is not 
an improper propensity; but when it comes into conflict with 
our allegiance to our Master — and in a world like this it often 
will — we must overcome it, or perish! There will arise 
occasions with some of you, many times in a week, in which it 
is “God — or gain.” “Christ or the 30 pieces of silver.” 
Therefore I am the more urgent in pressing this on you. Do 
not, though the world should bid its highest, though it should 
heap its comforts one upon another, and add fame, and honor, 
and respect — do not, I pray you, forsake your Master! There 
have been such cases — cases of persons who used to come 
here, but they found they did not get on — because Sunday was 
the best day’s trade in the week; they had some good feelings, 
some good impressions once, but they have lost them now. We 
have known others who have said, “Well, you see, I did once 
think I loved the Lord, but my business went so badly when I 
came up to the house of God, that I left it — I renounced my 
profession.” Ah, Judas! Ah, Judas! Ah, Judas! Let me call you 
by your name, for such you are! This is the sin of the apostate 
all over again! God help you to repent of it and go, not to any 
priest, but to Christ, and make confession, if by chance you 
may be saved! You perceive that in the act of selling Christ, 
Judas was faithful to his master. ‘Faithful to his master?” you 
say. Yes, his master was the devil, and having made an 


i57 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


agreement with him, he carried it out honesdy! Some people 
are always very honest with the devil; if they say they will do a 
wrong thing, they say they ought to do it because they said they 
would; as if any oath is binding on a man, even if it is an oath 
to do wrong! “I will never go into that house again,” some have 
said and they have said afterwards, “Well, I wish I had not said 
it.” Was it a wrong thing? What is your oath then? It was an 
oath given to the devil! What was that foolish promise, but a 
promise to Satan — and will you be faithful to him? Ah, would 
God that you were faithful to Christ! Would that any of us were 
as true to Christ, as Satan’s servants are to their master! 

Judas betrayed his Master with a kiss. That is how most 
apostates do it — it is always with a kiss. Did you ever read an 
infidel book in your life, which did not begin with profound 
respect for truth? I never have. Even modern ones, when 
bishops write them, always begin like that. They betray the Son 
of Man with a kiss! Did you ever read a book of bitter 
controversy, which did not begin with such a sickly lot of 
humility, such sugar, such butter, such syrup, such everything 
sweet and soft, that you said, “Ah, there is sure to be something 
bad here, for when people begin so sofdy and sweedy, so 
humbly and so smoothly, depend upon it — they have rank 
hatred in their hearts.” The most devout-looking people are 
often the most hypocritical in the world! 

We conclude with the repentance of Judas. He did repent; 
he did repent; but it was the repentance that works death. He 
did make a confession, but there was no respect to the deed 
itself — only to its consequences. He was very sorry that Christ 
was condemned. Some latent love that he had once had to a 
kind Master came up when he saw that He was condemned. He 
did not think, perhaps, it would come to that; he may have had 
a hope that He would escape out of their hands, and then he 
would keep his 30 pieces of silver, and perhaps sell Him over 


158 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


again. Perhaps, he thought that Jesus would rid Himself from 
their hands by some miraculous display of power, or would 
proclaim the kingdom, and so he, himself, would only be 
hastening on that very blessed consummation! Friends, the 
man who repents of consequences does NOT repent! The ruffian 
repents of the gallows, but not of the murder — and that is no 
repentance at all. Human law, of course, must measure sin by 
consequences, but God’s law does not. There is a point man 
on a railway who neglects Iris duty; there is a collision on the 
line, and people are killed; well, it is manslaughter of this man 
through his carelessness. But that point man, perhaps, many 
times before had neglected his duty, and no accident came of 
it. Then he walked home and said, “Well, I have done no 
wrong.” Now the wrong, mark you, is never to be measured by 
the accident, but by the thing itself. If you have committed an 
offense, and you have escaped undetected, it is just as vile in 
God’s eyes! If you have done wrong, and providence has 
prevented the natural result of the wrong, the honor of that is 
with God — you are as guilty as if your sin had been carried out 
to its fullest consequences, and the whole world set ablaze! 
Never measure sin by consequences, but repent of them as they 
are in themselves. 

Though being sorry for consequences, since these are 
unalterable, this man was led to remorse. He sought a tree, 
adjusted the rope, and hanged himself, but in his haste he 
hanged himself so badly, that the rope broke, he fell over a 
precipice, and there we read his insides gushed out. He laid a 
mangled mass at the bottom of the cliff, the horror of everyone 
who passed. Now you who make a gain of godliness — if there 
are such here — you may not come to a suicide’s end, but take 
the lesson home. Mr. Keach, my venerable predecessor, gives 
at the end of one of his volumes of sermons, the death of a Mr. 
John Child. John Child had been a Dissenting minister, and for 


i59 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the sake of gain, to get a living, he joined the Episcopalians 
against his conscience. He sprinkled infants, and practiced all 
the other paraphernalia of the Church against his conscience. 
At last, at last, he was filled with such terrors for having done 
what he had, that he renounced his living, took to a sick bed, 
and his dying oaths, and blasphemies, and curses were 
something so dreadful, that his case was the wonder of that age! 
Mr. Keach wrote a full account of it, and many went to try what 
they could do to comfort the man, but he would say, “Get out 
of here! Get out of here! It is of no use! I have sold Christ!” 
You remember, also, the terrible death of Francis Spira. In all 
literature, there is nothing so awful, as the death of Spira. The 
man had known the truth of God — he stood well among 
Reformers. He was an honored, and to a certain extent, 
apparendy a faithful man; but he went back to the Church of 
Rome! He apostatized, and then, when conscience was 
awakened, he did not fly to Christ, but he looked at the 
consequences instead of at the sin! And so, feeling that the 
consequences could not be altered, he forgot that the sin might 
be pardoned, and perished in extreme agonies. May it never be 
the unhappy lot of any of us to lay in such a deathbed, but the 
Lord have mercy upon us now, and make us search our hearts! 
Those of you who say, “We do not need this sermon,” are 
probably the persons who need it most. He who shall say, 
“Well, we have no Judas among us,” is probably a Judas himself. 
Oh, search yourselves! Turn out every cranny — look in every 
corner of your soul, to see whether your religion is for Christ’s 
sake, and for truth’s sake, and for God’s sake — or whether it is 
a profession which you take up because it is a respectable thing. 
Make sure it is not a profession which you keep up because it 
keeps you up! The Lord search and try us, and bring us to know 
our ways. 


160 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


494 The Betrayal - Luke 22:47-48 


And now, in conclusion — there is a Savior, and that Savior 
is willing to receive us now. If I am not a saint, I am a sinner. 
Would it not be best for all of us to go again to the fountain, 
and wash and be clean? Let each of us go anew, and say, 
“Master, You know what I am. I know not myself. But, if I am 
wrong, make me right. If I am right, keep me so. My trust is in 
You. Keep me now, for Your own sake, Jesus.” Amen. 


161 



495 The Greatest Trial on Record - Ps. 2:2 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, February 22nd, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take 
counsel together, against the Lord and against His anointed.” 

— Psalm 2:2 

AFTER OUR Lord had been betrayed by the false-hearted 
Judas, He was bound by the officers who had come to take 
Him; no doubt the cords were drawn as tight, and twisted as 
mercilessly as possible. If we believe the traditions of the 
fathers, these cords cut through the flesh even to the very 
bones, so that all the way from the garden to the house of 
Annas, His blood left a crimson trail. Our Redeemer was 
hurried along the road which crosses the brook Kidron. A 
second time He was made, like unto David, who passed over 
that brook, weeping as he went; and perhaps it was on this 
occasion that he drank of that foul brook by the way. The 
brook Kidron, you know, was that into which all the filth of 
the sacrifices of the temple was cast, and Christ, as though He 
were a foul and filthy thing, must be led to the black stream! 
He was led into Jerusalem by the sheep gate, the gate through 
which the lambs of the Passover, and the sheep for sacrifice 
were always driven. Litde did they understand that in so doing, 
they were again following out to the very letter the significant 
types which God had ordained in the law of Moses. They led, 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


I say, this Lamb of God through the sheep gate, and they 
hurried Him on to the house of Annas, the ex-high priest, who, 
either from his relationship to Caiaphas, from his natural ability, 
or his prominence in opposing the Savior, stood high in the 
opinion of the rulers. Here they made a temporary call, to 
gratify the bloodthirsty Annas with the sight of his Victim; and 
then, hastening on, they brought Him to the house of Caiaphas, 
some little distance off, where, though it was but a litde past 
the dead of night, many members of the Sanhedrin were 
assembled. In a very short time, no doubt informed by some 
speedy messenger, all the rest of the elders came together, and 
sat down with great delight to the malicious work at hand! Let 
us follow our Lord Jesus Christ, not, like Peter, afar off, but, 
like John, let us go in with Jesus into the high priest’s house, 
and when we have tarried awhile there, and have seen our 
Savior despitefully used, let us traverse the streets with Him, till 
we come to the hall of Pilate, and then to the palace of Herod, 
and then afterwards to the place called “The pavement,” where 
Christ is subjected to a shameful competition with Barabbas, 
the murderer, and where we hear the howling of the people, 
“Crucify Him! Crucify Him!” 

Brothers and sisters, as the Lord gave commandment 
concerning even the ashes and waste of the sacrifices, we ought 
to think no matter trivial which stands in connection with our 
great burnt offering! My admonition is, “Gather up the 
fragments which remain, that nothing be lost.” As goldsmiths 
sweep their shops to save even the filings of the gold, so every 
word of Jesus should be treasured up as very precious. But, 
indeed, the narrative to which I invite you is not unimportant. 
Things which were purposed of old, prophesied by seers, 
witnessed by aposdes, written by evangelists, and published by 
the ambassadors of God, are not matters of secondary interest, 
but deserve our solemn and devout attention! Let all our hearts 


163 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


be awed as we follow the King of kings in His pathway of 
shame and suffering. 

I. We come, then, to the hall of Caiaphas. After the mob 
had dragged our Lord from the house of Annas, they reached 
the palace of Caiaphas, and there a brief internal occurred before 
the high priest came forth to question the prisoner. How were 
those sad minutes spent? Was the poor Victim allowed a little 
pause to collect His thoughts, that He might face His accusers 
calmly? Far from it — Luke shall tell the pitiful story — “And the 
men that held Jesus mocked Him, and smote Him. And when 
they had blindfolded Him, they struck Him on the face, and 
asked Him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote You? And 
many other things blasphemously spoke they against Him.” 
The officers were pausing until the chairman of the court 
should please to have an interview with the prisoner, and 
instead of allowing the accused to take a litde rest before a trial 
so important, upon which His life and character depended, they 
spend all the time in venting their bitter malice upon Him! 
Observe how they insult His claim to the Messiahship! In effect, 
they mock Him thus — “You claim to be a prophet like Moses; 
You know things to come; if You are sent of God, prove it by 
identifying Your foes; we will put You on trial, and test You, O 
man of Nazareth.” They blindfold His eyes and then, smiting 
Him one after another, they bid Him exercise His prophetic 
gift for their amusement, and prophesy who it was that smote 
Him. Oh, shameful question! How gracious was the silence, for 
an answer might have withered them forever! The day shall 
come when all who smite Christ shall find that He has seen 
them, though they thought His eyes were blinded! The day shall 
come, blasphemer, worldling, careless man, when everything 
that you have done against Christ’s cause, and Christ’s people, 
shall be published before the eyes of men and angels — and 
Christ shall answer your question — and shall tell you who it is 


164 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


who smote Him! I speak to some this morning who have 
forgotten that Christ sees them; and they have ill-treated His 
people; they have spoken ill of His holy cause, saying, “How 
does God know? And is there knowledge in the Most High?” I 
tell you, the Judge of men shall, before long, point you out, and 
make you, to your shame and confusion, confess that you 
smote the Savior when you smote His Church! 

This preliminary mockery being over, Caiaphas, the high 
priest came in. He began, at once, to interrogate the Lord prior 
to the public trial, doubdess with the view of catching Him in 
His speech. The high priest asked Him, first, of his disciples. We 
do not know what questions he asked; perhaps they were 
something like these — “What do You mean, to allow a rabble 
to follow You wherever You go? Who are You, that You 
should have 12 persons always attending You, and calling You 
Master? Do You intend to make these the leaders of a band of 
men? Are these to be Your lieutenants, to raise a host on Your 
behalf? Or do You pretend to be a prophet, and are these the 
sons of the prophets who follow You, as Elisha did Elijah? 
Moreover, where are they? Where are Your gallant followers? If 
You are a good man, why are they not here to bear witness to 
You? Where have they gone? Are they not ashamed of their 
folly, now that Your promises of honor all end in shame?” The 
high priest, “asked Him of His disciples.” Our Lord Jesus, on 
this point, said not a syllable. Why this silence? Because it is not 
for our Advocate to accuse His disciples! He might have 
answered, “Well do you ask, ‘Where are they?’ The cowards 
forsook Me! When one proved a traitor, the rest took to their 
heels. You ask, ‘Where are My disciples?’ There is one ponder, 
sitting by the fire, warming his hands, the same who just now 
denied Me with an oath.” But no, He would not utter a word 
of accusation; He whose lips are mighty to intercede for His 
people, will never speak against them! Let Satan slander, but 


165 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Christ pleads! The accuser of the brothers and sisters is the 
prince of this world — the Prince of peace is always our 
Advocate before the eternal throne! 

The high priest next shifted his ground, and asked Him 
concerning His doctrine — what it was that He taught — whether 
what He taught did not contradict the original teachings of their 
great lawgiver Moses — and whether He had not railed at the 
Pharisees, reviled the Scribes, and exposed the rulers. The 
Master gave a noble answer. Truth is never shamefaced — He 
boldly points to His public life as His best answer. “I spoke 
openly to the world; I always taught in the synagogue, and in 
the temple, where the Jews always resort; and in secret have I 
said nothing. Why ask Me? Ask them who heard Me, what I 
have said unto them: behold, they know what I said.” No 
sophistries — no attempt at evasion — the best armor for the 
truth is her own naked breast! He had preached in the market 
places, on the mountain’s brow, and in the temple courts; 
nothing had been done in a corner. Happy is the man who can 
make so noble a defense! Where is the weakness in such a 
harness? Where can the arrow pierce the man arrayed in so 
complete an armor? Little did that arch-knave Caiaphas gain by 
Iris crafty questioning. For the rest of the questioning, our Lord 
Jesus said not a word in self-defense; He knew that it availed 
not for a lamb to plead with wolves; He was well aware that 
whatever He said would be misconstrued and made a fresh 
source of accusation, and He willed, moreover, to fulfill the 
prophecy, “He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a 
sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He opened not His 
mouth.” But what power He exerted in thus remaining silent! 
Perhaps nothing displays more fully the omnipotence of Christ 
than this power of self-control! Control the Deity? What power 
less than divine can attempt the task? Behold, my brothers and 
sisters, the Son of God does more than rule the winds, and 


166 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


command the waves, He restrains Himself. And when a word, a 
whisper, would have refuted His foes, and swept them to their 
eternal destruction, He “opened not His mouth.” He who 
opened His mouth for His enemies, will not utter a word for 
Himself! If ever silence were more than golden, it is this deep 
silence under infinite provocation! 

During this preliminary examination, our Lord allowed an 
outrage which needs a passing notice. When He had said, “Ask 
them who hear Me,” some over-zealous person in the crowd 
struck Him in the face. The margin in John 18:22 very properly 
corrects our version, and renders the passage, “with a rod.” 
Now, considering that our blessed Lord suffered so much, this 
one little particular might seem unimportant, only it happens 
to be the subject of prophecy in the book of Micah 5:1, “They 
shall smite the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.” This 
smiting, while under trial, is peculiarly atrocious. To strike a 
man while he is pleading in his own defense, would surely be a 
violation of the laws even of barbarians! It brought Paul’s blood 
into his face and made him lose his balance when the high 
priest ordered them to smite him on the mouth. I think I hear 
his words of burning indignation — “God shall smite you, you 
whited wall; for do you sit to judge me after the law, and 
command me to be smitten contrary to the law?” How soon 
the servant loses his temper! How far more glorious the 
meekness of the Master! What a contrast do these gentle words 
afford us — “If I have spoken evil, bear witness to the evil. But 
if well, why do you smite Me?” This was such a concentrated 
infamy, to strike a man while pleading for his life, that it well 
deserved the notice both of evangelist and prophet. 

But now, the court are all sitting the members of the great 
Sanhedrin are all in their various places, and Christ is brought 
forth for the public trial before the highest ecclesiastical court. 
It is, mark you, a foregone conclusion that by hook or crook 


167 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


they will find Him guilty! They scour the neighborhood for 
witnesses. There were fellows to be found in Jerusalem, like 
those who in the olden times frequented the Old Bailey — 
“straw witnesses” — who were ready to be bought on either side, 
and, provided they were well paid, would swear to anything! 
But for all this, though the witnesses were ready to perjure 
themselves, they could not agree with one another; being heard 
separately, their tales did not tally! At last, two came with some 
degree of similarity in their witness; they were both liars, but 
for once the two liars had struck the same note. They declared 
that He said, “I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, 
and within three days I will build another made without hands,” 
(Mark 14:58). Now, here was, first, misquotation. He never said, 
“I will destroy the temple.” His words were, “Destroy this 
temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” See how they add 
to His words, and twist them to their own ends? Then again, 
they not only misquoted the words, but they misrepresented 
the sense, willfully, because He spoke concerning the temple of 
His body, and not the literal temple in which they worshipped; 
and this they must have known. He said, “Destroy this 
temple” — and the accompanying action might have showed 
them that He meant His own body, which was raised by His 
glorious resurrection after destruction upon the cross. Let us 
add that even when thus misrepresented, the witness was not 
sufficient as the foundation for a capital charge. Surely there 
could be nothing worthy of death in a man’s saying, “Destroy 
this temple, and I will build it in three days.” A person might 
make use of those words a thousand times over — he might be 
very foolish, but he would not be guilty of death for such an 
offense! But where men have made up their minds to hate 
Christ, they will hate Him without a cause. Oh, you who are 
adversaries of Christ — and there are some such here today — I 
know you try to invent some excuse for your opposition to His 


168 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


holy religion! You forge a hundred lies! But you know that your 
witness is not true, and the trial in your conscience, through 
which you pass the Savior, is but a mock one! Oh that you were 
wise, and would understand Him to be what He is, and submit 
yourselves to Him now. 

Finding that their witness, even when tortured to the 
highest degree, was not strong enough, the high priest, to get 
matter of accusation, commanded Him by the Most High God to 
answer whether He was the Christ, “the Son of the Blessed.” 
Being thus entreated, our Master would not set us an example 
of cowardice — He spoke to purpose — He said, “1 am, ” (Mark 
14:62), and then, to show how fully He knew this to be true, 
He added, “You shall see the Son of man sitting on the right 
hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.” I cannot 
understand what Unitarians do with this incident! Christ was 
put to death on a charge of blasphemy, for having declared 
Himself to be the Son of God. Was not that the time when any 
sensible person would have denied the accusation? If He had 
not really claimed to be the Son of God, would He not now have 
spoken? Would He not now, once and for all, have delivered our 
minds from the mistake under which we are laboring, if, indeed, 
it is a mistake, that He is the Son of God? But no, He seals it 
with His blood! He bears open testimony before the herd of 
His accusers! “I am.” I am the Son of God, and I am the sent 
one of the Most High. Now, now the thing is done! They need 
no further evidence! The judge, forgetting the impartiality 
which becomes his station, pretends to be amazingly struck 
with horror, tears his garments, turns round to ask his co- 
assessors whether they need any further witness, and they, all 
too ready, hold up their hands in token of unanimity and our 
precious Master is at once condemned to die! Ah, brothers and 
sisters — and no sooner condemned, than the high priest, 
stepping down from his divan, spits in His face! And then, the 


169 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Sanhedrin follow, and smite Him on His cheeks; and then, they 
turn Him down to the rabble who had gathered in the court, 
and they buffet Him from one to the other, and spit upon His 
blessed cheeks, and smite Him; and then, they play the old 
game again, which they had learned so well before the trial 
came on; they blindfold Him for a second time, place Him in a 
chair, and as they smite Him with their fists, they cry, “Prophet! 
Prophet! Prophet! Who is it that smote You? Prophesy unto 
us!” And thus, the Savior passed a second time through that 
most brutal and humiliating treatment. If we had tears, if we 
had sympathies, if we had hearts — we would prepare to shed 
those tears, to awake those sympathies, and break those hearts 
now! O Lord of life and glory! How shamefully were You treated 
by those who pretended to be the curators of holy truth, the 
conservators of integrity, and the teachers of the law! 

Having thus sketched the trial as briefly as I could, let me 
just say that throughout the whole of this trial before the 
ecclesiastical tribunal, it is manifest that they did all they could 
to pour contempt upon His two claims — to Deity and to 
Messiahship. Now, friends, this morning — this morning, as 
truly as on that eventful occasion — you and I must decide on 
which of the two sides we are on. Either this day we must 
cheerfully acknowledge His Godhead, and accept Him also as 
the Messiah, the Savior promised of old to us, or else we must 
take our post with those who are the adversaries of God and 
of His Christ! Will you ask yourself the question, on which side 
will you now stand? I pray you, do not think that Christ’s Deity 
needs any further proof than that which this one court gives. 
My dear friends, there is no religion under heaven, no false 
religion, which would have dared to hazard such a statement — 
for that yonder man who was spit upon, and buffeted, was 
none other than Incarnate God! No false religion would 
venture to draw upon the credulity of its followers to that 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


extent. What? That man there who speaks not a word, who is 
mocked, despised, rejected, made nothing of — what? — He is 
“very God of very God?” You do not find Mohammed, nor 
any false prophet, asking any person to believe a doctrine so 
extraordinary! They know too well that there is a limit, even to 
human faith, and they have not ventured upon such a 
marvelous assertion as this, that yonder despised man is none 
other than the Upholder of all things! No false religion would 
have taught a truth so humbling to him who is its founder and 
lord! Besides, it is not in the power of any man-made religion 
to have conceived such a thought! That Deity should willingly 
submit to be spit upon to redeem those whose mouths vented 
the spittle! In what book do you read such a wonder as this? 
We have pictures drawn from imagination — we have been 
enchanted along romantic pages — and we have marveled at the 
creative flights of human genius; but where did you ever read 
such a thought as this — “God was made flesh and dwelt among 
us”? He was despised, scourged, mocked, treated as though He 
were the offscouring of all things? He was brutally treated, 
worse than a dog, and all out of pure Love to His enemies? 
Why, the thought is such a great one, so God-like; the 
compassion in it is so divine, that it must be true! None but God 
could have thought of such a thing as this stoop from the 
highest throne in heaven to the cross of deepest shame and 
woe! And do you think that if the doctrine of the cross were 
not true, such effects would follow from it? Would those South 
Sea Islands, once red with the blood of cannibalism, be now 
the abode of sacred song and peace? Would this island, once 
itself the place of naked savages, be what it is, through the 
influence of the benign gospel of God, if that gospel were a lie? 
Ah, hallowed mistake, indeed, to produce such peaceful, such 
blessed, such lasting, such divine results! Ah, He is God! The 
thing is not false! And that He is Messiah, who shall doubt? If 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


God should send a prophet, what better prophet could you 
desire? What character would you seek to have exhibited more 
completely Human and divine? What sort of a Savior would 
you wish for? What could better satisfy the cravings of 
conscience? Who could commend Himself more fully to the 
affections of the heart? He must be, we feel at once, as we see 
Him, one alone by Himself, with no competitor — He must be 
the Messiah of God! 

Come, now, sirs, on which side will you set yourselves? Will 
you smite Him? I put the question — “Who is it that will smite 
Him this day? Who is it that will spit upon Him this day?” “I 
will not,” says one, “but I do not accept nor believe in Him.” 
In that, you smite Him, fool! “I do not hate Him,” says another, 
“but I am not saved by Him.” In refusing His love, you smite 
Him! Whoever among you will not trust Him with your soul — 
in that, you smite Him, smite Him in the most tender part — 
since you impugn His love and power to save! Oh, “Kiss the 
Son, lest He be angry, and you perish from the way, when His 
wrath is kindled but a little.” That suffering man stands in the 
place of everyone who will believe on Him. Trust Him! Trust 
Him! — you have then accepted Him as your God, as your 
Messiah! Refuse to trust Him — you have smitten Him; and you 
may think it little to do this today — but when He rides upon 
the clouds of heaven, you will see your sin in its true light, and 
you will shudder to think that you ever could have refused Him 
who now reigns, “King of kings, and Lord of lords.” God help 
you to accept Him, as your God and Christ, today! 

II. But our time flies too rapidly, and we must hasten with 
it, and accompany our Savior to another place. 

The Romans had taken away from the Jews the power to 
put a person to death. The Jews sometimes still did it, but they 
did it, as in the case of Stephen, by popular tumult. Now, in our 
Savior’s case, they could not do this because there was still a 


172 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


strong feeling in favor of Christ among the people. A feeling 
so strong, that had they not been bribed by the rulers, they 
would never have said, “Crucify Him! Crucify Him!” You will 
remember that the priests and rulers did not arrest Him on the 
feast day, “lest,” they said, “There be a tumult among the 
people.” Besides, the Jewish way of putting a person to death 
was by stoning — therefore, unless there was a sufficient 
number of persons who hated Him, a person would never get 
put to death at all. That is why the method of putting to death 
by stoning was chosen, because if a person was generally 
thought to be innocent, very few persons would stone him, and 
although he would be somewhat maimed, his life might 
possibly be spared. They thought, therefore, the Savior might 
escape as He did at other times, when they took up stones to 
stone Him. Moreover, they desired to put Him to the death of 
the accursed; they would identify Him with slaves, and 
criminals, and hang him like the Canaanite kings of old! 
Therefore, they took him away to Pilate. The distance was 
about a mile. He was bound in the same cruel manner, and was 
doubtless cut by the cords, He had already suffered most 
dreadfully; remember the bloody sweat of last Sunday week; 
then, remember that He has already twice been beaten; and He 
is now hurried along, without any rest or refreshment, just as 
the morning is breaking, along the streets to the palace where 
Pilate lived, perhaps the tower of Antonia, close to the temple 
itself — we are not quite sure. He is bound and they hurry Him 
along the road; and here the Roman writers supply a great 
number of particulars of anguish out of their very fertile 
imaginations. After they had brought Him there, a difficulty 
occurred. These holy people, these very righteous elders, could 
not come into the company of Pilate, because Pilate, being a 
Gentile, would defile them! Now, there was a broad space 
outside the palace, like a raised platform, called “The pavement,” 


i73 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


where Pilate was likely to sit on those high days, that he might 
not touch these blessed Jews! So he came out on the pavement, 
and they, themselves, went not into the hall, but remained 
before “The pavement.” Always notice that sinners who can 
swallow camels will strain at gnats! Crowds of men who will do 
great sins are very much afraid of committing some litde things 
which they think will affect their religion! Notice, that many a 
man who is a big thief during the week, will ease his conscience 
by rigid Sabbatarianism when the day comes round; in fact, 
most hypocrites run for shelter to some close observance of 
days, ceremonies and observations — when they have slighted 
the weightier matters of the law! 

Well, Pilate receives Jesus bound. The charge brought 
against Him was not, of course, blasphemy; Pilate would have 
laughed at that, and declined all interference. They accused 
Him of stirring up sedition, pretending to be a king, and 
teaching that it was not right to pay tribute to Caesar. This last 
charge was a clear and manifest lie! He, refuse to pay tribute? 
Did not He send to the fish’s mouth to get the money? He, say 
that Caesar must not have his due? Did He not tell the 
Herodians — “Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s?” 
He, stir up a sedition? — the man that had “not where to lay His 
head?” He, pretend to snatch the diadem from Caesar? — He, 
the man who hid Himself when the people would have taken 
Him by force and made Him a king? Nothing can be more 
atrociously false! Pilate examines him, and discovers at once, 
both from His silence, and from His answer, that He is a most 
extraordinary person. He perceives that the kingdom which 
Jesus claims is something supernatural; He cannot understand 
it. He asks Him what He came into the world for — the reply 
puzzles and amazes him, “To bear witness to the truth,” says 
Jesus. Now, that was a thing no Roman understood — for a 
hundred years before Pilate came, Jugurtha said of the city of 


i74 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


Rome, “A city for sale” — bribery, corruption, lies, treachery, 
villainy — these were the gods of Rome, and truth had fled the 
seven hills! The very meaning of the word was scarcely known! 
So Pilate turned on his heel and said, “What is truth?” As much 
as to say, “I am the procurator of this part of the country. All 1 
care for is money. What’s truth?” I do not think he asked the 
question, “What is truth?” as some preach from it, as if he 
seriously desired to know what it really was, for surely he would 
have paused for the divine reply and not have gone away from 
Christ the moment afterwards. He said, “Pshaw! What’s truth?” 
Yet, there was something so amazing about the prisoner, that 
his wife’s dream, and her message — “See that you have nothing 
to do with this just person,” all worked upon the superstitious 
fears of this very weak-minded ruler. So he went back and told 
the Jews a second time, “I find no fault in Him.” And when 
they said, “He stirs up the people, teaching throughout alljewry, 
beginning at Galilee to this place.” Pilate caught at that word, 
“Galilee.” “Now,” he thought, “I will be rid of this man. The 
people shall have their way, and yet, I will not be guilty.” 
“Galilee?” he said. “Why, Herod is ruler there; you had better 
take Him to Herod at once.” He thus gained two or three 
points — he made Herod his friend — he hoped to exonerate 
himself of his crime — and yet please the mob. Away they go to 
Herod! Oh, I think I see that blessed Lamb of God again 
hounded through the streets! Did you ever read such a tale? No 
martyr, even in Bloody Mary’s time, was ever harried thus as 
the Savior was. We must not think that His agonies were all 
confined to the cross — they were endured in those streets — in 
those innumerable blows, and kicks, and strikes with the fist, 
that He had to bear! They took Him before Herod and Herod, 
having heard of His miracles, thought to see some wonderful 
thing, some piece of jugglery, done in his presence. And when 
Christ refused to speak, and would not plead before, “that fox,” 


i75 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


at all, Herod treated Him with a sneer. “They made nothing of 
Him.” Can you picture the scene? Herod, his captains, his 
lieutenants — and on down to the meanest soldiers — treat the 
Savior with a broad grin! “A pretty king,” they seem to say. 
“More like a miserable beggar! Look at His cheeks, all bruised 
where they have been smiting Him — is that the color of 
royalty’s complexion? Look,” they say, “He is emaciated. He is 
covered with blood, as though He had been sweating drops of 
blood all night. Is that the imperial purple?” And so, they “made 
nothing of Him,” and despised His kingship. And Herod said, 
“Bring out that cosdy white robe. If He is a king, let us dress 
Him so,” and so the white robe is put on Him — not a purple 
one — that, Pilate put on afterwards. He has two robes put on 
Him — the one put on by the Jews, the other by the Gentiles, 
seeming to be a fit comment on that passage in Solomon’s Song, 
where the spouse says, “My beloved is white and ruddy” — 
white with the gorgeous robe which marked Him King of the 
Jews, and then, red with the purple robe which Pilate 
afterwards cast upon His shoulders, which proved him King of 
nations, too! And so Herod and his men of war, after treating 
Jesus as shamefully as they could, looking at Him as some 
madman more fit for Bedlam than elsewhere, sent Him back 
again to Pilate. Oh, can you not follow Him? You need no great 
imagination — as you see them dragging Him back again! It is 
another journey along those streets; another scene of shameful 
tumult, bitter scorn, and cruel smiting. Why, He dies a hundred 
deaths, my brothers and sisters, it is not one — it is death on 
death the Savior bears, as He is dragged from tribunal to 
tribunal! 

Look, they bring Him to Pilate a second time! Pilate again 
is anxious to save Him; he says, “I have found no fault in this 
man touching those things whereof you accuse Him — no, and 
neither Herod — I will therefore release Him!” “No, no,” they 


176 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


say, and they clamor greatly. He proposes a cruel alternative, 
which yet He meant for tender mercy. “I will therefore chastise 
Him, and let Him go.” He gave Him over to his executioners 
to be scourged. The Roman scourge was, as I have explained 
before, a most dreadful instrument. It was made of the sinews 
of oxen, and litde sharp pieces of bone which, you know, cause 
the most frightful lacerations if by accident you even run your 
hand over them. Little sharp pieces, splinters of bone, were 
intertwisted here and there among the sinews. Every time the 
lash came down, some of these pieces of bone went right into 
the flesh and tore off heavy large pieces, and not only the blood 
but the very flesh would be rent away! The Savior was tied to 
the column and thus beaten; He had been beaten before — but 
this of the Roman executioner was probably the most severe 
of His whippings. After Pilate had beaten Him, he gave Him 
up to the soldiers for a short time, that they might complete the 
mockery, and so be able to witness that Pilate had no idea of 
the royalty of Jesus, and no complicity in any supposed treason. 
The soldiers put a crown of thorns on His head, and bowed 
before Him and spat on Him; they put a reed in His hands; they 
drove the crown of thorns into His temples; they covered Him 
with a purple robe. And then, Pilate brought Him out, saying, 
“Behold the man!” I believe he did it out of pity. He thought, 
“Now, I have wounded Him, and cut Him to pieces. I will not 
kill Him. This sight will move their hearts.” Oh, that Ecce Homo 
ought to have melted their hearts, if Satan had not made them 
harder than flints, and sterner than steel! But no, they cry, 
“Crucify Him! Crucify Him!” So Pilate listens to them again, 
and they change their tune. “He has spoken blasphemy.” This 
was a wrong charge to bring — for Pilate, having his superstition 
again aroused — is even more afraid to put him to death! And 
he comes out again, and says, “I find no fault in Him.” What a 
strong contest between good and evil in that man’s heart! But 


177 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


they cried out again, “If you let this man go, you are not 
Caesar’s friend.” They hit the mark this time, and he yields to 
their clamor; he brings forth a basin of water, and he washes 
his hands before them all, and he says, “I am innocent of the 
blood of this just person. You see to it.” A poor way of 
escaping! That water could not wash the blood from his hands, 
though their cry did bring the blood on their heads — “His blood 
be on us, and on our children.” When that is done, Pilate takes 
the last desperate step of sitting down on the pavement in royal 
state; he condemns Jesus and bids them take Him away. But 
before He is taken to execution, the dogs of war shall snap at 
Him again. The Jews, no doubt, having bribed the soldiers to 
excessive zeal of scorn, they a second time — (oh, mark this! 
Perhaps you thought this happened only once. This is she fifth 
time He has thus been treated) — the soldiers took Him back 
again, and once more they mocked Him, once more they spat 
upon Him, and treated Him shamefully! So, you see, the first 
time was when He first went to the house of Caiaphas; then 
after He was condemned there; then Herod and His men of 
war; then Pilate after the scourging; and then the soldiers, after 
the ultimate condemnation. Do you see, now, how manifestly, 
“He was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and 
acquainted with grief? “We hid, as it were, our faces from Him; 
He was despised, and we esteemed Him not.” I do not know 
when I ever more heartily wished to be eloquent than I do now. 
I am talking to my own lips, and saying, “Oh, that these lips 
had language worthy of the occasion!” I do but faintly sketch 
the scene; I cannot lay on the glowing colors. Oh, that I could 
set forth Your grief, You man of sorrows! God the Holy Spirit 
impress it on your memories, and on your souls, and help you 
pitifully to consider the griefs of your blessed Lord! 

I will now leave this point, when I have made this practical 
application of it. Remember, dear friends that this day, as truly 


178 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


as on that early morning, a division must be made among us. 
Either you must this day accept Christ as your King, or else His 
blood will be on you! I bring my Master out before your eyes, 
and say to you, “Behold your King!” Are you willing to yield 
obedience to Him? He claims, first, your implicit faith in His 
merit — will you yield to that? He claims, next, that you will take 
Him to be Lord of your heart and that, as He shall be Lord 
within, so He shall be Lord without. Which shall it be? Will you 
choose Him now? Does the Holy Spirit in your soul — for 
without Him you never will — does the Holy Spirit say, “Bow 
the knee and take Him as your King?” Thank God, then! But 
if not, His blood is on you, to condemn you! You crucified 
Him — Pilate, Caiaphas, Herod, the Jews, and Romans, all meet 
in you! You scourged Him. You said, “Let Him be crucified.” 
Do not say it was not so. In effect, you join their clamors when 
you refuse Him; when you go your way to your farm, and to 
your merchandise, and despise His love and His blood — -you do 
spiritually what they did literally — you despise the King of kings! 
Come to the fountain of His blood, and wash and be clean, by 
His grace! 

III. But, we must close with a third remark. Christ really 
underwent yet a third trial. He was not only tried before the 
ecclesiastical and civil tribunals, but He was really tried before 
the great democratic tribunal, that is, the assembly of the 
people in the street. 

You will say, “How?” Well, the trial was somewhat singular, 
but yet it was really a trial. Barabbas — a thief, a felon, a 
murderer, a traitor — had been captured — he was probably one 
of a band of murderers who were accustomed to come up to 
Jerusalem at the time of the feast, carrying daggers under their 
cloaks to stab persons in the crowd, and rob them, and then, 
he would be gone again. Besides that, he had tried to stir up 
sedition, setting himself up possibly as a leader of the bandits. 


179 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Christ was put into competition with this villain! The two were 
presented before the popular eye, and to the shame of 
manhood, to the disgrace of Adam’s race, let it be remembered 
that the perfect, loving, tender, sympathizing, unselfish Savior 
was met with the word, “Crucify Him!” And Barabbas, the thief, 
was preferred. “Well,” says one, “that was atrocious!” The same 
thing is put before you this morning — the very same thing! And 
every unregenerate man and woman will make the same choice 
that the Jews did — only those renewed by divine grace will act 
upon the contrary principle! I say, friend, this day, I put before 
you Christ Jesus, or your sins! The reason why many come not 
to Christ is because they cannot give up their lusts, their 
pleasures, their profits! Sin is Barabbas — sin is a thief — it will 
rob your soul of its life; it will rob God of His glory. Sin is a 
murderer — it stabbed our father, Adam — it slew our purity. Sin 
is a traitor — it rebels against the King of heaven and earth. If 
you prefer sin to Christ, Christ has stood at your tribunal, and 
you have given your verdict that sin is better than Christ! Who 
is that man? He comes here every Sunday. And yet he is a drunk? 
Where is he? You prefer that reeling demon Bacchus to Christ. 
Who is that man? He comes here, yes, and where are his 
midnight haunts? The harlot and the prostitute can tell! You 
have preferred your own foul, filthy lust to Christ! I know some 
here who have had their consciences openly pricked, and yet, 
there is no change in them; you prefer Sunday trading to Christ! 
You prefer cheating to Christ! You prefer the theater to Christ! 
You prefer the harlot to Christ — you prefer Satan, himself, to 
Christ — for Satan it is that is the father and author of these 
things. “No,” says one, “I don’t, I don’t!” Then, I do again put 
this question, and I put it very pointedly to you — “If you do 
not prefer your sins to Christ, how is it that you are not a 
Christian?” I believe this is the main stumbling block, that, 
“Men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil.” 


180 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


495 The Greatest Trial on Record - 
Ps. 2:2 


We come not to Christ because of the viciousness of our nature, 
and depravity of our heart! And this is the depravity of your 
heart, that you prefer darkness to light, prefer bitter for sweet, 
and choose evil as your good! Well, I think I hear one saying, 
“Oh, I would be on Jesus Christ’s side, but I did not look at it in 
that light; I thought the question was, ‘Would He be on my side?’ 
I am such a poor guilty sinner, that I would stand anywhere, if 
Jesus’ blood would wash me.” Sinner! Sinner! If you talk like 
that, then I will meet you right joyously! Never was a man one 
with Christ till Christ was one with Him! If you feel that you 
can now stand with Christ, and say, “Yes, despised and rejected, 
He is, nevertheless, my God, my Savior, my King, but will He 
accept me?” Why, soul, He has accepted you! He has renewed 
you, or else you would not talk so! You speak like a saved man; 
you may not have the comfort of salvation, but surely there is 
a work of divine grace in your heart! God’s divine election has 
fallen upon you, and Christ’s precious redemption has been 
made for you, or else you would not talk so. You cannot be 
even willing to come to Christ, and yet Christ reject you; God 
forbid we should suppose the possibility of any sinner crying 
after the Savior, and the Savior saying, “No, I will not have you.” 
Blessed be His name, “He who comes to Me,” He says, “I will 
in no wise cast out.” “Well,” one says, “then I would have Him 
today! How can I do it?” There is nothing asked of you but 
this — Trust Him! Trust Him! Believe that God put Him in the 
place of men — believe that what He suffered was accepted by 
God, instead of their punishment. Believe that this great 
equivalent for punishment can save j<w. Trust Him! Throw 
yourself on Him — as a man commits himself to the waters, so 
do you — sink or swim! You will never sink, you will never 
sink — for, “He that believes on the Lord Jesus Christ has 
everlasting life, and shall never come into condemnation.” 


181 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


May these faint words, upon so thrilling a subject, bless 
your souls! And unto God be glory, forever and ever. Amen 
and Amen! 


182 



496 The New Song -Ps. 98:1 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, December 28th, 1862, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“O sing unto the Lord a new song; for He has done 
marvelous things: His right hand, and His holy arm have 
gotten Him the victory.” — Psalm 98:1 

THERE MUST be new songs on new occasions of triumph. 
It would have been absurd for Miriam with her timbrel, to 
conduct the music of the daughters of Israel to some old 
sonnet that they had learned in Egypt. No, an old song could 
not have spoken out the feelings of that generation; much less 
could it have served to utter a voice, the jubilant notes of which 
distant posterity should echo! They must have a new song while 
they cry the one unto the other, “Sing unto the Lord, for He 
has triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider has He 
thrown into the sea.” The like, had never been known before, 
but from now on, father to son, must show forth its fame. In 
later times, when Deborah and Barak had routed the hosts of 
Sisera, they did not borrow Miriam’s song; but they had a new 
psalm for the new event. They said, “Awake, awake, Deborah; 
awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak, and lead your captivity 
captive, you son of Abinoam.” In later years, at the building of 
the temple, or on solemn feast days, it was always the custom 
of the inspired poets of the age to cry, “O come, let us sing 
unto the Lord a new song.” Thus the grateful notes of praise 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


have gathered volume and augmented their compass as the ages 
have rolled onwards! And these, as it were, only the rehearsals 
for a grand oratorio! What then, shall be the marvelous novelty, 
and the matchless glory, of that song which shall be sung at the 
last, upon Mount Zion, when ten thousand times ten thousand 
of the warriors of God shall surround Jesus the conqueror, 
when we shall hear a voice from heaven, as the voice of many 
waters, and like great thunders, when shall be heard the voice 
of harpers, harping with their harps? What shall be, I say, the 
strange novelty of that new song, which they shall sing before 
the throne of God, when the four and twenty elders, and the 
four living creatures, shall fall before God upon their faces, and 
worship Him forever and ever? Would that our ears could 
anticipate, that tremendous burst of, “Hallelujah, hallelujah, 
hallelujah, the Lord God Omnipotent reigns!” 

I want to carry your minds, tonight, if I can, for a little 
season, to that last and grandest song — at the decisive 
victory — which shall proclaim the name and fame of Jehovah 
in all His mighty attributes, and sing of all His majestic deeds — 
when the battle shall be over forever! When the banner shall be 
furled, and the sword shall be sheathed; when the last foe shall 
be destroyed, and placed beneath the feet of the Almighty 
victor. “His right hand and His holy arm have gotten Him the 
victory.” My text, seems, however suitable it may be to other 
occasions, to be most fitting to that last and most splendid 
triumph! 

Three things there are in it — victory transcendent; Deity 
conspicuous; holiness glorified. 

I. First, in our text, we perceive very clearly VICTORY 
TRANSCENDENT. 

What shall we say of that victory? The shouts thereof 
already greet our ears, and the anthem that celebrates it is 
already prepared! When all the principalities and powers of this 


184 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 


world shall be laid low, the pride of earth shall burst like a 
bubble, and the great globe itself shall dissolve, and the things 
that are seen shall be folded up like a vesture, worn out, and 
crumbled with decay — that victory will be transcendent! There 
shall be none comparable to it; it shall stand matchless and 
unrivalled, in all the wars of God, of angels, or men! 

Well, we must say of that victory, there shall be none to dispute 
the clam of God the Most High. The most splendid victories of one 
army have frequently been claimed by the opposite partisans. 
If you stand beneath the triumphal arch in Paris, you will see 
the names of some batdes, which you simpleminded 
Englishmen always thought had been won by British soldiers; 
but you discover that our history was all a mistake, and that the 
Frenchmen really retired victorious from the plain! I suppose 
in America, it is always difficult to ascertain who has been the 
conqueror. And where there are no generals, and the whole 
affair seems to be, which shall kill the most, and wade through 
the most blood, there naturally must be difficulty in 
ascertaining who has won the day. But, in this case, there shall 
be no dispute whatever. The dragon’s head shall be so 
completely broken, that he can do nothing but bite his iron 
bonds, and growl out his confession that God is stronger than 
he is. The hosts of hell shall have been so utterly routed, that 
the deep groans of dismay, and shrieks of terror, shall be the 
confession that Omnipotence rules their terrible doom! As for 
Death, it is when he shall see his captives all loosed before his 
eyes; as for the grave, the key shall be torn from her grip, and 
all her treasures plucked from her grasp — death and the grave 
shall both acknowledge that their victory is gone forever! Christ 
has been the conqueror, the Son of God, who in our nature has 
already taken away the sting! There may be today, some who 
write their names down as Atheists; there may be others who 
openly avow, that they are the adversaries of God; and 


185 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


throughout the universe, there are never wanting those who are 
hopeful that the issue will turn out as they wish — they are 
hopeful that wrong will master right — that evil shall drive out 
good, and darkness extinguish light. But, there shall not be one 
such being left on that great day of victory! It shall be 
acknowledged, even by the lips of despair, that the Lord God, 
“With His own right hand, and His holy arm has gotten Him 
the victory.” Blazoned across the sky, in lightning such as the 
eye of terror has never beheld before — thundered out with 
trumpet, louder than even that which starded the sleeping 
dead — every tongue in earth and hell shall confess, because 
every ear has heard, that the Lord reigns and is King forever 
and ever! 

But further, as this victory will be certainly beyond all 
dispute, let me remind you it will be transcendent, because there 
shall be nothing that can occur to ?nar it. When the last shock of the 
dread artillery shall have been endured by the hosts of God’s 
elect; when the last charge shall have driven the foes before 
them as thin clouds fly before a Biscay gale; then, as the heroes 
sit down to read the story of the war, they shall discover that 
there is nothing to mar the splendor of that glory, for it has 
been a victory throughout! Of all other victories we read, at one 
time the balance trembled — sometimes the host on this side 
wavered; perhaps for the first half day it seemed not only 
doubtful who would win, but it appeared as though the 
adversary, at last defeated, would certainly be the conqueror! 
But, beloved, when we shall read history in the light of heaven, 
we shall discover that God was never conquered — that never 
did the ranks reel — we shall see, that even the most disastrous 
strokes of providence; even the most dire calamities that ever 
occurred to the Church, were only the march, the tramp of 
victories yet to come! I am certain, that those things we most 
deplore, today will even become the subjects of the most 


186 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 


marvelous gratitude tomorrow! We look today upon the black 
side of the question, and say, “Ah, here, indeed, goodness was 
foiled.” But, when we look at the whole matter through, we 
shall see that every dark and bending line, meets in the center 
of the divine plan, and that which seemed the most inconsistent, 
and out of place with its fellow, was the most fitting and the 
most necessary of the whole program! Satan, at the last, shall 
not be able to put his finger upon any spot of the batdefield 
and say, “Here my hosts routed the troops of Emmanuel.” 
Everywhere it shall be seen that, from the dawning day, when 
first he struck the blow at Eve, and made her sin, to the very 
last, when Christ shall drag him up the everlasting hills, led 
captive at His chariot wheels — from the first to the last — the 
Lord’s “Right hand, and His holy arm have gotten Him the 
victory.” 

Remember, too, that this is a victory all along the line. The 
general’s cautious eyes mark that there the left wing has driven 
the adversary back, but for that right wing, bring up the 
reserves, let not the ranks be broken. Stern liners, let your 
chivalry be seen yonder, for that wing reels! Generally in the 
battle some part must fail, while in this portion, or the other, 
there shall be success. Ah, but at the last, when Christ shall 
stand and bare His brow in heaven’s sunlight, and all His angels 
shall be with Him, it shall be seen that they were everywhere 
triumphant! The blood on Madagascar’s rocks, shall not defeat 
the march of God’s armies; saints may be burned, may be sawn 
in sunder, may wander about in sheep skins and goat skins, but 
they shall be victorious everywhere! Spain may shut her gates 
against the gospel, and the inquisition may make that place its 
stronghold, but as sure as there is a God in heaven, Christ shall 
be conqueror there! Tyrants may pass edicts to exterminate 
Christians, conferences may make decrees to drive out the 
religion of Jesus — but in every place, in every land, where ever 


187 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


foot of man has trod this green earth — shall there be victory! 
From the north to the south, from the east to the west, 
everywhere shall be triumph — China and Japan, Brazil and 
Chili, the islands of the south, the frozen regions of the north; 
even Africa with her sable sons, the dwellers in the wilderness, 
shall bow before Him and lick the dust at His feet! There shall 
be victory all along the line; not merely from one place, but 
from all, shall be heard the tune — “His own right hand, and 
His holy arm have gotten Him the victory.” 

And, it shall be a victory sustained by the news of the morrow. Not 
so among the embattled hosts of men. How hard to brook the 
morrow! Then the general’s brow is dark, and his eyes are heavy, 
for the list of the dead and wounded is brought in for 
inspection. “Another victory like this,” says one, “and I am 
defeated forever; it is dearly purchased,” he says, “with the 
blood of these mothers’ sons. My comrades and companions 
in arms must bite the ground to let the country live.” But, in 
that last great battle of God, the muster roll shall be found 
without one missing in it! As they call their names, they shall all 
answer! There shall not be one left dead upon the field. “How 
so; how so?” says unbelief, “Are they not dead and buried now? 
Have not their bodies lain to bleach upon the side of the Alps? 
Have they not been burned in the fire, and scattered as ashes 
to the four winds? Do not the saints sleep today in our 
cemeteries, and in our graveyards, and does not the deep engulf 
full, many a body that was a temple of the Holy Spirit?” 1 
answer, yes, but they shall come again! Refrain your eyes from 
weeping, O daughter of Jerusalem; refrain your heart from 
sorrow, for they shall come again from the land of their 
captivity! We, who are alive and remain, shall not have the 
preference beyond them who sleep. “For the trumpet shall 
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall 
be changed; so when this corruptible shall have put on 


188 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 


incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, 
then, shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death 
is swallowed up in victory.” “His right hand and His holy arm 
have gotten Him the victory.” 

And sometimes, on the morrow, the general feels the glory 
of the victory is marred, for there are many prisoners; they are 
not dead, their corpses lie not on the field, but they have been 
taken off by the opposite parties, and they are a prey; and who 
knows what may become of them? What dungeons may 
contain them? To what tortures they may be put? But in this 
last victory of God, there shall be no prisoners, no prisoners left in 
the hand of His enemy! I know there are some who say, that 
we may be children of God, and yet fall from grace and perish. 
My brothers and sisters, it is a foul slander upon the faithfulness 
and power of the Redeemer! I know that all He undertakes to 
save, He will save, and He will bring the troops off from the 
batdefield, every brow crowned with laurel, not one slain, not 
one a prisoner! The gates of hell shall never enclose the 
ransomed of the Lord! Among the groans of the lost, there 
shall never be heard a sigh from one who was once a saint 
before God! There are no prisoners. March out your prisoners, 
Prince of hell! Bring forth, if you can, one soul that Jesus 
bought with blood; one soul that the Spirit quickened, one soul 
that the Eternal Father gave to the hands of the Great Surety 
to keep forever — bring him forth! Ah, you have none — “Shall 
the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive 
delivered?” Thus says the Lord, the God of hosts, “My 
ransomed shall return, and come to Zion with songs and 
everlasting joy upon their heads.” Then shall it be said, “His 
right hand, and His holy arm have gotten Him the victory.” 

But, beloved, after the battle is over, the conqueror wipes 
his brow and says, “Ah, but the scattered hosts may rally, and 
they who were driven today like chaff before the wind, may rise 


189 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


again! And then, long may be the campaign, and fierce the 
struggle, before we have stamped out the sparks of war. “Sleep 
on your arms,” he says, “you may be attacked tomorrow; be 
ready for the cry of ‘boot and saddle,’ for there may be a charge 
again, before many hours are spent.” But, not so in this case — 
the victory is crushing, total, final; it is once forever with evil, 
with darkness, with hell; they shall never again be able to tempt 
the righteous, or to cast them down, or to pale their cheeks 
with fear! They shall never be able again, to win the world to 
their dominion, they are routed, routed, routed forever! Hosts 
of evil, it is not your heel that is bruised — your head is broken! 
The Lord has used His people as His battle-axe, and His 
weapons of war, and He has cleft you and left you without 
might or strength, forever and forever. So, dear friends, this is 
our joy and comfort — that once the battle is over — the whole 
campaign is ended! There shall be no further onslaughts; we 
rest eternally — we triumph everlastingly; no more fights to risk, 
no more conflicts in which to tug and strive. This shall be the 
note that shall ring throughout the arches of eternity — “The 
Lord’s right hand, and His holy arm have gotten Him the 
victory forever and forever.” 

I think these are two good reasons why I should say this 
victory is transcendent — there is none to dispute it, and there 
is nothing to mar it. 

But yet, further, we will venture to enlarge upon this 
victory, by showing its particulars. The ultimate triumph and 
victory of God in all His purposes will lie in several things. How 
glorious the fact, that all whom He ordained to save are saved! Calling 
was the first work which He worked in them; they were called, 
everyone of them, but like the rest of mankind, they would not 
come; their wills were so desperate that they resisted long; the 
minister preached at them; their mother wept over them; their 
father entreated them; providence came and hewed them; 


190 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 


afflictions broke them in pieces, and they were still unsaved! 
But not in one case, where God ordains to call, has the calling 
failed. In every case where His electing love has set its purpose, 
the will is turned round, the affections yield, the judgment gives 
way, the man is subdued — he is called, he is quickened. There 
may be some such here tonight, who think, “Well, I never 
would be saved upon such terms as acknowledging the 
sovereign grace of God, even if He wills to do it.” Your will 
must give way before the crushing force of the will of God. He 
has mysterious ways of finding an entrance into the most 
reluctant heart, and taking up His throne there forever! 

How clearly is this victory seen in the subjugation of the lusts 
and passions of the called sinner! He may have been a drunk, he 
thought he could not give it up, but the rod of iron “dashes in 
pieces the potter’s vessel.” He may have loved the pleasures of 
the flesh, they were as dear to him as his right eye, but divine 
grace overcame the most darling lust, and threw to the earth 
the most pampered sin! 

Not less conspicuously will it appear, in the perseverance 
of every saint. Not a stone will have been left unturned by the 
adversary, to prevent the saints holding on; the caverns of hell 
will be emptied against God’s redeemed; Satan and his faithful 
followers will do their utmost to cast them down to destruction, 
but they shall hold on their way! They shall wax stronger and 
stronger, until at last, the gates of heaven shall be fast closed, 
because there are no more to enter, it shall be proclaimed, while 
devils bite their iron bands in shame, that not a soul who was 
written in the Book of Life was lost! Not one whom Jesus 
bought with blood has been unredeemed! Not one quickened 
by divine grace was allowed to die! Not one who truly began 
the heavenly race turned aside from it! Not one concerning 
whom it was said, “These are Mine, and in the day when I make 
up My jewels, they shall be Mine” — not one of these is lost, but 


191 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


all saved, saved eternally! Oh, that will be a splendid victory! 
What can be greater? You who know the conflict through 
which the child of God has to pass, will bear me witness, that 
if you get to heaven, you will sing with all your might the 
conqueror’s hymn! And I think we all will do the same! I 
remember saying once, that if ever I got to heaven I would sing 
the loudest there, for I owed the most to sovereign grace. But, 
when I came downstairs, one said to me, “You made a mistake; 
I shall sing more loudly than you, for I owe more than you do.” 
And, I found that was the general opinion that each brother, 
and each sister, thought that he owed most to divine grace. 
Now, if we are all to sing loudest, what a shout of triumph there 
will be! And I suppose, the verse in our hymn is quite true to 
the apprehension of each of us — 

“Then loudest of the crowd I’ll sing, 

While heaven’s resounding mansions ring 
With shouts of sovereign grace.” 

What a transcendent triumph! 

Not a few shall there be to share the triumph, but a multitude 
that no man can number! The. glory shall be enhanced by the salvation 
of so many. Heaven is none of your narrow places, for narrow- 
hearted bigots. No, brothers and sisters, our largest imagination 
never yet could grasp heaven, but it will hold multitudes of 
multitudes! Nor will the praise be any the less, when we 
consider that there were so many of such varied clans and 
climes, some of all kindreds on the face of the earth! There shall 
be found in heaven, the vilest sinner who lived, there shall be 
brought there the proudest rebel, and the stoutest-hearted, and 
the most obstinate of sinners! There shall be such in heaven, as 
would have made a wonder in hell! Some, I say, who would 
have been such great sinners, had they been allowed to go to 


192 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 


hell, that their dreadful fall would even hell itself appall, but 
they are in heaven, saved by sovereign grace! And, O beloved, 
as there are such persons, this will help to make the victory 
grand, that they were saved by such means, such simple means, 
by the simple preaching of the gospel — not by wisdom, not by 
science, not by eloquence — but by the simple telling out of the 
story of the cross! How this will tend to make the triumph 
brighter than it could have been in any other way! 

And, O beloved, this victory will excel all others in the 
routing of such foes, such cruel, such crafty, such mighty, and such numerous 
foes. Sin, sin, it is a name of horror — sin overthrown. Death — 
what gloom is concentrated in that word! Death destroyed. 
Satan — what craft, what cruelties, what malice linger there — 
Satan bound, hand and foot, and led captive. Such a victory 
over such foes! 1 find no words in any tongue, by which I can 
describe its magnitude. And oh, the results of that victory! How 
bright! souls knit to Christ by such love, tongues tuned to such 
music, hearts burning with such fire, heaven filled with such 
devout, such holy inhabitants, the ears of Deity regaled with 
such grateful music, heaven filled with such myriads of happy 
spirits! The peaceful results, setting aside the overthrow, will be 
enough to make this victory, grander than all the triumphs of 
men or angels, put together! 

Say now, and gather up all your enthusiasm to say it: What 
a victory shall that be, when there shall not be a single trophy in the 
hands of the adversary! The victory shall be unparalleled in this, 
that all the success which the enemy thought he had achieved, 
shall only tend to make his defeat the more galling, and add 
luster to the victorious King of kings! You see sometimes, 
hanging up in old minsters, tattered flags that were taken from 
the adversary; sometimes when the report of battle comes in, 
we are told the batde was won, but that so many cannon, and 
so many flags, were left with the enemy. But, O Lord God, You 


i93 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


have not left a single trophy in the hands of Your foe! I said he 
had no prisoners, but he shall not even have a flag — not one 
truth torn in pieces, not one doctrine of revelation hung up to 
rot in the minsters of hell — not one single attribute of God that 
shall be trailed in the mire, not one single truth of Christianity 
to be laughed at, and despised by fiends — not a trophy! There 
shall not a hair of your head perish, not so much as that shall 
Satan gain; not a bone, not a fragment of the saint, either of his 
body or his spirit — no trophies left — and all this will make hell 
angry, to think that God gave Satan vantage ground, let him 
contend with poor feeble men, but God was in man, and fought 
with Satan — man, a poor feeble worm, fought with Satan, and, 
like David, he threw the stone of faith at the giant’s head and 
destroyed him with his own weapons! God has destroyed death 
by the death of Christ, destroyed sin by the great sin-bearer. 
Yes, He has destroyed the dragon by the seed of a woman, who 
bruised his head with that very seed, whose heel the serpent 
once did bite. Glory be unto You, O Lord! This is Your victory! 
The more we muse upon it, the higher does our rapture rise, 
and the more prepared do our hearts grow, to peal forth the 
words of the Psalmist, “His right hand, and His holy arm have 
gotten Him the victory.” 

II. Secondly, observe that DEITY IS CONSPICUOUS HERE. 

Man is not made mention of. There is no name of Moses, 
or of the prophets, or of the apostles here. I read not, the names 
of Chrysostom and Augustine, nor of those modern fathers of 
the Church, such as Calvin and Zwingli — the stars are lost in 
the blaze of the sun! O God, how glorious is Your right arm, 
and how do Your disciples, Your children, hide their heads and 
say, “Not unto us, but unto Your name be all the glory!” But 
mark, beloved, as they are not mentioned, it is not because the 
mention needs to be avoided, for the more we talk of 
instrumentalities, or rather think about them — (I do not say the 


194 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 


more we think o/'them, but the more we think about them) — 
the more persuaded we shall be that it only adds to God’s glory 
to use men — for men are such poor tools to work with! You 
have heard of the celebrated painter, who gained renown by 
painting with poor brushes, when the good ones were stolen. 
And Quintin Matsys, who made a cover for the well without 
tools, when all the proper tools were taken away — he worked 
the ironwork with such poor implements as he could get. So 
was the skill of the painter or artisan admired, in that, he could 
produce such effects, under such disadvantageous conditions. 
“Ah, then, what an artist must he be,” they exclaim, concerning 
the one. And they look upon this piece of ironwork, and say of 
the other, “What? No engraving tools, no casting, how could 
he do it?” So when we shall come to look at men, when we 
look at them in the light of God which eternity shall reveal, we 
shall say of the best of them, “How can the Lord have won 
such victories with such poor things as these?” You may 
mention the instruments, every one of them, from righteous 
Abel down to the last preacher of the Word — and yet it shall 
be true, that the victory shall speak the sole praise of the 
General! No doubt, dear friends, this will be a part of the 
splendor of the triumph, to think that He did win by man. It 
was in man that Satan conquered — Adam and Eve were led 
astray by the crafty wiles of Satan. It is by man that death came, 
and by man comes the resurrection of the dead! This will be 
gall and wormwood in the cup of the lost, when they shall see 
the Man, Christ Jesus, the seed of the woman, sitting at the right 
hand of God! This is judgment’s greatest terror, “Hide us from 
the Lamb.” And this shall be hell’s greatest horror, “Hide us 
from the Lamb, let us not behold His face.” But glory be unto 
You, most gracious God, for You have lifted man up above all 
the works of Your hands, and given him dominion above all 
creatures. You put principalities and powers beneath his feet, 


i95 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


in the person of Christ, and all this only proves that “His own 
right hand and His holy arm have gotten Him the victory.” 

I wish I might enlarge here, and speak of the conspicuous 
glory of God in this respect, that all the persons of the Trinity 
will be glorified — the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. All the 
attributes of God, His unsearchable greatness, and His 
unrivalled majesty, His grace, His power, His truths, His justice, 
His holiness, His immutability — these shall shine forth with 
resplendent luster! His wondrous works, and His terrible acts, 
shall declare His praise; they shall be the theme of every tongue, 
and the topic of every conversation. “Men shall speak of the 
glory of Your kingdom, and talk of Your power.” All His 
decrees shall be seen in their final accomplishment, every one 
of them fulfilled, the counsel answering to the providence. Of 
all that the Father willed, of all that the Son performed, of all 
that the Spirit revealed, not one thing is frustrated! How shall I 
gather up these things? O, for the voice of a mighty angel! O, 
for a seraph’s lips of fire, to speak now of the splendor of that 
last day, when not only the great, but the litde, not only the 
abundance of God’s providence, and the great deeps of His 
counsel, but even the small deeds of His loving-kindness, shall 
be made to sing forth His praise, when not only the leviathan 
deeds of God, shall make the deep to praise the Lord, but even 
the litde fish that move therein, shall leap up to join the chorus, 
and everywhere from everything, for everything, there shall be 
heard the tune — “His right hand, and His holy arm have gotten 
Him the victory.” 

III. We have in our text a third thought, which we can only 
hint at in all this — HOLINESS WILL BE GLORIFIED. 

Note the adjective — “His holy arm.” When we contemplate 
any actions of God, you will notice that the name which 
cherubs utter, “Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth,” is 
always brought out. Where Christ bears sin, and overcomes it, 


196 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 


I hear the cry of, “Holy, holy, holy,” from the cross. Where 
Jesus breaks the tomb, and conquers death, I seem to hear the 
note of, “Holy, holy, holy,” for it makes the day holy on which 
the deed was done. And when He ascends to glory and the 
Father says, “Well done,” we seem to hear, still, the note, “Holy, 
holy, holy.” In everything, from the manger to the cross, and 
from the cross onward to the crown, holiness becomes God’s 
house and all God’s acts forever! Is it not, dear friends, after all, 
the hinge of the struggle? Is not this the point; just as you know 
in great battles, there is some one mountain or hill, which is the 
objective of struggle? Not for the value of that particular hill, 
but because on that the battle will depend — so holiness is just 
the point — the rallying point between God and Satan! Here are 
the two war cries. The hosts of evil cry, “Sin, sin, sin,” but the 
cry of the armies of the Lord of hosts is this, “Holiness, 
holiness, holiness.” Every time we strike a blow it is “Holiness.” 
And every time they attack us it is “Sin.” Sin is the real objective 
of their aim. When Satan attacks, it is to stab at holiness. And 
when we resist, it is to guard holiness, or to drive back sin! Mark 
this, I say — this is the point of the battle, and by that you shall 
be able to judge on which side you are. What is your war cry? 
What is your war cry? When Cromwell fought with the soldiers 
of the covenant at Dunbar, you will remember they were 
distinguished by their cries. On the one side “The Covenant, 
the Covenant”; and on the other side “The Lord of hosts, the 
Lord of hosts.” And so tonight, there is the cry on either side: 
“Sin and the pleasures of sin!” Is that your war cry, friend? You 
say, “No.” How is it, then, you were at the theater the other 
night? You say, “No.” How is it, then, you frequent the tavern? 
You say, “No.” How is it, then, you have got so many illicit 
gains about you now? You say, “No.” How is it, you make 
appointments for deeds of sin, and perhaps tonight, or 
tomorrow night, intend to fulfill them? I tell you, sirs, there are 


197 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


many of you whose war cry tonight is, “Sin and the pleasures 
of sin!” On the other hand, I trust there are not a few in this 
vast throng, who can say, “Oh, sir, feebly though I speak it, yet 
my war cry is, ‘Holiness and the cross.’” Ah, beloved, you are 
just now on the side that is laughed at — the world points at 
you and says, “There are your saints.” Yes, here they are, sir; 
what do you dare say against them? Abide your time, man, and 
have your jeering out — you shall change that laugh for 
everlasting howling by-and-by! “There are your Methodists; 
there are your hypocritical professors.” What, sir, dare you say 
it? The servants of the living God will know how to answer you 
in that day, when their King shall be revealed in the clouds of 
heaven, and His glory shall be manifest — and they shall share 
His triumph, and all flesh shall see it — for the mouth of the 
Lord has spoken it! The world knows us not, because it knew 
Him not. “It does not yet appear what we shall be, but when 
He shall appear, we shall be like He is, for we shall see Him as 
He is.” Come, we will pass that question again tonight, “What 
is your war cry?” 

There has been a good deal of wickedness these last few 
days in London. I love to see holy mirth; I delight to see men 
well feasted. I like Christmas; I wish it came six times a year. I 
like the generosity of those who give to the poor. Let it be 
extended. I would not stop a smile. God forbid me! But cannot 
men be happy without drunkenness? Cannot they be mirthful 
without blasphemy? Is there no possibility of being happy 
without lasciviousness? Are there no other ways of finding true 
pleasure, besides selling your soul to the devil? O sirs! 1 say 
there have been thousands in this huge city who have been 
going about the streets, and whose cry has been, “Sin and the 
pleasures of sin! Where is the music hall? Where is the casino? 
Where is the coal hole? Where is the tavern? Where is the 
ballroom? Sin and the pleasures of sin!” O Satan! You have 


198 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


496 The New Song - Ps. 98:1 


many soldiers, and right brave soldiers they are! They are never 
afraid of your cause, nor ashamed of your name, nor of your 
unholy work. Yes, you are well served, O prince of hell! And 
rich will be your wages, when your drudges earn the fire for 
which they have labored. But I hope and trust, there are some 
tonight who will change their war cry. You have not nailed your 
colors to the mast, have you? Even if you have, by God’s grace, 
I would pull the nails out! Are you determined to die? Will you 
serve the black prince forever, and perish with him? Jesus 
Emmanuel, the captain of our salvation, bids me cry to you, 
“Enlist beneath My banner.” Believe in Him, trust in Him, and 
live! Oh, trust the merits of the cross, the virtue of the blood, 
the tears and the dying groans. This it is to be a Christian, and 
ever afterwards, this shall be your war cry — “Holiness, and the 
cross!” O, take this, all! Fear not. The cross with holiness will 
bring the mortifying of the flesh, the shame of the world, and 
the reproach of men. Take both, for now the battle is raging. 
But, O, my brothers and sisters, another crush, and another, 
and another, and another, and we shall gain the top of the hill 
and the shout of, “Holiness and the cross!” shall be answered 
by the echoes all round the world, for everywhere, holiness 
shall be victorious, and men shall know the Lord! Yes, and the 
echoes of heaven shall answer, too, and the spirits of the 
sanctified shall cry, “Holiness and the Crown!” Then as our 
enemies have broken before us, and are utterly destroyed — as 
they melt away like the fat of rams — as unto smoke they 
consume away, we will sing forever, “Holiness and the crown! 
Holiness and the crown!” But, that shall be only one note — 
this shall be the song — “His own right hand, and His holy arm 
have gotten Him the victory.” I would that some soul would 
believe in Jesus tonight, that it might share in the victory. 

I would that young man’s heart would be given to Christ 
tonight, or yours, yonder. He deserves it of you — if it were only 


199 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


His mercy in having spared you, He deserves it. And you gray- 
headed sinner there, does He not deserve your heart for sparing 
you so long? Yield, I pray you! His love meets you. Yield! His 
terrors threaten you. Yield! Lay down your weapons, and be 
forever forgiven! May God help you to do it. May the Lord 
prove His sovereignty and His power tonight in the conversion 
of many of His chosen; and unto Him shall be the glory forever 
and ever! Amen. 


200 



497 T HE Procession of Sorrow - John 
19:16 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, March 1st, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“And they took Jesus, and led Him away.” — John 19:16 

NEXT SATURDAY all eyes will be fixed on a great Prince 
who shall ride through our streets with his Royal Bride. Today 
I invite your attention to another Prince, marching in another 
fashion through His metropolis. London shall see the glory of 
the one — Jerusalem beheld the shame of the other. Come here, 
you lovers of Immanuel, and I will show you this great sight — 
the King of sorrow marching to His throne of grief, the cross! 
I claim for the procession of my Lord an interest superior to 
the pageant you are now so anxiously expecting. Will your 
Prince be sumptuously arrayed? Mine is adorned with garments 
crimsoned with His own blood! Will your Prince be decorated 
with honors? Behold, my King is not without His crown — alas, 
a crown of thorns set with ruby drops of blood! Will your 
thoroughfares be thronged? So were the streets of Jerusalem — 
for great multitudes followed Him. Will you raise a clamor of 
tumultuous shouting? Such a greeting had the Lord of glory, 
but alas, it was not the shout of welcome, but the yell of, “Away 
with Him! Away with Him.” High in the air you bid your 
banners wave about the heir of England’s throne, but how shall 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you rival the banner of the sacred cross, that day for the first 
time borne among the sons of men? For the thousands of eyes 
which shall gaze upon the youthful Prince, I offer the gaze of 
men and angels. All nations gathered about my Lord, both great 
and mean men clustered around His person. From the sky, the 
angels viewed Him with wonder and amazement; the spirits of 
the just looked from the windows of heaven upon the scene, 
yes, the great God and Father watched each movement of His 
suffering Son. But you ask me, “Where is the spouse, the king’s 
daughter, fair and beautiful?” My Lord is not altogether without 
His espoused one. The Church, the bride of Christ, was there, 
conformed to the image of her Lord; she was there, I say, in 
Simon, bearing the cross, and in the women weeping and 
lamenting. Say not that the comparison is strained, for in a 
moment I will withdraw it, and present the contrast. Grant me 
only this much of likeness — we have here a Prince with his 
bride, bearing his banner, and wearing his royal robes, 
traversing the streets of his own city, surrounded by a throng 
who shout aloud, and a multitude who gaze with profound 
interest. But how vast was the disparity! The most careless eye 
discerns it. Yonder young Prince is ruddy with the bloom of 
early youth and health; my Master’s visage is more marred than 
that of any man! Look, it has been blackened with bruises, and 
stained with the shameful spit of those who derided Him! Your 
heir of royalty is magnificently drawn along the streets in his 
stately chariot, sitting at his ease — my princely sufferer walks 
with weary feet, marking the road with crimson drops — not 
borne, but bearing — He is not carried, but carrying His cross! 
Your Prince is surrounded by a multitude of friends — listen 
how they joyously welcome him! And well they may; the son of 
such noble parents deserves a nation’s love. But my Prince is 
hated without a cause! Listen how their loud voices demand 
that He should be hastened to execution! How harshly grate 


202 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


the cruel syllables, “Crucify Him! Crucify Him!” Your noble 
Prince is preparing for his marriage — mine is hastening to His 
doom. Oh, shame that men should find so much applause for 
Princes, and none for the King of kings! Yet, dear friends, to 
some eyes there will be more attraction in the procession of 
sorrow, of shame, and of blood, than in your display of 
grandeur and joy. Oh, I pray you, lend your ears to such faint 
words as I can utter on a subject all too high for me — the march 
of the world’s Maker along the way of His great sorrow! Your 
Redeemer traversing the rugged path of suffering — along 
which He went with heaving heart and heavy footsteps — that 
He might pave a royal road of mercy for His ENEMIES! 

I. After our Lord Jesus Christ had been formally 
condemned by Pilate, our text tells us He was led away. I invite 
your attention to CHRIST AS LED FORTH. 

Pilate, as we reminded you, scourged our Savior according 
to the common custom of Roman courts. The lictors executed 
their cruel office upon His shoulders with their rods and 
scourges, until the stripes had reached the full number. Jesus is 
formally condemned to crucifixion, but before He is led away, 
He is given over to the Praetorian guards that those rough 
legionaries may insult Him. It is said that a German regiment 
was at that time stationed in Judea, and I should not wonder if 
they were the lineal ancestors of those German theologians of 
modern times who have mocked the Savior, tampered with 
revelation, and cast the vile spit of their philosophy into the 
face of the truth of God! The soldiers mocked and insulted 
Him in every way that cruelty and scorn could devise. The 
platted crown of thorns, the purple robe, the reed with which 
they smote Him, and the spit with which they disfigured Him — 
all these marked the contempt in which they held the King of 
the Jews! The reed was no mere rush from the brook, it was of 
a stouter kind, of which those of the East often make walking 


203 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sticks — the blows were cruel as well as insulting; and the crown 
was not of straw, but of thorns, therefore it produced pain as 
well as pictured scorn. When they had mocked Him, they 
pulled off the purple garment He had worn — this rough 
operation would cause much pain. His wounds, unstaunched 
and raw, freshly bleeding from beneath the lash, would make 
this scarlet robe adhere to Him, and when it was dragged off, 
His gashes would bleed anew. We do not read that they 
removed the crown of thorns, and therefore, it is most 
probable, though not absolutely certain, that our Savior wore it 
along the Via Dolorosa, and also bore it upon His head when 
He was fastened to the cross. Those pictures which represent 
our Lord as wearing the crown of thorns upon the cross have, 
therefore, at least some Scriptural warrant. They put His own 
clothes upon Him, because they were the reward of the 
executioner; as modern hangmen take the garments of those 
whom they execute, so did the four soldiers claim a right to His 
raiment. They put on Him His own clothes that the multitudes 
might discern Him to be the same man, the very man who had 
professed to be the Messiah. We all know that a different dress 
will often raise a doubt about the identity of an individual, but 
lo, the people saw Him in the street, not arrayed in the purple 
robe, but wearing His garment without seam, woven from the 
top throughout, the common smock frock, in fact, of the 
countrymen of Palestine, and they said at once, “Yes, it is He, 
the man who healed the sick and raised the dead; the mighty 
teacher whose custom was to sit upon the mountaintop, or 
stand in the temple courts and preach with authority, and not 
as the Scribes.” There can be no shadow of doubt but that our 
Lord was really crucified, and no one substituted for Him! How 
they led him forth, we do not know. Roman expositors, who 
draw upon their prolific fancy for their facts, tell us that He had 
a rope about His neck with which they roughly dragged Him 


204 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


to the cross. This is one of the most probable of their surmises, 
since it was not unusual for the Romans thus to conduct 
criminals to the gallows. We care, however, far more for the 
fact that He went forth carrying His cross upon His shoulders. 
This was intended at once to proclaim His guilt, and intimate 
His doom. Usually the crier went before with an announcement 
such as this, “This is Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, who 
for making Himself a King, and stirring up the people, has been 
condemned to die.” This cross was a ponderous machine — not 
so heavy, perhaps, as some pictures would represent it — but 
still no light burden to a man whose shoulders were raw with 
the lashes of the Roman scourge. He had been all night in 
agony, He had spent the early morning at the hall of Caiaphas. 
He had been hurried, as I described to you last Sunday — (See 
Sermon #495) from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, 
and from Herod back again to Pilate. He had, therefore, but 
little strength left, and you will not wonder that by-and-by we 
find Him staggering beneath His load, and that another is called 
to bear it with Him. He goes forth, then, bearing His cross. 

What do we learn here, as we see Christ led forth? Do we 
not see here the truth of God which was set forth in shadow 
by the scapegoat ? Did not the high priest bring the scapegoat, and 
put both his hands upon its head, confessing the sins of the 
people, that thus those sins might be laid upon the goat? Then 
the goat was led away by a fit man into the wilderness, and it 
carried away the sins of the people, so that if they were sought 
for, they could not be found. Now, we see Jesus brought before 
the priests and rulers, who pronounce Him guilty; God Himself 
imputes our sins to Him; He was made sin for us; and, as the 
substitute for our guilt, bearing our sin upon His shoulders — 
for that cross was a sort of representation in wood of our guilt 
and doom — we see the great Scapegoat led away by the 
appointed officers of justice! Bearing upon His back the sin of 


205 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


all His people, the offering goes outside the camp. Beloved, can 
you say He carried your sins? As you look at the cross upon His 
shoulders, does it represent your sins? Oh I raise the question, 
and be not satisfied unless you can answer it most positively in 
the affirmative! There is one way by which you can tell whether 
He carried your sin or not — have you laid your hands upon His 
head, confessed your sins, and trusted in Him? Then, your sin 
lies not on you — not one single ounce of it lies on you — it has 
all been transferred by blessed imputation to Christ, and He 
bears it on His shoulders in the form of yonder heavy cross! 
What joy, what satisfaction this will give if we can sing — 

“My soul looks back to see 
The burden You did bear, 

When hastening to the accursed tree, 

And knows her guilt was there!” 

Do not let the picture vanish till you have satisfied 
yourselves once and for all that Christ was here the substitute 
for you! 

Let us muse upon the fact that Jesus was conducted outside 
the gates of the city. It was the common place of death. That little 
rising ground, which perhaps was called Golgotha, the place of 
a skull, from its somewhat resembling the crown of a man’s 
skull, was the common place of execution. It was one of 
Death’s castles; here he stored his gloomiest trophies — he was 
the grim lord of that stronghold! Our great hero, the destroyer 
of Death, bearded the lion in his den, slew the monster in his 
own castle, and dragged the dragon captive from his own den! 
I think Death thought it a splendid triumph when he saw the 
Master impaled and bleeding in the dominions of destruction; 
little did he know that the grave was to be rifled, and he 
destroyed, by that crucified Son of man! 


206 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


Was not the Redeemer led there to aggravate His shame ? 
Calvary was like our Old Bailey — it was the usual place of 
execution for the district. Christ must die a felon’s death, and 
it must be upon the felon’s gallows, in the place where horrid 
crimes had met their due reward. This added to His shame; but, 
I think, in this, too, He draws the nearer to us, “He was 
numbered with the transgressors, and bore the sins of many, 
and made intercession for the transgressors.” 

But further, my brothers and sisters — this, 1 think, is the 
great lesson from Christ’s being slaughtered outside the gate of 
the city — let us go forth, therefore, outside the camp, bearing His reproach. 
You see there, the multitudes are leading Him forth from the te?nple. 
He is not allowed to worship with them. The ceremonial 
system of the Jewish religion denies Him any participation in 
its pomp; the priests condemn Him never again to tread the 
hallowed floors, never again to look upon the consecrated 
altars in the place of His people’s worship! He is exiled from 
their friendship, too. No man dare call Him friend now, or 
whisper a word of comfort to Him. No, more, He is banished 
from their society, as if He were a leper whose breath would be 
infectious, whose presence would scatter the plague! They 
force Him outside the walls, and are not satisfied till they have 
rid themselves of His obnoxious presence! For Him, they have 
no tolerance; Barabbas may go free; the thief and the murderer 
may be spared; but for Christ, there is no word, but, “Away 
with such a fellow from the earth! It is not fit that He should 
live.” Jesus is therefore driven out of the city, beyond the gate, 
with the will and force of His own nation! But He journeys not 
against His own will; even as the lamb goes as willingly to the 
shambles as to the meadow, so does Christ cheerfully take up 
His cross, and go outside the camp. Look, brothers and sisters, 
here is a picture of what we may expect from men if we are 
faithful to our Master! It is not likely that we shall be able to 


207 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


worship with their worship. They prefer pompous and gaudy 
ceremonies; the swell of music, the glitter of cosdy garments, 
the parade of learning — all these must minister grandeur to the 
world’s religion — and thus shut out the simple followers of the 
Lamb! The high places of earth’s worship and honor are not 
for us. If we are true to our Master, we shall soon lose the 
friendship of the world — the sinful find our conversation 
distasteful; in our pursuits, the carnal have no interest — things 
dear to us are dross to worldlings, while things precious to them 
are contemptible to us! There have been times, and the days 
may come again, when faithfulness to Christ has entailed 
exclusion from what is called “society.” Even now, to a large 
extent, the true Christian is like an outcast, lower than the 
lowest caste, in the judgment of some. The world has, in former 
days, counted it God’s service to kill the saints; we are to reckon 
upon all this, and should the worst befall us, it is to be no 
strange thing to us! These are silken days, and religion fights 
not so stern a battle. I will not say it is because we are unfaithful 
to our Master that the world is more kind to us, but I half 
suspect it is, and it is very possible that if we were more 
thoroughly Christians, the world would more heartily detest us, 
and if we would cleave more closely to Christ, we might expect 
to receive more slander, more abuse, less tolerance, and less 
favor from men! 

You young believers, who have lately followed Christ, 
should your father and mother forsake you — remember you 
were bid to count upon it! Should brothers and sisters deride 
you, you must put this down as part of the cost of being a 
Christian! Godly working men should your employers or your 
fellow workers frown upon you — wives, should your husbands 
threaten to cast you out — remember, outside the camp was 
Jesus’ place, and outside the camp is yours! Oh, you Christians 
who dream of trimming your sails to the wind, who seek to win 


208 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


the world’s favor — I do beseech you, cease from a course so 
perilous! We are in the world, but we must never be of it, we are 
not to be secluded, like monks in the cloister, but we are to be 
separated like Jews among Gentiles — men, but not of men; 
helping, aiding, befriending, teaching, comforting, 
instructing — but not sinning either to escape a frown, or to win 
a smile! The more manifestly there shall be a great gulf between 
the Church and the world, the better shall it be for both — the 
better for the world, for it shall be thereby warned; the better 
for the Church, for it shall be thereby preserved. Go, then, like 
the Master, expecting to be abused, to wear an ill name, and to 
earn reproach. Go, like He did, outside the camp! 

II. Let us now gaze for a while upon CHRIST CARRYING 
HIS CROSS. 

Believer, 1 have shown you your position; let me now show 
you your service. Christ comes forth from Pilate’s hall with the 
cumbrous wood upon His shoulder, but through weariness He 
travels slowly, and His enemies, urgent for His death, and half 
afraid, from His emaciated appearance, that He may die before 
He reaches the place of execution, allow another to carry His 
burden. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, they will 
not spare Him the agonies of dying on the cross — they will 
therefore remit the labor of carrying it. They place the cross 
upon Simon, a Cyrenian, coming out of the country. Simon was 
an African, he came from Cyrene; alas, poor African, you have 
been compelled to carry the cross even until now. Hail, you 
despised children of the sun; you follow first after the King in 
the march of woe! We are not sure that Simon was a disciple of 
Christ; he may have been a friendly spectator, yet, one would 
think the Jews would naturally select a disciple if they could. 
Coming fresh from the country, not knowing what was going 
on, he joined with the mob, and they made him carry the cross. 
Whether a disciple, then, or not, we have every reason to 


209 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


believe that he became so afterwards; he was the father, we read, 
of Alexander and Rufus, two persons who appear to have been 
well known in the early Church. Let us hope that salvation 
came to his house when he was compelled to bear the Savior’s 
cross. 

Dear friends, we must remember that although no one died 
on the cross with Christ, for atonement must be executed by a 
solitary Savior, yet another person did carry the cross for Christ; 
for this world — while redeemed by price by Christ, and by 
Christ alone — is to be redeemed by divine power manifested in 
the sufferings and labors of the saints, as well as those of Christ. 
Mark you, the ransom of men was all paid by Christ — that was 
redemption by price. But power is needed to dash down those 
idols, to overcome the hosts of error — where is it to be found? 
In the Lord of Hosts, who shows His power in the sufferings 
of Christ, and of His Church! The Church must suffer, that the 
gospel may be spread by her means. This is what the Apostle 
meant when he said, “I fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ in my flesh for His body’s sake, which is 
the Church.” There was nothing behind in the price, but there 
is something behind in the manifested power, and we must 
continue to fill up that measure of revealed power, carrying, 
each one of us, the cross with Christ, till the last shame shall 
have been poured upon His cause, and He shall reign forever 
and ever! We see, in Simon’s carrying the cross, a picture of 
what the Church is to do throughout all generations! Mark then, 
Christian, Jesus does not suffer so as to exclude your suffering; 
He bears a cross, not that you may escape it, but that you may 
endure it! Christ does exempt you from sin, but not from sorrow; 
He does take the curse of the cross, but He does not take the 
cross of the curse away from you! Remember that, and expect to 
suffer! 


210 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


Beloved, let us comfort ourselves with this thought, that in 
our case, as in Simon’s, it is not our cross, but Christ’s cross which we 
cany! When you are molested for your piety; when your religion 
brings the trial of cruel mockery upon you, then remember, it 
is not your cross, it is Christ’s cross, and how delightful is it to 
carry the cross of our Lord Jesus! 

You carry the cross after dim. You have blessed company! 
Your path is marked with footprints of your Lord. If you will 
look, there is the mark of His blood-red shoulder upon that 
heavy cross. It is His cross, and He goes before you as a 
shepherd goes before his sheep. Take up your cross daily and 
follow Him! 

Do not forget, also, that you bear this cross in partnership. It is 
the opinion of some commentators that Simon only carried 
one end of the cross, and not the whole of it. That is very 
possible. Christ may have carried the heavier end, against the 
transverse beam, and Simon may have borne the lighter end. 
Certainly it is so with you — you do but carry the light end of 
the cross — Christ bares the heavier end — 

“His way was much rougher and darker than mine; 

Did Christ, my Lord, suffer and shall I repine?” 

Rutherford says, “Whenever Christ gives us a cross, He 
cries, ‘Halves, My love.’” Others think that Simon carried the 
whole of the cross. If he carried the entire cross, yet he only 
carried the wood of it — he did not bear the sin which made it 
such a load. Christ did but transfer to Simon the outward frame, 
the mere tree, but the curse of the tree, which was our sin and 
its punishment, still rested on Jesus’ shoulders. Dear friend, if 
you think that you suffer all that a Christian can suffer; if all 
God’s billows roll over you, yet remember, there is not one 
drop of His wrath in all your sea of sorrow! Jesus took His 


211 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


wrath. Jesus carried the sin. And now, all that you endure is but 
for His sake, that you may be conformed unto His image, and 
may aid in gathering His people into His family. 

Although Simon carried Christ’s cross, he did not volunteer to 
do it, hut they compelled him. I fear, beloved, I fear that the most 
of us, if we ever do carry it, carry it by compulsion. At least, 
when it first comes onto our shoulders, we do not like it, and 
would rather run from it. But the world compels us to bear 
Christ’s cross. Cheerfully accept this burden, you servants of 
the Lord. I do not think we should seek after needless 
persecution; that man is a fool and deserves no pity, who 
purposely excites the disgust of other people. No, no! We must 
not make a cross of our own — let there be nothing but your 
religion to object to, and then, if that offends them, let them be 
offended — it is a cross which you must carry joyfully. 

Though Simon had to hear the cross for a very little while, it gave him 
lasting honor. 1 do not know how far it was from Pilate’s house 
to the Mount of Doom. Roman Catholics pretend to know — 
in fact, they know the very spot where Veronica wiped the 
blessed face with her handkerchief, and found His likeness 
impressed upon it! We know very well where that was not done! 
But, of course, Roman Catholics know the very spot where 
Jesus fainted, and if you go to Jerusalem, you can see all these 
different places if you are only fool enough to believe it all! But 
the fact is, the city has been so razed and burned and plowed, 
that there is little chance of distinguishing any of these 
positions, with the exception, it may be, of Mount Calvary — 
which being outside the walls — may possibly still remain. The 
Via Dolorosa, as the Roman Catholics call it, is a long street at 
the present time, but it may have been but a few yards. Simon 
had to carry the cross but for a very little time, yet his name is 
in this Book forever, and we may envy him his honor. Well, 
beloved, the cross we have to carry is only for a little while at 


212 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


most. A few times the sun will go up and down the hill. A few 
more moons will wax and wane, and then we shall receive the 
glory. “I reckon that these light afflictions, which are but for a 
moment, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which 
shall be revealed in us.” We should love the cross, and count it 
very dear, because it works out for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory. Christians, will you refuse to be cross- 
bearers for Christ? I am ashamed of some professed Christians, 
heartily ashamed of them! Some of them have no objection to 
worship with a poor congregation till they grow rich, and then, 
indeed, they must go with the world’s church, to mingle with 
fashion and gentility! There are some who in company hold 
their tongues, and never say a good word for Christ. They take 
matters very gently; they think it unnecessary to be soldiers of 
the cross. “He who takes not up his cross and follows not after 
Me,” says Christ, “is not worthy of Me.” Some of you will not 
be baptized because you think people will say, “He is a 
Christian! How holy he ought to be!” I am glad the world 
expects much from us, and watches us carefully. All this is a 
blessed clog upon us, and a means of keeping us more near to 
the Lord. Oh, you who are ashamed of Christ, how can you 
read that text, “He who is ashamed of Me, and of My words, 
of him will I be ashamed when I come in the glory of My Father, 
and all My holy angels with Me”? Conceal your religion? Cover 
it with a cloak? God forbid! Our religion is our glory! The cross 
of Christ is our honor and, while not ostentatiously parading it, 
as the Pharisees do, we ought never to be so cowardly as to 
conceal it! “Come you out from among them, and be you 
separate, and touch not the unclean thing.” Take up your cross 
and go outside the camp, following your Lord, even until death! 

III. I have now a third picture to present to you — CHRIST 
AND HIS MOURNERS. 


213 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


As Christ went through the streets, a great multitude 
looked on. In the multitude, there was a sparse sprinkling of 
tender-hearted women, probably those who had been healed, 
or whose children had been blessed by Him. Some of these 
were persons of considerable rank — many of them had 
ministered to Him of their substance — amidst the din and 
howling of the crowd, and the noise of the soldiers, they raised 
an exceedingly loud and bitter cry, like Rachel weeping for her 
children, who would not be comforted, because they were not. 
The voice of sympathy prevailed over the voice of scorn. Jesus 
paused and said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for Me, 
but weep for yourselves, and for your children.” The sorrow of 
these good women was a very proper sorrow; Jesus did not, by 
any means, forbid it; He only recommended another sorrow as 
being better — not finding fault with this, but still commending 
that. Let me show you what I think He meant. Last Sunday the 
remark was made to me — “If the story of the sufferings of 
Christ had been told of any other man, all the congregation 
would have been in tears.” Some of us, indeed, confess that if 
we had read this narrative of suffering in a romantic novel, we 
would have wept copiously, but the story of Christ’s sufferings 
does not cause the excitement and emotion one would expect. 
Now, I am not sure that we ought to blame ourselves for this. 
If we weep for the sufferings of Christ in the same way as we 
lament the sufferings of another man, our emotions will be only 
natural, and may work no good. They would be very proper, 
very proper — God forbid that we should stop them, except 
with the gentle words of Christ, “Daughters of Jerusalem, weep 
not for Me.” The most Scriptural way to describe the sufferings 
of Christ is not by laboring to excite sympathy through highly- 
colored descriptions of His blood and wounds. Romanists of 
all ages have worked upon the feelings of the people in this 
manner, and to a degree, the attempt is commendable, but if it 


214 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


shall all end in tears of pity, no good is done! I have heard 
sermons and studied works by Romanist writers upon the 
passion and agony, which have moved me to copious tears, but 
I am not clear that all the emotion was profitable. Let me show 
you a more excellent way. 

What, then, dear friends, should be the sorrows excited by 
a view of Christ’s sufferings? They are these — Weep not because 
the Savior bled, but because YOUR SINS made Him bleed — 

“It were my sins, my cruel sins, 

His chief tormentors were! 

Each of my crimes became a nail, 

And unbelief the spear!” 

When a believer makes confession of his transgressions — 
when on his knees before God he humbles himself with many 
tears — I am sure the Lord thinks far more of the tears of 
repentance than He would do of the mere drops of human 
sympathy. “Weep for yourselves,” says Christ, “rather than for 
Me.” 

The sufferings of Christ should make us weep over those who 
have brought that blood upon their heads. We ought not to forget the 
Jews. Those once highly favored people of God who cursed 
themselves with, “His blood be upon us, and upon our 
children,” ought to make us mourn when we think of their 
present degradation! There are no passages in all the public 
ministry of Jesus as tender as those which have regard to 
Jerusalem. It is not sorrow over Rome, but Jerusalem! I believe 
there was a tenderness in Christ’s heart to the Jew of a special 
character; He loved the Gentile, but still, Jerusalem was the city 
of the Great King. It was, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often 
would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers 
her chickens under her wings, but you would not!” He saw its 


215 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


streets flowing like bloody rivers; He saw the temple flaming 
up to heaven; He marked the walls loaded with Jewish captives 
crucified by command of Titus; He saw the city razed to the 
ground, and sown with salt! And He said, “Weep not for Me, 
but for yourselves, and for your children, for the day shall come 
when you shall say to the rocks, Hide us, and to the mountains, 
Fall upon us.” 

Let me add, that when we look at the sufferings of Christ, 
we ought to sorrow deeply for the souls of all unregenerate men and women! 
Remember, dear friends that what Christ suffered for us, these 
unregenerate ones must suffer for themselves, unless they put 
their trust in Christ! The woes which broke the Savior’s heart 
must crush theirs! Either Christ must die for me, or else I must 
die for myself the second death. If He did not carry the curse 
for me, then on me must it rest forever and ever! Think, dear 
friends, there are some in this congregation who as yet have no 
interest in Jesus’ blood; some sitting next to you, your nearest 
friends who, if they were now to close their eyes in death, 
would open them in hell! Think of that! Weep not for Him, but 
for these! Perhaps they are your children, the objects of your 
fondest love, with no interest in Christ, without God, and 
without hope in the world! Save your tears for them! Christ asks 
them not in sympathy for Himself. Think of the millions in this 
dark world! It is calculated that one soul passes from time into 
eternity every time the clock ticks! So numerous has the family 
of man now become, that there is a death every second; and 
when we know how very small a proportion of the human race 
have even nominally received Christ — and there is none other 
name given under heaven among men whereby we must be 
saved — oh, what a black thought crosses our mind! What a 
waterfall of immortal souls dashes downwards to the pit of hell 
every hour! Well might the Master say, “Weep not for Me, but 
for yourselves.” You have, then, no true sympathy for Christ if 


216 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


you have not an earnest sympathy with those who would win 
souls for Christ. You may sit under a sermon and feel a great 
deal, but your feeling is worthless unless it leads you to weep 
for yourselves, and for your children. How has it been with you? 
Have you repented of sin? Have you prayed for your fellow 
men? If not, may that picture of Christ fainting in the streets 
lead you to do so this morning! 

IV. In the fourth place, one or two words upon CHRIST’S 
FELLOW-SUFFERERS. 

There were two other cross-bearers in the throng. They 
were malefactors; their crosses were just as heavy as the Lord’s, 
and yet, at least one of them had no sympathy with Him, and 
his bearing the cross only led to his death, and not to his 
salvation. I have sometimes met with persons who have 
suffered much; they have lost money, they have worked hard 
all their lives, or they have laid for years upon a bed of sickness. 
They, therefore, suppose that because they have suffered so 
much in this life, they shall thus escape the punishment of sin 
hereafter. I tell you, sirs, that yonder malefactor carried his 
cross and died on it — and you will carry your sorrows and be 
damned with them, except you repent! That impenitent thief 
went from the cross of his great agony — and it was agony, 
indeed, to die on a cross — he went from that place, to the 
flames of hell! And you, too, may go from the bed of sickness, 
and from the abode of poverty, to perdition, quite as readily as 
from the home of ease, and the house of plenty! No sufferings 
of ours have anything to do with the atonement of sin. No 
blood, but that which He has spilt, no groans, but those which 
came from His heart, no suffering, but that which was endured 
by Him, can ever make a recompense for sin. Shake off the 
thought, any of you who suppose that God will have pity on 
you because you have endured affliction. You must consider 
Jesus, and not yourself. Turn your eyes to Christ, the great 


217 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


substitute for sinners, but never dream of trusting in yourselves! 
You may think that this remark is not needed, but I have met 
with one or two cases where it was required; and I have often 
said I would preach a sermon for even one person, and 
therefore, I make this remark, even though it should rebuke but 
one! 

V. I close with THE SAVIOR’S WARNING QUESTION — “If 

they do these things in the green tree, what will they do in the dry l” 

Among other things, I think He meant this — “If I, the innocent 
substitute for sinners, suffer thus, what will be done when the 
sinner, himself — the dry tree — whose sins are his own, and not 
merely imputed to him, shall fall into the hands of an angry 
God?” Oh, you unregenerate men and women — and there are 
not a few such here now — remember that when God saw 
Christ in the sinner’s place, He did not spare Him! And when 
He finds you without Christ, He will not spare you! You have 
seen Jesus led away by His enemies; so shall you be dragged 
away by fiends to the place appointed for you. “Deliver him to 
the tormentors,” was the word of the king in the parable — it 
shall be fulfilled in you — “Depart, you cursed, into everlasting 
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.” Jesus was deserted 
of God; and if He, who was only imputedly a sinner, was 
deserted, how much more shall you be? “Eloi, Eloi, lama 
Sabachthani” — what an awful shriek! But what shall be your cry 
when you shall say, “Good God! Good God! Why have You 
forsaken me?” And the answer shall come back, “Because 1 
have called, and you refused; I have stretched out My hand, and 
no man regarded; but you have set at nothing all My counsel, 
and would none of My reproof: I also will laugh at your 
calamity; I will mock when your fear comes.” These are awful 
words, but they are not mine! They are the very words of God 
in Scripture! Oh, sinner, if God hides His face from Christ, how 
much less will He spare you! He did not spare His Son the 


218 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


497 The Procession of Sorrow - John 

19:16 


stripes. Did I not describe last Sunday the knotted scourges 
which fell upon the Savior’s back? What whips of steel for you, 
what knots of burning wire for you, when conscience shall 
smite you, when the law shall scourge you with its ten-thronged 
whip! Oh, who will stand in your place, you richest, you 
merriest, you most self-righteous sinners — who will stand in 
your place when God shall say, “Awake, O sword, against the 
rebel, against the man who rejected Me; smite him, and let him 
feel the smart forever!” Christ was spit upon with shame; sinner, 
what shame will be yours! The whole universe shall hiss you! 
Angels shall be ashamed of you — your own friends, yes, your 
sainted mother — shall say, “Amen” to your condemnation; 
and those who loved you best shall sit as assessors with Christ 
to judge you, and condemn you! I cannot roll up into one word 
all the mass of sorrows which met upon the head of Christ, 
who died for us, therefore, it is impossible for me to tell you 
what streams, what oceans of grief must roll over your spirit if 
you die as you now are! You may die so, you may die now. 
There are more unlikely things than that you will be dead before 
next Sunday. Some of you will! It does not often happen that 
five or six thousand people meet together twice — it never does, 
I suppose. The scythe of death must cut some of you down 
before my voice shall warn you again! Oh, souls, I do beseech 
you, by the agonies of Christ, by His wounds, and by His blood, 
do not bring upon yourselves the curse; do not bear in your 
own persons the awful wrath to come! May God deliver you! 
Trust in the Son of God, and you shall never die. 

The Lord bless you, for Jesus’ own sake. Amen. 


219 



498 The Gladness of the Man of Sorrow - 
Psalm 45:7-8 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, March 1 st, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“You love righteousness and hate wickedness: therefore 
God, Your God, has anointed You with the oil of gladness 
above Your fellows. All Your garments smell of myrrh, and 
aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have 
made You glad.” — Psalm 45:7-8 

DURING the last few Sundays we have been considering 
the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ. We followed Him 
through the agony of the garden, the sorrows of the betrayal, 
the weariness and slander of His various trials, the shame and 
mockery of the soldiers, and the sorrows of His cross-bearing 
progress along the streets of the city. It seems fit this morning, 
to make a pause that we may take a breath in this, our 
pilgrimage of sorrow, and be comforted by a view of the land 
of glory to which the thorny pathway leads. A festive occasion 
like the present may have unfitted your minds for deep 
contemplations upon the passion, and it may be more 
congenial with our present mood of gladness to meditate upon 
the glory which followed the shame. The same person will be 
before our eyes, but we shall view Him in a brighter light, we 
shall see the silver lining of the black cloud of anguish, the rich 
pearls hidden in the stormy deep of His sufferings, and the days 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


of heaven which were conceived in the womb of the black 
night of His agony. The Man of Sorrows is the fountain of all 
joy to others, and is the possessor of all the joys of heaven and 
earth by virtue of His triumphs. He has experienced joys in 
proportion to His sorrows; as He once waded through deep 
waters of grief, He has now climbed to the highest mountains 
of happiness! For the joy that was set before Him, He endured 
the cross, despising the shame, and now, having sat down at 
His Father’s right hand, He enjoys pleasures forevermore! We 
have seen our David crossing the brook Kidron weeping as He 
went; shall we not gaze upon Him as He dances for joy before 
the ark? We saw Him crowned with thorns — shall we not go 
forth to meet Him, and behold Him with the crown which His 
mother crowned Him in the day of His espousals, and in the 
day of the gladness of His heart? Oh that while we muse upon 
these things, our heavenly Father may hear the prayer of our 
great Advocate who once cried on our behalf — “And now I 
come to You; and these things I speak in the world, that they 
might have My joy fulfilled in themselves.” 

Our text describes the joy poured forth upon our glorious 
King in a twofold manner. Our Lord is first made joyous by 
His Father — “You love righteousness and hate wickedness: 
therefore God, Your God, has anointed You with the oil of 
gladness above Your fellows.” But there is another joy, which 
He gets not from one person, but from many. Read the next 
verse — “All Your garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and 
cassia, out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have made You 
glad.” Here both saints and angels unite to swell the ever- 
deepening and widening river of the Savior’s gladness! When 
we shall have walked by these still waters, and trod these green 
pastures, perhaps we shall be prepared to say with the aposde, 
“And not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.” And 


221 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


we shall be qualified to sing with the spouse, “We will rejoice 
and be glad in You; we will remember Your love more than 
wine; the upright love You.” 

I. Come, my brothers and sisters, let us ponder that part of 
our Savior’s joy which is given him by his Father. 

To a degree the Redeemer possessed this joy even while He 
was here on earth. We are not sure that the early life of the Savior 
was full of sorrow. As He grew in wisdom and in stature, He 
also grew in favor both with God and man; and favor with God 
and man would probably give the youthful Jesus an unusual 
degree of holy happiness. When He entered upon His public 
ministry, sorrows in troops beset Him, so that the countenance 
once fairer than the children of men became more marred than 
that of any man. At the age of 32 or 33 He was taken to be near 
50, from the effect of labor, hardship and woe. Yet, even in the 
days of His affliction, the Great Mourner was not utterly 
wretched; even amid the wormwood and the gall there were 
drops of joy. When, in His baptism, the heavens were opened, 
and the Spirit descended, did that divine Dove bring no peace, 
no comfort upon His wings? When the Father bore witness, 
“This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,” did those 
approving words from the opening heavens afford no 
satisfaction to the mind of the obedient Son? Brothers and 
sisters, the perfect nature of our Redeemer could not but 
rejoice exceedingly in the smile of the Father, and the descent 
of the Holy Spirit! When in the wilderness, after the 40 days of 
fasting and of temptation, the angels ministered unto Him — 
did they bring Him no celestial joys, no consolations of God? 
Did He know no secret joys upon the mountaintops, where He 
communed with God at midnight? Was it no delight to Him to 
utter sweet invitations, and loving words of mercy? Surely those 
lips were blessed which poured forth benedictions, and there 
must have been some comfort in the hands which bound up 


222 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


the brokenhearted, and opened the prisons of the captives. We 
read thatjesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, “Father, I thank You, 
that You have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and 
have revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it 
seemed good in Your sight.” The doctrine of electing love 
stirred the deeps of His great soul, and made the floods clap 
their hands! “The King shall joy in Your strength, O Lord; and 
in Your salvation how gready shall He rejoice.” 

Do you think, brothers and sisters, our Savior lived in this 
world, doing so much good, without receiving some joy in His acts 
of mercy? To teach, to labor, and to make men holy, must give 
joy to a benevolent mind. It could not be otherwise than 
pleasant to a good man to do good. If God delights in mercy, 
surely His express image must do the same! To restore the dead 
to their sorrowing relations was this no satisfaction? Did the 
widow’s grateful eyes in the gates of Nain kindle no flashes of 
joy in His heart? Did the thankfulness of Mary and Martha 
inspire no comfort in the Life-giver? Do you think that it was 
not gladsome work to feed the famishing multitudes? Who 
could look upon the feasting thousands without rejoicing? To 
heal the leper, to restore the lame, to give eyes to the blind, and 
ears to the deaf — who could do all this, and not be happy in 
distributing the gifts? Surely, brothers and sisters, there were 
some hosannas in Jesus’ ears, and though He could always hear 
the cry of, “Crucify Him! Crucify Him!” yet He must have felt 
the wondrous joy of doing good, which is one of the delights 
entailed on all self-sacrificing lovers of others! 

Think, beloved, of His character, and surely He must have 
known the joy of being good; for there is a deep gladness in 
holiness, a blessed peacefulness in righteousness. The holiness 
of angels is their happiness, and although to a large degree the 
Savior laid His peace aside, yet there is a rest of soul from which 
virtue cannot separate. Distractions of conscience He never 


223 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


knew. Disturbances of mind on account of sin He did not feel 
on His own account, although as our substitute He was made 
sin for us. He suffered. Mark, I am not for a moment detracting 
from His sufferings — I see high mountains of grief; the eagle’s 
wing cannot reach their summit, nor foot of angel climb their 
brows — but lo, I see leaping streams of pleasure running down 
the rugged steeps, and amid the hollows of the desolate hills I 
gaze upon deep lakes of joy unfathomable by mortals! 

Brothers and sisters, we have every reason to believe that 
our Savior permanently found a solace while on earth, in the 
consideration that He was doing His Father’s will. He said, “It is 
My meat and My drink to do the will of Him who sent me.” 
“Know you not that I must be about My Father’s business?” 
On several occasions the Voice from heaven proclaimed the 
Father’s good pleasure in His only begotten — once the glory 
of heaven enwrapped Him on the holy mount; and during His 
whole life He had the presence of God until the moment of 
necessary desertion, when we find Him, for the first and only 
time, crying, “My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?” 
To do a work which He had contemplated from all eternity, to 
engage in an occupation, which had always been most 
delightful in prospect, could not have been altogether, and only, 
sorrowful! It was a passover with many bitter herbs, but with 
delight had He desired to eat of it. It was a baptism, and a 
baptism of blood, but He was straitened until it was 
accomplished. Of old, in expectation, His delights were with 
the sons of men. Were there none in the work ? Brothers and 
sisters let your Lord speak for Himself — “Lo, I come: in the 
volume of the book it is written of Me, I delight to do Your 
will, O My God: yes, Your law is within My heart.” 

In the glorious prospect which this great work opened to Him, 
when it would be completed, I am absolutely sure our Savior 
found comfort. Think not I speak too strongly; I have 


224 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


Scriptural warrant. Turn to the 22nd Psalm, which is the 
soliloquy of Christ upon the cross, and you find Him, after He 
bemoaned His desolate condition, comforting Himself thus, 
“All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the 
Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before 
You. All they who are fat upon earth shall eat and worship; all 
they who go down to the dust shall bow before Him; and none 
can keep alive his own soul. A seed shall serve Him: it shall be 
accounted to the Lord for a generation. They shall come, and 
shall declare His righteousness unto a people that shall be born, 
that He has done this.” He saw with prophetic eyes through 
the thick darkness which enveloped the cross, the rising of the 
bright sun of heaven’s eternal noon! He saw, when He hung 
upon the cross, not only the mocking eyes of multitudes of 
enemies, but the loving eyes of millions of souls whom He 
should redeem from hell! He heard not only the shouts of the 
vulgar mob, but the songs of blood-redeemed spirits. When He 
saw the lions and heard them roar, was it not a comfort to the 
Shepherd that He had kept the sheep, and none of them had 
perished? Indeed, my brothers and sisters, there is more than 
enough evidence to prove that a rich anointing of gladness 
rested on the head of the Man of Sorrows! 

Still, dear friends, this may be viewed by some as a moot 
point. We allow that there is room for differences of opinion, 
but not so as to the great joy which Christ obtained after He had 
endured the cross, despising the shame. Let us enter into the secret 
joys of our beloved. Consider, my brothers and sisters, the 
work accomplished; Christ has borne the wrath of God; God 
is reconciled to His people; Death has been destroyed — Christ 
is risen from the dead — the dragon’s head has been broken, the 
powers of sin have been subdued. Our Lord ascends to heaven 
with a shout, with the trumpet of the archangel; the glorified 
spirits accord Him a triumphal entry! “Lift up your heads, O 


225 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you gates, and be you lifted up, you everlasting doors, that the 
King of glory may come in!” He sits down upon His throne at 
His Father’s right hand, and then it is that He is anointed with 
the oil of gladness above His fellows! 

I should not have failed to remark that, as God, our 
Redeemer always possessed fullness of joy and pleasures 
forevermore. We are speaking of Him in His complex person 
as man and God, and in His official role as Mediator — it is His 
delight in this capacity which we now consider. 

The joy of the risen Mediator laid, first of all, in this — that 
He had now accotnplished a work which He had meditated upon from all 
eternity. Before the daystar marked the dawn; before the calm of 
space had ever been stirred by wings of angels, or the solemnity 
of silence had been startled with song of seraph, Christ had 
purposed to redeem His people. It was in the eternal purpose 
of the great Second Person in the Divine Unity, from before all 
worlds, to redeem unto Himself a people by price. What joy 
must it give Him, now that He can say, “I have finished 
transgression, made an end of sin, and brought in everlasting 
righteousness.” 

His heart had not only meditated, hut had been mightily set 
upon His work. He had bound His people’s names upon His 
breast; He had engraved them upon the palms of His hands; 
His ears were bored, for He intended to serve even until death. 
What if I say that, from before all worlds, He thirsted and 
panted that He might do His Father’s will, and redeem His 
people from their ruin? Now, brothers and sisters, that desire 
which had been in Him like coals of juniper, unquenchable, is 
now fulfilled to the uttermost — how can He be otherwise than 
anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows, since none 
other ever purposed so firmly or succeeded so perfectly? 

Consider, too, how great the pains which He endured, and we must 
believe, the joy to be commensurate with the pain in the accomplishing 


226 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


of His great life -purpose. He descended to the cross of deepest 
woe. Have I not tried to paint in my poor way the mysterious 
agonies of our blessed Savior? But I feel that I have failed. Now, 
when all this had been suffered, what joy to look back upon it! 
Never day so bright as that which follows black darkness; never 
calm so sweet as that which succeeds hurricane and tempest; 
never native place so delightful as to the long exiled pilgrim. So 
deep the sorrow, so high the joy — so unspeakable the grief, so 
unutterable the bliss! 

Remember, beloved brothers and sisters, the enemies He had 
overcome, and you will not marvel that His joy was matchless. 
Had He not defeated Death — grim tyrant — vanquisher of all 
mankind? Had He not broken the head of the old serpent, who 
in his crushing coils had bound and pressed a universe of souls? 
Did He not defeat in batde all the fiends in hell? Was not evil 
forever dethroned? Did not goodness sit upon a glorious high 
throne? Was not virtue exalted to the highest heaven, and sin 
cast down to the lowest hell in that day of the judgment of this 
world, when the Prince of Darkness was cast out? “Behold,” 
He might have said, “I see Satan falling like lightning from 
heaven. The dragon bound with a great chain. Lo, hell’s gates 
are shut upon the saints, the grave is rifled of its spoils, heaven 
is crowded with the saved, and earth purified from sin.” O 
Jesus, You mighty conqueror! Your glorious victories must 
surely give to You, as they do to us, a blessed anointing with 
the oil of gladness! 

Our Lord possesses in heaven, now, as perfect man, the 
joy of looking back upon a life without spot, or wrinkle, or any 
such thing; He has the satisfaction of seeing this perfect 
obedience covering all His people, till they stand lovely in His 
loveliness; He has the equal delight of observing the efficacy of 
His blood to wash the foulest, and make them whiter than 
snow — while His intercession scatters mercy in one everlasting 


227 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


shower upon the sons of men! Since His heart was love, His 
joy must be in deeds of love, and as He has become a fountain 
always welling up with loving gifts towards the chosen sons of 
men, His delight must be unchanging like His nature, and 
unbounded like His divinity. “God, Your God, has anointed 
You with the oil of gladness above Your fellows.” 

We pause a moment, having tried to dwell upon the joy, to 
notice the cause of it. “You love righteousness, and hate 
wickedness, therefore God has anointed You.” It seems, then, 
that the first cause why Jesus Christ has received fullness of joy 
lies in His having loved righteousness. This He did necessarily 
because of the spodess purity of His nature; this He did 
practically in the hallowed sincerity and integrity of His life. Of whom 
could it be said so truly as of our Lord, that the law of God was 
in His heart? How abundantly did He prove His love of 
righteousness, by vindicating it in His death, fulfilling in His 
own person all the sentence of divine wrath, and taking upon 
Himself all the curses which fell upon offenders! You cannot 
suppose righteousness to be more clearly manifested than in 
the living works of Jesus, nor more completely avenged than in 
His dying throes! How sovereign is that righteousness to which 
even the Son of God bowed His head and gave up the ghost? 
The world deluged with water, the plains of Sodom smoking 
with brimstone, the land of Egypt vexed with plagues — all 
these terrible things in righteousness manifest the justice of 
God — but none of them so solemnly as the voluntary sacrifice 
of Jesus! Our beloved loved righteousness, indeed, when He 
emptied out all His heart that He might make us righteous! 
Moreover, as in His life and death we see that He loved 
righteousness, we discern it, too, in the constant effect of His work. 
His gospel makes men righteous. Does it not give them a legal 
righteousness by imputation, a real righteousness by infusion, 
a righteousness which covers them with fine linen, and makes 


228 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


them all glorious within? The spirit of the gospel which we 
preach is to magnify that which is pure, and lovely, and of good 
repute. Wherever the Lord Jesus displays His gracious power, 
sins yield the throne, purity wins the scepter, divine grace reigns 
through righteousness unto eternal life through the perfect 
sacrifice — the living power of Jesus! 

The text adds, “You hate wickedness.” A man’s character is 
not complete without a perfect hatred of sin. “Be you angry 
and sin not.” There can hardly be goodness in a man if he is 
not angry at sin; he who loves the truth of God must hate every 
false way! How our Lord Jesus hated it when the temptation 
came! Thrice it assailed Him in different forms, but always it 
was, “Get behind Me, Satan.” How He hated it when He saw 
it in others — none the less fervently because He showed His 
hate more often in tears of pity, than in words of rebuke. Yet 
what language could be more stern, more Elijah -like, than the 
words, “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For 
you devour widows’ houses, and for a pretense make long 
prayers.” He hated wickedness so much that He bled that He 
might wound it to the heart. He died that it might die — He was 
buried that He might bury it in His tomb, and He rose that He 
might forever trample it beneath His feet! Christ is in the gospel, 
my brothers and sisters, and you all know how utterly that 
gospel is opposed to wickedness in every shape! No matter how 
wickedness may array itself in fair garments, and imitate the 
language of holiness — the precepts of Jesus, like His famous 
scourge of small cords — chase wickedness out of the temple, 
and will not let it have peaceful lodging in the Church! So too, 
in the heart where Jesus reigns, what war there is between 
Christ and Belial! And when our Redeemer shall come to be 
our judge, in those thundering words, “Depart, you cursed,” 
which are, indeed, but a prolongation of His life-teaching 
concerning sin, then shall it be seen, I say, that He hated 


229 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


wickedness. As warm as is His love to sinners, so hot is His 
hatred of sin; as perfect as is the righteousness which He 
completed, so perfect shall be the destruction of every form of 
wickedness! Oh You glorious champion of right, and destroyer 
of wrong, for this cause has God, even Your God, anointed 
You with the oil of gladness above Your fellows! 

But, beloved, we must dwell for one moment upon another 
thought supplied by the text, the character of this joy is hinted at 
by way of comparison — “God, even Your God, has anointed 
You with the oil of gladness above Your fellows.” And who are 
His fellows? Suppose His fellows to be the kings and princes 
of this world, for the psalm is descriptive of Christ in His 
royalty? Well, is He not anointed with gladness above them all? 
Kings rejoice in their dominions, their extent and population — 
our King looks from shore to shore, and from the river even 
to the ends of the earth — and of His dominion there is no end! 
Princes delight in the fame and honor which their office and 
deeds may bring them; but before the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
fame of monarchs dwindles into nothing! His name shall 
endure forever — throughout all generations the people shall 
praise Him. Monarchs delight in the riches and treasure which 
their dominions yield — Christ receives a wealth of love and 
homage from His people, before which the riches of Croesus 
become poverty itself! “The daughter of Tyre shall be there 
with a gift; even the rich among the people shall entreat Your 
favor.” Kings are accustomed to rejoice in the victories they 
have achieved. He that comes from Edom, with dyed garments 
from Bozrah, traveling in the greatness of His strength, has 
more joy than they. They boast the sureness of their throne, 
but, “Your throne, O God, is forever and ever.” The inward 
thought of some kings may be that they are invincible in power, 
and that their will is law; but at the name of Jesus every knee 
shall bow, and His enemies shall become as the fat of rams; 


230 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


into smoke shall they consume, yes, into smoke shall they 
consume away. Good kings rejoice in the beneficence of their 
rule, and the happiness of their subjects; our King may surely 
glory in the favors which He has scattered from His scepter. 
But time would fail us if we were to complete the contrast here. 
Kings of the earth, you may take off your crowns and remain 
uncrowned in the presence of King Jesus, for on His head are 
many crowns! O you lords and mighty men, you may lay down 
your dignities and honors, for you are unhonored and 
undignified in the presence of Him who is above His fellows! 

My brothers and sisters, where shall His fellows be found? 
Search among the wise, and who shall match the gladness of 
incarnate wisdom, for man’s wisdom brings sorrow. Go and 
travel among the famous, and who shall be compared with His 
illustrious name? Where else is there a name so full of joy? 
Search out the mighty, who has an arm like His? Go and search 
among the good and excellent, who have blessed their kind by 
philanthropy — who among them is so anointed as the man of 
Nazareth? As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is 
my beloved among the sons. Standing as high above all the rest 
of men as the heavens are above the earth; He is, indeed, 
anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows! I find that 
some interpreters read it — “The oil of gladness for His fellows.” 
The rendering is probably incorrect, but it bears a very truthful, 
sweet, and comfortable thought in it. If the saints are His 
fellows, and He is not ashamed to call them brothers and sisters, 
then the oil of gladness was first poured on His head that it 
might descend even to the skirts of His garments, and that all 
the saints might be made partakers of His joy! 

We have said enough, we think, on this first point — here is 
the material for much meditation. Search, my brothers and 
sisters, and learn how the Lord, even our God, has glorified His 
Son Jesus! 


231 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


II. Now, we turn to THE GLADNESS AFFORDED BY THE 

CHURCH. “All Your garments smell of myrrh, and cassia, and 
aloes, out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have made You 
glad.” His garments have been saturated with very precious and 
fragrant odors; this is the work of His Church in the phrase, 
“ivory palaces,” the allusion is to certain costly structures which 
some Oriental kings erected, plated within and without with 
ivory. We read of Ahab, that he built an ivory house, and it was 
a solemn threat from the lips of Amos, “The houses of ivory 
shall perish.” These ivory houses relate, I suppose, either to the 
courts of glory, or, more consistently with our interpretation 
this morning, to the hearts of believers. Or, better still, to the 
Churches, which are like palaces of ivory, both for glory, and 
majesty — for richness, and for purity. The saints’ graces — their 
love, their praise, their prayers, their faith — are like myrrh, 
cassia, and aloes. The Savior’s garments are so perfumed, that 
when He rides in His triumphal chariot, He scatters sweet 
odors all around. It is a great and certain truth of God, that 
Christ finds an intense satisfaction in His Church. “He will 
rejoice over You with joy; He will rest in His love; He will joy 
over You with singing.” In His people, as the objects of His choice, 
He finds satisfaction. It is true there is nothing in them naturally; 
they are by nature heirs of wrath, even as others; but having set 
His love upon them, having determined to make them His 
people, He takes a delight in the objects of His choice because 
of that choice. Nothing in us could have been the origin of the 
Savior’s first delight in us. Now, doubtless, that we are His 
workmanship, He takes a delight in the works of His own 
hands! But when we were like broken potsherds, thrown away 
upon the dunghill of the fall, if He saw anything in us it must 
have been in His own eyes. 

But, dear friends, as men always take a deep interest in that 
which has cost them dearly, so since that triumphant day when 


232 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


Jesus stretched out His hands upon the cross, and paid the 
price for His people, He has found an infinite solace and delight 
in them. He sees in every believer’s face a memento of His 
groans; He looks into the eyes of every penitent, and sees His 
own tears there; He hears the cry of every mourner, and there 
hears His own groans over again; He beholds the reward of His 
soul’s travail in every regenerate heart, and therefore, as the 
purchase of His blood, we make Him glad. 

Again, as His workmanship, as He sees us day by day more 
conformed to His image, He rejoices in us. Just as you see the 
sculptor with his chisel etching out the statue which lies hidden 
in the block of marble, taking off a corner here, and a chip there, 
and a piece here — see how he smiles when he brings out the 
features of the form — so our Savior, as He proceeds with His 
engraving tool, working through the operation of the Spirit, 
and making us like unto Himself, finds much delight in us! The 
painter makes rough drafts at first, and lays on the colors 
roughly. Some do not understand what he is doing, and for 
three or four sittings the portrait is much unlike the man it aims 
at representing; but the painter can discern the features in the 
canvas — he sees them looming through that mist and haze of 
color — he knows that beauty will yet beam forth from yonder 
daubs and blotches. So Jesus, though we are yet but mere 
outlines of His image, can discover His own perfection in us 
where no eyes but His own, as the Mighty Artist, can perceive 
it! Dear friends, it is for this reason — because we are the work 
of His hands — that He takes delight in us! 

Don’t you know that we are His brothers and sisters? And 
brothers should delight in brothers. No, we are His spouse — 
and where should the husband find his comfort but in his bride? 
We are His body — shall not the head be content with the 
members? We are one with Him, vitally, personally, 
everlastingly one! And it is litde marvel, therefore, if we have a 


233 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


mutual joy in each other, so that His garments smell of myrrh, 
aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory palaces of His Church, 
wherein He has been made glad! 

Let us think how we can make Him glad. Brothers and sisters, 
our love to Christ — oh, we think it so cold, so litde, and so, 
indeed, we must sorrowfully confess it to be — but it is very 
sweet to Christ. We can never compare our love to Christ with 
His love to us, and yet He does not despise it. Hear His own 
eulogy of His Church in the Song, “You have ravished My heart, 
My sister, My spouse. You have ravished My heart with one of 
your eyes, with one chain of your neck. How fair is your love, 
My sister, My spouse! How much better is your love than wine, 
and the smell of your ointments than all spices!” ‘You are 
beautiful, O My love, as Tirza, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as 
an army with banners. Turn away your eyes from Me, for they 
have overcome Me.” See, see, my brothers and sisters! His 
delight is in you! When you lean your head on His bosom, you 
not only receive, but you give Him joy! When you gaze with 
love upon His beauteous face, you not only receive comfort, 
but give delight! Our praise, too, gives Him joy, when from our 
hearts we sing His name, and when gratefully, though silendy, 
we breathe a song up to His throne. As princes are delighted 
with incense, so is Christ delighted with the praise of His 
people. And our gifts, too, delight Him. As the son of our good 
Queen accepts rich tokens of kindness from the people of his 
land, so our Lord J esus is charmed with the offerings of His 
people. He loves to see us lay our time, our talents, our 
substance upon His altar — not for the value of what we give — 
but for the sake of the motive from which the gift springs! He 
takes far more delight in what we do for Him than our Queen’s 
son could take in splendid arches, or in the glorious pageantry 
of yesterday. To Christ the shouts of His people are better than 
the cheers of the most enthusiastic populace, and to Him the 


234 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


lowly offerings of His saints are more acceptable than 
thousands of gold and silver! Forgive your enemy and you 
make Christ glad! Distribute of your substance to the poor, and 
He rejoices! Be the means of saving souls, and you give Him to 
see of the travail of His soul. Preach His gospel, and you are a 
sweet savor unto Him. Go among the ignorant, and among the 
hopeless, and try to lift them up for His sake, and you have 
given Him satisfaction! I tell you, brothers and sisters, it is in 
your power this very day to break the alabaster box, and pour 
the precious ointment on His head, as did the woman of old, 
whose memorial is to this day set forth. You can anoint Him 
above all His fellows with the oil of gladness! 

I think I see a great procession. It is Jesus Christ riding 
alone through the tens of thousands of souls whom He has 
redeemed with His own blood. I think I see Him looking to the 
right and to the left as He rides along the centuries. Look how 
every window of every age is crowded! Glorified spirits look 
down from the housetops of heaven — the Church militant 
looks up from the streets of earth — multitudes upon 
multitudes of souls that love Him, and call Him King, salute 
Him as their Redeemer! I notice that, as He goes along in this 
great procession, His eyes are bright with joy. We liked to see 
the Prince and Princess happy yesterday, but their joy could be 
nothing compared with that of Christ as He rides along in 
triumph! How the multitudes delight Him; the ten thousand 
times ten thousand — who shall tell how many Christ has 
redeemed? Their number is beyond all human count! So many 
are they that, as they clap their hands, and shout His name, I 
hear a voice like many waters, or like great thunders, while they 
cry, “Hallelujah, Sweet Prince! Ride on triumphantly! And reign 
forever and ever!” There is one thing Christ feels as He looks 
upon the crowd around Him, which our Prince could not feel 
yesterday — He knows that every one of these would lay down 


235 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


their lives for Him — of all those whom Jesus bought with 
blood; among those who are renewed in heart; there is not one 
who would not bleed for Him! To the stake they would walk, 
and sing amidst the flames! To the dungeon they would go, and 
praise Him while they rot in darkness! They would be dragged 
at the heels of horses; they would be stoned; they would be 
sawn in sunder; they would wander about in sheepskins, and in 
goatskins, and they would glory in all these things that they may 
show their love to Christ! 

Every eye in the vast throng which gathers about the 
triumphal chariot of Christ beams with intense love for Him. 
And when they shout, each one shouts louder than his fellow! 
Each one in the whole throng feels he owes more to the great 
King than anyone else! There is something special about each 
face the King looks on, and as He remembers the special 
circumstances, He perceives the reason for that special love. 
Either it is much forgiven, or else it is much trial averted, or 
much strength conferred by which to perform labor. I am sure 
that when you and I are in that throng looking upon Him, we 
may truly say — 

“Then loudest of the crowd I’ll sing, 

While heaven’s resounding mansions ring 
With shouts of sovereign grace!” 

You did well to applaud your Prince yesterday, but what 
had he ever done for you? What debt did you owe to him? 
Owed he not far more to you? But our King, as He rides along 
in the midst of the joyful hosts of the blood-bought, has this 
upon His mind — “I bought all these souls with My blood.” He 
recollects, as He looks upon them, where they would have been 
but for His grace, and the very pangs of hell must add joy to 
His soul when He remembers that He saved them from passing 


236 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


into the pit of hell! He recollects, too, what they once were — 
how full of sin, what enemies of God — how they crucified Him, 
how they trampled on His precious blood; and now He sees 
them bowing before Him, too glad to catch but a glimpse of 
Him as He rides by. They are more than happy to be as the dust 
of His feet if He will but honor them by treading upon them — 
that He might be lifted the higher! O my brothers and sisters, 
we love the Lord Jesus Christ, and our hearts give Him a 
reception such as never was accorded to an earthly Prince. Pile 
the arches! Pile the arches! Let hearts pour forth their life-blood, 
if in no other way the banners can be dyed red! Strew the streets! 
Strip off your garments if in no other way the pageant can be 
made illustrious! Bring forth the royal diadem, and let every 
saint renounce wealth, and comfort, if by no other means Jesus 
can be crowned! Empty heaven, if by no other way Jesus can 
be attended with guards of honor. Come, all you sons and 
daughters of His great family, and offer yourselves a living 
sacrifice, if there can be no other incense! We are all prepared — 
I speak for the sacramental host of God’s elect — we are all 
prepared, by His grace, to follow Him through floods and 
through flames! We are prepared to give Him all the honor that 
heart can conceive. We are prepared to kiss His feet as well as 
to crown His head! Bring forth the royal diadem today and 
crown Him Lord of All; and each day as He rides along, till He 
shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, let Him 
be crowned King of kings and Lord of lords! 

III. Now for another text, but not another sermon. It is in 
the fourth verse of the first chapter of the Song of Solomon — 

“We will be glad and rejoice in you.” 

God has made the king glad, and His saints make Him glad; 
let us be glad, too! But let us take care that our gladness is of 
the right sort. “We will rejoice and be glad in You .” That man 
is glad in his farm; that other in his merchandise; that one 


237 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


yonder in his wealth — that woman in her jewels; that other in 
her beauty. ‘We will rejoice and be glad in You. ” But in what? 
We will rejoice, more especially, in His love to us. You remember 
Jesus Christ said to Simon Peter, “Simon, son of Jonas, do you 
love Me more than these?” Interpreters read that two ways. 
Some think He meant, “Do you love Me more than you love 
these nets, and this boat, and your earthly calling, and these 
friends?” I think I hear Jesus Christ speaking this morning, and 
He says, “My people, I love you more than these.” He points 
to spirits that once stood around His throne, angels that have 
sinned — they fell like lightning from heaven, and there they lie 
in flames. And Christ says, “I love you more than these. I let 
these perish, but I saved you.” Pointing to the kings and princes 
of this world, the great, the mighty, and the learned men — and 
to all the nations that sit in darkness — He says, “I love you 
more than these. I gave Ethiopia and Seba for you.” Then 
taking a higher range, He points to heaven; there sit the angels 
before the throne of God, and He says, “I love you more than 
these; I left their company for yours.” He bids you listen to 
their harps, and to their songs, and He says, “I love you more 
than these; I left all these melodies that I might be able to meet 
your groans.” Yes, He points to His own throne, so bright with 
glory that mortal eyes scarcely dare to rest upon it, and He says, 
“I love you more than these, for I left the glory of My throne 
that I might redeem you with My blood.” Saint, will you not 
join with me? Shall we not both say, “Savior, blessed be Your 
unexampled love! We will rejoice and be glad in You!” 

But some interpreters read the text — “Do you love Me 
more than these?” — “Do you love me more than these others 
love Me?” Jesus speaks today to us, “I have loved you more 
than these; your mother loved you; strong were her pangs when 
you were born, and anxious her cares when she nursed you at 
her bosom. But I have loved you more than these, and more 


238 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


498 The Gladness of the Man of 
Sorrow - Psalm 45:7-8 


than your brothers and sisters loved you — born of the same 
parents, they watched over you with delight, and they have 
been ready to help you in your time of need, but I have loved 
you more than these. And more than your husband loved you, 
loved you as his own soul. He has cherished you, and has been 
ready to lay down his life to give you back health when you 
have been sick — I have loved you more than he. Your children, 
too, have loved you; they have climbed your knee, and smiled 
upon you for all your kindness to them, and they have 
strengthened your old age, and you have leaned upon them, as 
upon a staff, when you have been tottering with weakness. But 
I have loved you more than these! And you have had a joyous 
companion, a dear friend who has been with you from your 
youth up, and has never lifted his heel against you; and you 
have had your confidantes and your brethren who went up to 
the House of God with you and talked cheerfully by the way, 
but I have loved you more than these.” 1 think I hear Him say 
to me — “There are some in this congregation who would pluck 
out their own eyes to give them to you. They love you, for you 
are their spiritual father — but I have loved you more than these.” 
And He points to all the good men that have ever tried to teach 
you, to all the comforters who have given you joy, to all the 
helpers that have aided you on the road to immortality, and He 
says, “I have loved you more than these.” 

Well, if His love is matchless like this, we will rejoice and 
be glad in Him! The Lord knows I have nothing else to rejoice 
in. I cannot rejoice in myself — there are so many sins and so 
many doubts — but I will rejoice, and be glad in Him if He loves 
me like this. He has finished the work for me, given me a 
perfect righteousness, washed me in His blood, taken off His 
robe to clothe me, given His life that He may make me live! He 
has entered the grave to bring me out of it, and said that I shall 
shordy be enthroned with Him above the sky — I will rejoice 


239 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and be glad in Him! When King Solomon was crowned, all the 
people rejoiced; and shall we be mourners when Christ sits 
upon His throne? Let the heaviest heart begin to leap! And if 
you have to bear your burdens tomorrow, yet throw them off 
today. “We will rejoice and be glad in You.” I should not like 
one Christian to go down these aisles this morning without 
some light of heaven’s brightness on his cheek — without some 
note of heaven’s music in his ears. “Oh,” says the Christian, 
‘Yes. I will. The cross is heavy, but I will hope beneath it; the 
furnace is hot, but I will sing in it; the way is rough, but I will 
tread it with light footsteps, for I will rejoice and be glad in Him 
who has loved me, and given Himself for me!” Well, you see, 
there is a glad Christ in heaven, and here is a glad Church on 
earth! There is Christ anointed by His Father; here are His 
people sharing that anointing! Here is Christ giving you joy, and 
you giving Christ joy! Belt the world with happiness — lift up 
the ladder of your songs! While the bottom rests on earth, let 
the top reach to heaven! And you angels of God, hold 
fellowship today with God, and with us through the joy and 
peace which God the Father gives us, while we rejoice and are 
glad in Him! 

I wish you all understood this subject, but some of you are 
strangers to it altogether! Remember, there is no joy anywhere 
but in Christ; it is all poor mockery which you get elsewhere. 
Jesus Christ is to be had, and whoever believes in Him shall not 
perish but have everlasting life! 

The Lord give you His benediction, for Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


240 



499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 11 : 2-3 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, March 8 th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These are the 
beasts which you shall eat among all the beasts that are on the 
earth. Whatever parts the hoof, and is cloven footed, and chews 
the cud, among the beasts, that shall you eat.” — Leviticus 11:2- 
3 


THE MOSAIC LAW attached great importance to meats and 
drinks — the Christian religion attaches none. The Aposde 
Peter was shown by the vision of a sheet let down from heaven, 
not only that all nations were now to receive the gospel message, 
but that all kinds of food were now clean, and that all the 
prohibitions which had formerly been laid upon them for legal 
purposes were now, once and for all, withdrawn. A Christian 
may, if he pleases, put himself under restrictions as to these 
matters. You will remember that the Apostle Paul says, “I know 
and am persuaded of the Lord Jesus that there is nothing 
unclean of itself, but to him who esteems anything to be 
unclean, to him it is unclean.” 1 know our Aposde was tender 
of weak consciences, but he could expostulate with the 
brothers and sisters somewhat thus, “If you are dead with 
Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living 
in the world, do you dogmatize — touch not this, taste not that, 
handle not the other — and all about things which perish with 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the using?” The doctrine of the New Testament is expressly 
laid down, “Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be 
refused, if it is received with thanksgiving.” And as for the 
practice enjoined upon believers, “All things are lawful, but all 
things are not expedient.” In the example of Paul we have full 
liberty; he would put no embargo upon the conscience. But in 
his example we have also fervent charity — he would put no 
stumbling block in his brother’s way. “If meat makes my 
brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands.” 
The Levitical law enjoined many precepts as to meats and 
drinks; but those carnal ordinances were imposed until the time 
of reformation. Since then, this Mosaic institution was not 
designed to be perpetual; we feel certain that it must have had 
some use at the time when it was first established, and during 
the time in which it was sustained. As that was peculiarly a 
typical dispensation, we feel persuaded that we shall not 
exaggerate the uses of the text if we show that there was 
something instructive to us, and something typical of the better 
covenant in the command that the people were to eat no 
creatures but those which divided the hoof, and those which 
chewed the cud. 

I. It is our firm belief that these distinctions of meats were 
laid down on purpose TO KEEP THE JEWS AS A DISTINCT 
PEOPLE, and that herein they might be a type of the people of 
God, who are also, throughout all ages, to be a distinct and 
separate people — not of the world, even as Christ was not of 
the world. 

You who are conversant with the old Levitical rule, well 
know that it was quite impossible for the Hebrews to mix with 
any other nation without violating the statutes they were 
commanded to keep. Their food was so restricted that they 
could not possibly enter into social dealings with any of the 
neighboring peoples. The Canaanites, for instance, ate 


242 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


everything — even the flesh that had been torn by dogs — and 
the dogs themselves. Now, a Jew could never sit at a 
Canaanite’s table, because he could never be sure that there 
would not be the flesh of some unclean and accursed thing 
upon it. The Jews could not even eat with the Arabs, who were 
near akin to them, for they frequendy partook of the flesh of 
the camels, the hare and the coney, all which, as we shall see 
presendy, were forbidden to the Jew. The Arabs on the south, 
and the Canaanite nations all round Palestine, were the most 
likely people with whom the Jews would associate; but this 
command about what they should and should not eat 
prevented them, forever, from mingling with these people, and 
made them a distinct and isolated republic as long as they were 
obedient to the law. We are told by Eastern travelers that the 
Muslim regulations, which are far less strict than those of the 
Jew, prevent their becoming socially intermingled either with 
the idolaters or with Christians. It is a well-known fact that no 
people who have laws about meats and drinks have ever 
changed their religion to that of another people, because the 
familiarity which seems necessary, in order to proselyte, is quite 
prevented by the barrier that precludes from dining at the table! 
It is at the social table men enjoy the most genial dealings — it 
is there they pour out their souls with the least reserve, and mix 
their thoughts, one with another, in the greatest freedom of 
conversation. Stop them there — prevent their sitting at the 
same table, and there is no likelihood that they will ever blend 
or intermingle in any kind of affinity — the races must be 
distinct! 

I believe, dear friends, though I have been somewhat prosy 
in explaining myself, that it was God’s real intention to keep 
the children of Israel, until the coming of Christ, separate from 
all the nations that were upon the face of the earth. They could 
not join in the worship of other nations, for other nations 


243 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sacrificed to their gods the very animals which to the Jew were 
unclean; they could not join in social contact, as we have 
already seen, and therefore marriage with any other nation 
would be, not only, as it were, prohibited by the law, but would 
be actually prevented by the possibilities of the case. It must, in 
each instance, put the transgressor beyond the pale of his tribe. 
They would remain as much a distinct people as if a great wall 
of brass had been built all around them, or as if they had been 
transported to some island, and an impassable gulf had been 
put between them and any other kindred upon earth. They 
were separated forever! Now friends, you will say, “What is the 
use of this to us?” I answer, it is the earthly type of a heavenly 
mystery! When the Jews were put away as the people of God 
for a time, then the Gentiles were grafted into their olive 
branch, and though we did not inherit the ceremonies, we did 
inherit all the privileges to which those ceremonies point. Thus, 
all of you who name the name of Christ, and are truly what you 
profess to be, are solemnly bound to be forever separated from 
the world. Not that you are to leave off your daily dealings with 
men. Our Savior did not do so. He was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, and separate from sinners, yet, you know, He was 
always in the company of sinners, sitting at their table, seeking 
their good, and hunting after their souls. He was with them, but 
He was never o/them. He was among them, but always distinct 
and separate from them — not conforming Himself to them, 
but transforming them to Himself! He has set us an example. 
It is not the seclusion of a hermit, nor the exclusion of 
yourselves in a monastery, where you would be of no service 
to your fellow men, but it is a higher and more spiritual 
separation which I claim of Christians tonight. You are to be in 
the world, and among the world; you are to mingle with all sorts 
and conditions of men — but still to maintain the dignity of your 
new-born character, and to let men see that you are among 


244 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


them as a speckled bird, as a light in the midst of darkness, as 
salt scattered over putridity, as heavenly angels in the midst of 
fallen men! So are you to be a distinct people, a chosen 
generation! 

But, you will ask of me, in what respects are you to be 
distinguished ? In a pure consistency always — in a vain 
eccentricity never — this shall be my first reply. Not in your 
garments, my brothers and sisters. All those inventions of 
broad-brimmed hats, and coats without collars, perish in the 
using! Let your dress be, nevertheless, so distinguished from 
that of some other men, that there shall be none of the pride 
and foolish quality in which they delight. The Aposde Peter has 
well laid down the regulations by which our sisters in Christ are 
to adorn themselves. But I need not mention what you know 
so well, and practice so little — that chaste and becoming 
neatness which is always right in the sight of God — and 
beautiful in the assembly of Christians. Not by any peculiar 
dialect in your speech are you to be known. For my part, I 
abhor in any man that sanctimonious tone and sacred whine 
which many affect — even in the pulpit I despise it! I believe 
that the reason why the pulpit has lost so much of its former 
power is because men think they need to mouth our blessed 
Saxon tongue, and talk as if everything natural were to be 
eschewed there, and men, metamorphosed into ministers, were 
to be as unnatural and grotesque in their modes of speech as 
possible! No, not these, not these; all such artificial separations 
we leave to the people whose vanity feeds on its own conceit! 
Nor need you make any straining effort to be distinguished by 
any stiff rigid formality of your own. Do not try to make 
yourself look like a Christian! True Christians can do a great 
many things that sham Christians must not do. As for me, I am 
never afraid to laugh, for I shall never crack the paint on my 
face, laugh as I may! A sincere man may do a great many things 


245 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


that a hypocrite dare not do, for he will split the garments of 
his hypocrisy if he ventures to run as a Christian may. Heavenly 
realities within do not always need to be plastered up and 
labeled outside, so that everybody may see and recognize you 
and say, “There goes a saint.” There are other modes of being 
distinguished from the world than any of these. 

What are they, then? Well, brothers and sisters, we ought 
always to be distinguished from the world in the great object of our 
life. As for worldly men, some of them are seeking wealth, 
others of them fame; some seek after comfort, others after 
pleasure. Subordinately you may seek after any of these, but 
your main and principal motive as a Christian should always be 
to live for Christ. To live for glory? Yes, but for His glory. To 
live for comfort? Yes, but be all your consolation in Him. To 
live for pleasure? Yes, but when you are merry, sing psalms, 
and make melody in your hearts to the Lord. T o live for wealth? 
Yes, but to be rich in faith; you may lay up treasure, but lay it 
up in heaven, where neither moth nor rust corrupt, where 
thieves break not through, nor steal. It is thought, you know, 
that ministers live for God — merchants should do the same! I 
wish, my brothers and sisters that you would trade and do your 
merchandise for His service. Do your plowing, and sowing, and 
reaping, and mowing — do it for Christ! Would God you could 
do this quite as much in His service, as we do ours, when we 
preach for Christ! You can make the most common calling 
become really sacred; you may take the highest orders by 
dedicating your daily life wholly to the service of Jesus. There 
is such a thing — and let those who deny the possibility stand 
self-convicted that they obey not the precept — “Whether you 
eat or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God.” 

By your spirit, as well as your aim, you should likewise be 
distinguished. The spirit of this world is often selfish — it is 
always a spirit that forgets God that ignores the existence of a 


246 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


Creator in His own world, the land which He makes fat by His 
own bounty. Men with God’s breath in their nostrils forget 
Him who makes them live! Now, your spirit should be one of 
unselfish devotion, a spirit always conscious of His presence, 
bowed down with the weight, or raised up with the cheer of 
Hagar’s exclamation — “ You God see me” — a spirit which 
watches humbly before God, and seeks to know His will, and 
to do it through the grace of God given to you! Such a spirit as 
this — without the drab of one sect or the phylacteries of 
another — will soon make you quite as distinct from your fellow 
men as ever meats and drinks could make the Jews a separate 
people. 

Your maxims, too, and the rules which regulate you, should 
be very different from those of others. The world says, “Well, 
it is usual in the trade; there is no use in being over scrupulous; 
we must not be too Puritanical, or too severe — we shall never 
get on if we are picking at this, and frowning at that.” A 
Christian never considers what is usual, but what pleases God! He 
does not estimate a wrong by its commonness — he counts that 
a fraud and a falsehood will be a fraud and lie — though the 
entire world shall agree to practice it! The believer reads things, 
not in man’s light, in the obscurity of which so many blind bats 
are willing to fly, but he reads things in the sunlight of heaven. 
If a thing is right, though he loses by it, it is done! If it is wrong, 
though he should become as rich as Croesus by allowing it, he 
scorns the sin for his Master’s sake! We want our merchants on 
the Exchange, our traders in their shops, and our artisans in 
their factories. Yes, and we want all masters, employers, and 
overseers, too, to be distinguished as the clean from the 
unclean, in the maxims that govern their daily life, and thus 
manifestly separate them from the world! 

This will naturally lead to the next point — the Christian 
should be separate in his actions. I would not give much for your 


247 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


religion unless it can be seen. I know some people’s religion is 
heard of — but give me the man whose religion is seen! Lamps 
do not talk, but shine. A lighthouse sounds no drum, it beats 
no gong, and yet, far over the waters its friendly spark is seen 
by the mariner. So let your actions shine out your religion; let 
your conduct talk out your soul; let the main sermon of your 
life be illustrated by all your conduct, and it shall not fail to be 
illustrious. Have I not told you before that the only bit of 
ecclesiastical history we have in the whole New Testament is — 
what? The sermons of the Apostles? No, no, the “Acts of the 
Apostles.” So let your history be written, so that it may have 
this title — “The acts of such-and-such a man.” This will furnish 
the best proof that you have been with Jesus! 

A Christian is distinguished by his conversation. He will often 
trim a sentence where others would have made it far more 
luxuriant by a jest which was not altogether clean. Following 
Herbert’s advice — “He pares his apple — he would cleanly 
feed.” If he would have a jest, he picks the mirth, but leaves the 
sin. His conversation is not use to levity — it is not mere froth — 
it ministers divine grace unto its hearers. He has learned where 
the saltbox is kept in God’s great house, and so his speech is 
always seasoned with it, so that it may do no hurt but much 
good. Oh, commend me to the man who talks like Jesus, who 
will not for the world suffer corrupt communications to come 
out of his mouth! I know what people will say of you if you are 
like this — they will say you are straight-laced, and that you will 
not throw much life into company; others will call you mean- 
spirited. Oh, my brothers and sisters! Bold-hearted men are 
always called mean-spirited by cowards! They will admonish 
you not to be singular, but you can tell them that it is no folly 
to be singular, when to be singular is to be right. I know they 
will say you deny yourselves a great deal, but you will remind 
them that it is no denial to you. Sheep do not eat carrion, but I 


248 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


do not know that sheep think it a hardship to turn away from 
the foul feast! Eagles do not prefer to float on the sea, but I do 
not read that eagles think it a denial when they can soar in 
higher atmospheres! Do not talk of self-denial; you have other 
ends and other aims — you have wells of comfort that such men 
know not of. It would be a shame for you to be eating husks 
with swine, when your Father’s table is loaded with dainties. I 
trust, my dear brothers and sisters, that you know the value of 
the gold of heaven too well to pawn it away for the counterfeits 
of earth! “Come you out from among them; be you separate, 
and touch not the unclean thing.” By a holiness which merely 
moral men cannot equal, stand as on a pedestal aloft above the 
world. Thus, men may know you to be of the seed of Jesus, 
even as they knew the Jew to be the seed of Israel. 

How shall I urge you to give more earnest heed to this holy 
separation? Let me add the voice of warning to that of entreaty. 
If we do not see to this matter, we shall bring sorrow on our 
own souls, we shall lose all hope of honoring Christ, and we 
shall sooner, or later, bring a great disaster on the world. You 
know the world is always trying to nationalize the Church. 
What a mercy it is that there are some who will not have it! If 
you could once make the Church and the nation one, what 
would follow? It must be destroyed — it must fall! It was when 
the Church and the world became one in Noah’s day that the 
Lord sent the flood to destroy all people. No, the proper 
position of a Christian is not with the world, even in its best 
state, and its most exalted condition! We are to be separate 
from this present evil world according to the will of God! Our 
position today is as much as in Christ’s day — outside the 
camp — not in it. We are still to be protesters, still to be testifiers 
against the world. “You are of God, little children, and the 
whole world lies in the wicked one.” Scripture never supposes 
that the world will get better till the coming of Christ; it does 


249 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


not propose to lift the world up, and marry it with the Church; 
it always supposes the Church to be as an alien and a stranger 
here until Christ, her husband, shall come! On which side will 
you join? Truce there cannot be! Links between the two there 
must not be; God and mammon cannot go together. For which 
will you be — for God — for truth — for right? Or for Satan — 
for hell — for the wrong? Which shall it be? May the Spirit of 
God whisper in your heart tonight and say, “Believe in Christ 
Jesus! Take up your cross and follow Him, and be enlisted on 
His side from now on and forever.” 

II. We have now a second and an important matter to 
bring forward. The distinction drawn between clean and 
unclean animals was, we think, intended by God TO KEEP HIS 
PEOPLE ALWAYS CONSCIOUS THAT THEY WERE IN THE 
NEIGHBORHOOD OF SIN. 

Just let me picture it. I have caught the idea from Mr. Bonar, 
though I fear I cannot paint it in words as well as he has done. 
An Oriental Jew, sensible and intelligent, walks out in the fields. 
He walks along close by the side of the high road, and what 
should he see but a string of camels going along? “Ah,” he says 
to himself, “those are unclean animals.” Sin, you see, is brought 
at once before his mind’s eye. He turns away from the road, 
and walks down one of his own fields, and as he goes along a 
hare starts across his path. “Ah,” says he, “an unclean animal 
again. There is sin in my path.” He gets into a more retired 
place; he walks on the mountains; surely he shall be alone there. 
But he sees a coney burrowing among the rocks — “Ah,” he 
says, “unclean. There is sin there!” He lifts his eye up to 
heaven — he sees the osprey, the bald eagle, flying along 
through the air, and he says, “Ah, there is an emblem of sin 
there!” A dragonfly has just flitted by him — there is sin there. 
There are insects among the flowers; now every creeping thing 
and every insect, except the locust, was unclean to the Jew. 


250 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


Everywhere he would come in contact with some creature that 
would render him ceremonially unclean, and it were impossible 
for him, unless he were brutish, to remain even for ten minutes 
abroad without being reminded that this world, however 
beautiful it is, still has sin in it! Even the fish, in sea, or river, or 
inland lake, had their divisions — those that had no scales or fins 
were unclean to the Jew, so the litde Hebrew boys could not 
even fish for minnows in the brook, but they would know that 
the minnow was unclean, and so their young hearts were made 
to dread litde wrongs and litde sins — for there were little sins 
in the litde pools — even as there were leviathan sins doating in 
the deep and nude sea! Ah, friends, we need to have this more 
before our minds! Look at the fairest landscape that your eyes 
have ever beheld — see the towering Alps, the green valley and 
the silver stream — 

“These are Your glorious works, 

Parent of good, Almighty,” 

but the slime of the serpent is on them all — 

“Keep me, O, keep me King of kings, 

Beneath the shadow of Your wings.” 

When I walk abroad in this temple of nature and seek to 
behold nature’s God, 1 may not light upon a spot in the 
universe where the curse of sin has never indicted a blight, or 
where the hope of redemption should not inspire a prayer! 
Sometimes, brothers and sisters, you get all alone and quiet, but 
do not imagine that you are even there free from sin! As the 
most beautiful landscape, so the sweetest retirement cannot 
shut out uncleanness. As the dy or the insect would intrude 
into the arbor where the Jew would worship, so sin will haunt 


251 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and molest us even in the closet of devotion! Get up, Christians, 
and be upon your watchtowers! You may sleep, but your 
enemies never will; you may suppose yourselves safe, but then 
you are most in danger. See that you put on the whole armor 
of God, and are armed from head to foot, and having done all, 
watch and pray lest you enter into temptation. Every morning 
we ought to ask the Lord to keep us from unknown sins, to 
preserve us from temptations that we cannot foresee, to check 
us in every part of life if we are about to go wrong, and to hold 
us up every hour that we sin not. You will say it must have been 
an unpleasant thing for the Jew always to have sin before his 
eyes, nor would you wish every aspect of life to be thus fouled 
before your eyes. But it will not be so unpleasant for you, my 
brothers and sisters, because you know there is redemption, 
and your faith can realize the end of the curse by sin being put 
away. Shut not your eyes to sin, but keep Christ always before 
you, and you will walk aright! I wish that some of my hearers 
had sin before their eyes now. Oh, you that trifle with it, you 
do not know what it is! Fools make a mockery of sin. You laugh 
at it now — you do not understand what a fire it is that you have 
kindled to consume your soul! Oh, you that think it is such a 
little thing, but its deadly poison will soon envenom all your 
blood — and then you will discover that he that plays with sin, 
plays with damnation! May the Lord set sin straight before your 
eyes, and then set the cross of Christ there, too, and so you will 
be saved! Two prayers I ask all my hearers to pray — they are 
very brief — “Lord, show me myself.” If there is any man here 
who says he would pray, but he does not know what to pray 
for — pray that every night and morning — “Lord, show me 
myself.” And if God hears you, you will soon be in such a 
wretched state that you will need another prayer. And then, I 
give you this — “Lord, show me Yourself.” And then, if He 
shall show you Himself hanging on the cross, the expiation for 


252 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


guilt, the Great God become man that He might put away sin — 
your salvation will be accomplished! It is all the prayer that is 
needed — “Lord, show me myself; Lord, show me Yourself; 
reveal sin and reveal a Savior.” Lord, do this for all of us for 
Your name’s sake! 

III. And now, I come to show you a third teaching of my 
text. As this injunction was meant to separate the Jews from 
other nations, and to keep the pious Israelite in constant 
remembrance of his danger of falling into sin, so it was also 
intended to be A RULE OF DISCRIMINATION BY WHICH WE 
MAY JUDGE WHO ARE CLEAN AND WHO ARE UNCLEAN, 
THAT IS, WHO ARE SAINTS AND WHO ARE NOT. 

There are two tests, but they must both be united. The 
beast that was clean was to chew the cud — here is the inner 
life — every true-hearted man must know how to read, mark, 
learn, and inwardly digest the sacred Word of God. The man 
who does not feed upon gospel truth, and so feed upon it, too, 
that he knows the sweetness and relish of it, and seeks out its 
marrow and fatness — that man is no heir of heaven! You must 
know a Christian by his heart, by that which supports his life, 
and sustains his frame. But then, the clean creatures were also 
known by their walk. The Jew at once discovered the unclean 
animal by its having an undivided hoof. But if the hoof was 
thoroughly divided, then it was clean, provided that it also 
chewed the cud. So there must be in the true Christian a 
peculiar walk such as God requires. You cannot tell a man by 
either of these tests alone — you must have them both. But 
while you use them upon others, apply them to yourselves! 
What do you feed on? What is jour habit of life? Do you chew 
the cud by meditation? When your soul feeds on the flesh and 
blood of Christ, have you learned that His flesh is meat, indeed, 
and that His blood is drink, indeed? If so, it is well. And what 
about your life? Are your conversation and your daily walk 


253 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


according to the description which is given in the Word of 
believers in Christ? If not, the first test will not stand alone! 
You may profess the faith within, but if you do not walk aright 
without, you belong to the unclean. On the other hand, you 
may walk aright without, but unless there is the chewing of the 
cud within, unless there is a real feeding upon the precious 
truths of God in the heart, all the right walking in the world will 
not prove you to be a Christian! That holiness which is only 
outward in moral, and not spiritual, does not save the soul! That 
religion, on the other hand, which is only inward is but fancy — 
it cannot save the soul, either. But the two together — the 
inward parts made capable of knowing the lusciousness, the 
sweetness, the fatness of Christ’s truth, and the outward parts 
conformed to Christ’s image and character — these conjoined 
point out the true and clean Christian with whom it is blessed 
to associate here, and for whom a better portion is prepared 
hereafter! 

If you read the chapter through, you will find there were 
some two or three animals about which the Jew would have 
some little difficulty. There was the camel that did chew the 
cud, but did not exacdy divide the hoof. Now this animal seems 
to me fitly to represent — though it may not have been so 
intended — those men who seem really to feed on the truth of 
God, and yet their walk and conversation are not aright. Their 
feet have been formed rather for the sandy desert of sin than 
for the sacred soil of godliness. Oh, I know some of you! Come, 
let us be personal — there are some of you, if I would always 
preach the doctrine of predestination, or some other doctrine 
of that kind, how sweet it would be to you! But your lives are 
not what they should be. Thank God there are not many of that 
sort who come here. They get angry with me very quickly, and 
go off to other places where they can get sweet and savory 
morsels, which exacdy suit their taste. They hear no 


254 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


admonitions about their lives whatever! May the Lord, for my 
Master’s sake, deliver my ministry from ever being comfortable 
and flattering to souls that live in sin! I hope you will sometimes 
have to say, “I must either give up that sin, or else give up my 
seat here.” I know one who said, “Well! It has come to this — I 
cannot go there on Sunday evening, and keep my shop open in 
the morning. It will not do for me to go and sit there, and hear 
the Word and sing with those people on Sunday evening, and 
then hear songs, and join in revelries on weeknights.” I hope 
the Word of God here will be such a searching Word to some 
of you that you will even gnash your teeth at the preacher! He 
would sooner for you to do that than for you to say, “Peace, 
peace, where there is no peace,” sucking in sweet doctrine and 
yet living in sin. God deliver us from Antinomianism! We do 
preach against Arminianism, but that is a white devil compared 
with the black devil of Antinomianism! God save us from that! 
If there is any religion that will drug consciences, stimulate 
crime, crowd jails, and turn this world into an Aceldama, it is 
the religion of the man who preaches divine sovereignty, but 
neglects human responsibility! I believe it is a vicious, immoral 
and corrupt manner of setting forth doctrine, and cannot be of 
God. It would undermine morality and put the very life of 
society in peril if it were largely believed, or if it were preached 
by men of any great weight who should have any great numbers 
to follow them. Oh, dear friends, be not as the animal which 
chews the cud, but yet divides not the hoof. Seek not merely to 
get precious doctrine, comforting to yourselves — but see that 
your walk is such as it should be. 

Then, there was another animal. It did not chew the cud; 
still the Jews thought it did. This was the coney — the nearest 
approach to it is the rabbit of our land — “The coney, because 
he chews the cud, but divides not the hoof, he is unclean.” The 
coney was a very timid creature, which burrowed in the rocks. 


255 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“The conies are a feeble folk, but they make their dwellings in 
the rocks,” says Solomon. Now, there are some people who 
seem as if they like the gospel truth, and they may be put down 
in the class in which Moses puts the coney — which appeared 
to chew the cud — though it did not really do so. We know there 
are hundreds of this sort; they like the gospel, but it must be 
very cheap. They like to hear it preached, but as to doing 
anything to extend it, unless it would be to lend their tongues 
an hour, they would not dream of it! The coney, you know, 
lived in the earth. These people are always scraping; John 
Bunyan’s muck rake is always in their hands. Neither to dig nor 
to beg are they ashamed. They are as true misers, and as 
covetous as if they had no religion at all! And many of these 
people get into our churches and are received, when they ought 
not to be. Covetousness ought to exclude a man from church 
fellowship as well as fornication, for Paul says, “Covetousness, 
which is idolatry.” He puts the brand right on its forehead, and 
marks what it is! We would not admit an idolater to the Lord’s 
table — nor ought we to admit a covetous man — only we 
cannot always know him! St. Francis Sales, who had a great 
many people come to him to confession, makes this note, that 
he had many men and women come to him who confessed all 
sorts of most outrageous crimes, but he never had one who 
confessed covetousness. It is a kind of sin that always comes in 
at the backdoor, and it is always entertained at the back part of 
the house. People do not suspect it as an inmate of their own 
hearts. Mr. Covetousness has changed his name to Mr. 
Prudent- Thrifty — and it is quite an insult to call him other than 
by his adopted name. Old vices, like streets notorious for vice, 
get new names given them. Avaricious grasping, they call that, 
“the laws of social economy.” Screwing down the poor is, “the 
natural result of competition.” Withholding corn until the 
people curse, oh, that is, “just the usual regulation of the 


256 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


market.” People name the thing prettily, and then they think 
they have rescued it from the taint. These people, who are all 
for earth, are like the conies, who, though they chew the cud, 
burrow in the ground. They love the precious truths of God, 
and yet they are all for this earth. If there are any such here, in 
spite of their fine experience, we pronounce them unclean — 
they are not heirs of heaven! 

The next creature mentioned in the chapter is the hare — 
“The hare, because he chews the cud, but divides not the hoof, 
he is unclean.” See how he flies with bounding step over the 
ground! A clapping of the hands, and how he starts and is away! 
The hare is such a timid creature; she leaves her food and flees 
before the passerby. I would not say a harsh thing, but there are 
some people who appear to chew the cud; they love to hear the 
gospel preached; their eyes will sparkle sometimes when we are 
talking of Christ, but they do not divide the hoof. Like the hare, 
they are too timid to be domesticated among the creatures 
whom the Lord has pronounced clean. They do not come out 
from the world, enter into the church, and manifest themselves 
wholly on the Lord’s side. Their conscience tells them they 
should be baptized as believers — but they dare not. They know 
they should be united with the people of God, and confess 
Christ before men — but they are ashamed, ashamed, ashamed! 
One fears lest his wife should know it, and she might ridicule 
him; some start abashed lest their friends should know it, for 
the finger of scorn, or the breath of raillery could frighten them 
out of their senses; others of them are alarmed because the 
world might, perhaps, give them an ill name! Do you know 
where the fearful go? Not the fearing, not the doubting — for 
there are many poor, humble, doubters and fearers who are 
saved — but do you know where the fearful go? The fearful who 
are afraid of being persecuted, mocked, or even laughed at for 
Christ — do you know where they go? You will find it in the 


257 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Book of the Revelation — “But the fearful and unbelieving 
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and 
brimstone, which is the second death.” Have you ever read that 
sentence which says, “Whoever shall be ashamed of Me, and 
of My words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed when 
He shall come in His own glory, and in His Father’s, and of the 
holy angels”? There you are, young men! You are ashamed of 
Christ! You have just come up from the country, and you did 
not pray to God the other night because there was another 
young man in the room, and you were ashamed of Him! In the 
name of God I entreat you — no, I COMMAND you — be not 
ashamed of your Master, Christ, and of the religion which you 
learned at your father’s knee! There are others of you who work 
in large shops, and you do not want to be jeered at, as the other 
young fellow is who works with you, because he is a Christian. 
You keep your love as a secret, do you, and will not let it out? 
What? If Christ had only loved you in secret, and had never 
dared to come here on earth to be despised and rejected of men, 
where would you have been? “No man lights a candle and puts 
it under a bushel.” Do you think that Christ has lit a candle in 
your hearts that you may hide it? Oh, I pray you, be not like the 
hare; let your hoof be so divided from the rest of mankind that 
they may say, “There is a man — he is not as bold as a lion, 
perhaps — but he is not ashamed to be a follower of Jesus Christ. 
He does bear the sneer and gibe for Him, and counts it his 
honor to be thought evil of for Jesus’ sake.” Oh, be not, I pray 
you, like the timid hare, lest you be found among the unclean! 

There is one other creature mentioned — “The swine, though 
he divides the hoof and is cloven-footed, yet he chews not the 
cud, he is unclean to you.” Now, the swine is the emblem of 
those who do act rightly. They make a profession — before men 
they are the most upright and the most devout; but then the 
inner part is not right. They do not chew the cud. The foot is 


258 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


499 The Clean and the Unclean - Lev. 

11:2-3 


right, but not the inward part. There is no chewing, no 
masticating, no digesting the Word of Life. “But,” says one, 
“why pick out a swine, because that does not seem to be a fair 
comparison.” Yes, it is, for there are no people in the world 
more like swine than those Pharisees who make clean the 
outside of the cup and the platter — whose hoof is divided 
enough — but whose inward part is very wickedness! I do not 
know an animal that might more tidy picture out those vile, 
unclean Pharisees. You may say you think it is too harsh a 
picture for you. You are put down, thus, in the catalog, and I 
have no other place in which to put you. You are like swine, 
unless the grace of God is in you. What good does the swine 
do? Of what concern is life to him but to feed grossly, and 
slumber heavily? And so your life, since the inward part is 
wrong, brings no glory to God — you bring no good to your 
fellow men. Oh, that the Lord would show you that dead 
morality, unattended by the love of God in the soul, will most 
certainly be of no avail! “You must be born again.” “Except 
you are converted and become as litde children, you shall in no 
wise enter into the kingdom of heaven.” 

My text seems to be a dividing one — it divides the house 
in two. Remember, dear friends, the day is coming when a 
greater division than any which can be described will occur to 
all of us! But the same rule will be enforced. We shall be 
assembled in one crowd, a mightier crowd than language can 
picture, or imagination grasp. The books shall be opened — 
books more terrible than this Book of Mercy. The Book of Life 
shall be unfolded and read, in which those washed in Jesus’ 
blood, and so made clean, shall find their names recorded. They 
will be borne to heaven! Listen to the music of the angels as 
they bear them up to God’s right hand! Where will you be? Will 
you be with those who mount to heaven, or with yonder 
trembling, shrieking, screaming souls, who, as hell opens her 


259 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


mouth, descend alive into the pit of hell? God help you if you 
are not on the right-hand side! It is not too late; Jesus Christ is 
still preached to you! The way of salvation is very plain. It is 
this — believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved. 
Believe in Jesus. Then make a profession of your faith in God’s 
own ordained way, and method, and you have His promise for 
it that you will be saved! God help you to believe, and you shall 
be saved through Jesus — and unto Him shall be the glory 
forever and ever. Amen. 


260 



500 Ebenezer! - 1 Sam. 7:12 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, March 15th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizpeh and 
Shen, and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Up to now 
has the Lord helped us.” — I Samuel 7:12 

IT IS CERTAINLY a very delightful thing to mark the hand 
of God in the lives of ancient saints. How profitable an 
occupation to observe God’s goodness in delivering David out 
of the jaws of the lion and the paws of the bear; His mercy in 
passing by the transgression, iniquity, and sin of Manasseh; His 
faithfulness in keeping the covenant made with Abraham — or 
His interposition on the behalf of the dying Hezekiah. But, 
beloved, would it not be even more interesting and profitable 
for us to remark the hand of God in our own lives? Ought we 
not to look upon our own history as being at least as full of 
God, as full of His goodness, and of his sir — as much a proof 
of His faithfulness and veracity as in the lives of any of the 
saints who have gone before? I think we do our Lord an 
injustice when we suppose that He worked all His mighty acts 
in days of yore, and showed Himself strong for those in the 
early times, but does not perform wonders or lay bare His arm 
for the saints that are now upon the earth! Let us review, I say, 
our own diaries. Surely in these modern pages we may discover 
some happy incidents, refreshing to ourselves and glorifying to 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


our God! Have jon had no deliverances ? Have you passed through 
no rivers, supported by the divine presence? Have you walked 
through no fires unharmed? Have you not been saved in six 
troubles? Yes, in seven has not Jehovah helped you? Have you 
had no manifestations ? The God who spoke to Abraham at 
Mamre, has He never spoken to you? The Angel who wrestled 
with Jacob at Peniel, has He never wresded with you? He that 
stood in the fiery furnace with the three holy children, has He 
never trod the coals at your side? O beloved, He has manifested 
Himself to us as He does not to the world! Forget not these 
manifestations — fail not to rejoice in them. Have you had no 
choice favors? The God who gave Solomon the desire of his heart, 
has He never listened to you, and answered your requests? That 
God of lavish bounty, of whom David sang, “Who satisfies 
your mouth with good things, so that your youth is renewed 
like the eagle’s” has He never satiated you with fatness? Have 
you never been made to lie down in green pastures? Have you 
never been led by the still waters? Surely, beloved, the goodness 
of God of old has been repeated unto us! The manifestations 
of His grace to those gone to glory has been renewed to us, and 
delivering mercies as experienced by them are not unknown 
even to us, upon whom the ends of the world are come. 

I beg you, therefore, dear friends, for a little time this 
morning, to fix your thoughts upon your God in connection 
with yourselves. And, while we think of Samuel piling the 
stones, and saying, “Up to now has the Lord helped us,” let us 
lay the emphasis upon the last word and say, “Up to now has 
the Lord helped US, ” and if you can put it in the singular and 
say, “Up to now has the Lord helped ME, ” so much the better! 

Again, it is a very delightful exercise to remember the 
various ways in which the grateful saints recorded their 
thankfulness. Who can look without pleasure upon the altar 
which Noah reared after his preservation from the universal 


262 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


deluge? Have not our eyes often sparkled as we have thought 
of Abraham building the altar and calling it, “Jehovah-Jireh, in 
the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen”? Have we not read, with 
intense satisfaction, of Jacob setting up the stone which had 
been his pillow, pouring oil upon it, and calling upon the name 
of the Lord, naming the place Bethel, though the name thereof 
was Luz at the first? Who has failed to rejoice in the martial 
music of Miriam’s timbrel, and the glorious notes of Moses’ 
song at the Red Sea? And have we not paused and looked at 
the 12 stones set up in the midst of Jordan by good old Joshua 
when Jordan was driven back, that the hosts of Israel might go 
through dry-shod? Surely, brothers and sisters, we have 
rejoiced in this stone which Samuel set up and called Ebenezer! 
And, in looking upon all the various ways in which the saints 
of God have recorded His loving kindness of old, we have felt 
a satisfaction in beholding the perpetuity of God’s glory, since 
one generation shows forth to another all His mighty acts. Oh, 
would it not be quite as pleasant and more profitable for us to 
record the mighty acts of the Lord as we have seen them? 
Should not we set up an altar unto His name, or weave His 
mercies into a song? Should we not take the pure gold of 
thankfulness, the jewels of praise, and make them into another 
crown for the head of Jesus? Ought not our souls to give forth 
music as sweet and exhilarating as ever came from David’s harp? 
Ought not the feet of our gratitude to trip as lighdy as Miriam’s 
when she led the daughters of Israel? Have we not some means 
of praising God? Are there no methods by which we may set 
forth the gratitude we feel within? I trust we can make an 
offering unto our Lord. We can entertain our beloved with the 
spiced wine of our pomegranate, and the choice drops of our 
honeycomb. I hope that this day our souls may suggest unto 
themselves some way in which we may record the Lord’s 


263 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


mighty deeds, and hand down to coming generations our 
testimony of His faithfulness and of His truth! 

In the spirit of these two observations then, looking at 
God’s hand in our own life, and acknowledging that hand with 
some record of thankfulness, I, your minister, brought by 
divine grace to preach this morning the 500th of my printed 
sermons, consecutively published week by week, set up my 
stone of Ebenezer to God. I thank Him, thank Him humbly, 
but yet most joyfully for all the help and assistance given in 
studying and preaching the Word of God to these mighty 
congregations by my voice, and afterwards to so many nations 
through the press. I set up my pillar in the form of this sermon! 
My slogan this day shall be the same as Samuel’s, “Up to now, 
the Lord has helped me.” And as the stone of my praise is much 
too heavy for me to set it upright alone, I ask you, my comrades 
in the day of batde, my fellow laborers in the vineyard of Christ, 
to join with me in expressing gratitude, while together we set 
up the memorial stone and say, “Up to now the Lord has 
helped us.” 

This morning there are three things I want to talk about — 
three, yet only one — this stone of help was suggestive as to the 
place of its erection, as to the occasion of its setting up, and as to the 
inscription which it bore. I. First, then, much valuable instruction, 
much excitement to devout thankfulness may be found in THE 
SPOT WHERE THE STONE OF EBENEZER WAS SET UP. 

Twenty pears before on that field Israel was routed. Twenty years 
before, Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the Lord, were 
slain upon that ground, and the ark of the Lord was taken when 
the Philistines triumphed. It was well that they should 
remember the defeat they had sustained, and that amidst the 
joyous victory they should recollect that the batde would had 
been turned into a defeat unless the Lord had been upon their 
side! Brothers and sisters, let us remember our defeats! Have 


264 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


we forgotten when we went out in our own strength, 
determined to subdue our corruptions, and found ourselves 
weak as water? Have you forgotten when you reposed in the 
ark of the Lord, when you rested in ceremonies, and ordinances, 
and not in the rock of your salvation? Have you forgotten, I say, 
how you were perplexed before your sins, and found no place 
of refuge from your adversaries? Have we forgotten our pitiful 
failures in preaching, and prayer — -when we waited not upon 
God for strength? O, those times of groaning, when none have 
believed our report because the Lord’s arm was not revealed! I 
call to remembrance all my failures as I stand on this hill of joy. 
I doubt not that on the field of Ebenezer there were the graves 
of thousands who had been slain in battle. Let the graves of our 
past proud notions, the graves of our self-confidence, the 
graves of our creature-strength and boasting, stir us up to praise 
the Lord who has up to now helped us! Perhaps on that spot 
there stood a trophy raised by the insulting Philistines. Oh, let 
the remembrance of the boasting of the adversary, when he 
said, “Aha! Aha!” — let that come into our ears to sweeten the 
shout of triumph while we glorify the God of Israel! Have you 
done anything for God? You would have done nothing without 
Him! Look to your former defeats. Do you return victorious? 
You would have returned with your garments trailing in the 
mire, and your shield dishonored, if God had not been on your 
side! Oh, you that have proven your weakness, perhaps by 
some terrible fall, or in some sad disappointment — let the 
recollection of the spot where you were vanquished compel 
you to praise the Lord more — who has helped you even to this 
day to triumph over your adversaries! 

The field between Mizpeh and Shen would also refresh 
their memories concerning their sins, for it was sin that 
conquered them. Had not their hearts been captured by sin — 
their land had never been captured by Philistia! Had they not 


265 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


turned their backs upon their God, they would not have turned 
their backs in the day of conflict. Beloved, let us remember our 
sins; they will serve as a black foil on which the mercy of God 
shall glisten the more brighdy! Egypt’s fertility is the more 
wonderful because of its nearness to the Libyan sands — which 
would cover it altogether if it were not for the Nile. That God 
should be so good is marvelous, but that He should be so good 
to you and to me, who are so rebellious, is a miracle of miracles! 
1 know not a word which can express the surprise and wonder 
our souls ought to feel at God’s goodness to us. Our hearts 
playing the harlot; our lives far from perfect; our faith almost 
blown out; our unbelief often prevailing; our pride lifting up its 
accursed head; our patience a poor sickly plant, almost nipped 
by one night’s frost; our courage litde better than cowardice, 
our love lukewarmness — our ardor but as ice! Oh, my dear 
brothers and sisters, if we will but think, anyone of us, what a 
mass of sin we are! If we will but reflect that we are, after all, as 
one of the fathers writes, “Walking dunghills,” we would, 
indeed, be surprised that the sun of divine grace should 
continue so perpetually to shine upon us! What amazing grace 
that the abundance of heaven’s mercy should be revealed in us! 
Oh, Lord, when we recollect what we might have been, and 
what we really have been, we must say, “Glory be unto the 
gracious and merciful God who up to now has helped us.” 

Again, that spot would remind them of their sorrows. What a 
mournful chapter in Israel’s history is that which follows their 
defeat by the Philistines. Good old Eli, you remember, fell 
backward and broke his neck; and his daughter-in-law, in the 
pangs of her travail, cried, concerning her child, “Call him 
Ichabod, for the glory has departed, because the ark of the Lord 
is taken.” Their harvests were snatched away by robbers; their 
vintage was gleaned for them by alien hands. Israel had 20 years 
of deep and bitter sorrow. They might have said with David, 


266 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


“We went through tire and through water; men did ride over 
our heads.” Well, friends, let the remembrance of our sorrows 
also inspire us with a more profound thankfulness while we 
erect the stone of Ebenezer. We have had our sorrows as a 
church. Shall I remind you of our black and dark day? Never 
erased from our memory can be the time of our affliction and 
trial. Death came into our windows, and dismay into our hearts! 
Did not all men speak ill of us? Who would give us a good word? 
The Lord Himself afflicted us, and broke us as in the day of 
His anger — so it seemed to us, then. Ah, God, You know how 
great have been the results which flowed from that terrible 
calamity, but from our souls the memory never can be taken, 
not even in heaven itself in the recollection of that night of 
confusion, and those long weeks of slander and abuse! Let us 
roll a great stone before the Lord and let us write thereon, “Up 
to now the Lord has helped us.” Little, I suppose, did the devil 
get by that master-stroke; small was the triumph which he 
earned by that piece of malice. Greater multitudes than ever 
flocked to listen to the Word of God, and some here who 
otherwise might never have attended the preaching of the 
gospel, remain as living monuments of God’s power to save! 
Of all evil things out of which good has arisen, we can always 
point to the Surrey Hall catastrophe as one of the greatest 
goods which ever befell this neighborhood, notwithstanding 
the sorrows which it brought. This one fact is but a sample of 
others — for it is the Lord’s rule to bring good out of evil — and 
so to prove His wisdom, and magnify His grace. O you who 
have come from beds of languishing, you who have been 
bowed down with doubt and fear, and you who have been 
poverty-stricken, or slandered, or apparendy deserted by your 
God — if this day the glory of God’s grace rests upon you — pile 
the stones, and anoint the pillar, and write thereon, “Ebenezer, 
up to now the Lord has helped us.” 


267 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


While dwelling upon the peculiarity of the locality, we must 
remark, that, as it had been the spot of their defeat, their sin, 
their sorrow — so now before the victory — it was the place of 
their repentance ! You see, beloved, they came together to repent, 
to confess their sins, to put away their false gods, to cast Ashtaroth 
from their houses, and from their hearts! It was there that they 
saw God’s hand and were led to say, “Up to now has the Lord 
helped us.” When you and I are most diligent in hunting sin, 
then God will be most valiant in routing our foes. You look to 
the work within, and overcome sin, and God will look to the 
work without, and overcome your troubles and your trials for 
you! Ah, dear friends, as we pile that stone thinking how God 
has helped us, let us shed tears of sorrow to think how 
ungrateful we have been! On earth penitence and praise must 
always sing together. Just as in some of our tunes there are two 
or three parts, we shall always need repentance to take the bass 
notes while we are here, while faith in praise can mount up to 
the very highest notes of the divine music of gratitude! Yes, 
with our joy for pardoned guilt we mourn that we pierced the 
Lord, and with our joy for strengthened graces and ripening 
experience, we must mourn over ingratitude and unbelief! Up 
to now the Lord has helped you, and yet you did once say, “My 
God has forgotten me.” Up to now the Lord has helped you, 
and yet you did murmur and complain against Him. Up to now 
the Lord has helped you, and yet you did once deny Him like 
Peter. Up to now the Lord has helped you, and yet your eyes 
have gone astray after vanity, and your hands have touched sin, 
and your heart has played the wanton. Let us repent, my 
brothers and sisters, for it is through our tears that we shall best 
perceive the beauty of these grateful words, “Up to now has 
the Lord helped us.” 

You must remember, too, that Ebenezer was the place of 
lamentation after the Lord. They came together to pray God to 


268 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


return to them. We shall surely see God when we long after 
Him. How delightful it is to see a church earnest after 
revivals — crying — pleading for God to come into her midst! 
When you know, brothers and sisters that without God your 
ordinances are nothing; when you cannot rest satisfied with the 
dead, dry letter, but really want to have the power and the 
presence of God, then it will not be long before you have it! So 
while you and I express gratitude for the past, let us breathe 
another prayer to God for renewed grace. If you personally 
have lost the light of His face, pray this morning — 

“Return, O holy Dove! Return, 

Sweet messenger of rest! 

I hate the sins that made You mourn, 

And drove You from my breast.” 

And if it is the entire church, and in any measure, our love 
that has grown cold, and the converting and sanctifying Spirit 
has departed, let us pray also the same prayer — 

“Savior, visit Your plantation; 

Grant us, Lord, a gracious rain! 

All will come to desolation, 

Unless You return again! 

Lord, revive us, 

All our help must come from You!” 

The place of revival should be the place of gracious 
thankfulness. 

On that day, too, Mizpeh was the place of renewed covenant, 
and its name signifies the watchtower. These people, I say, came 
together to renew their covenant with God, and wait for Him 
as upon a watchtower. Whenever God’s people look back upon 


269 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the past, they should renew their covenant with God. Put your 
hands into the hands of Christ anew, you saints of the Most 
High, and give yourself to Him again! Climb your watchtower 
and watch for the coming of your Lord. See whether there is 
sin within you, temptation outside you — duty neglected or 
lethargy creeping over you. Come to Mizpeh, the watchtower! 
Come to Mizpeh the place of the renewal of the covenant, and 
then set up your stone and say, “Up to now, the Lord has 
helped us.” 

It seems to me that the spot where Samuel said, “Ebenezer,” 
was exceedingly similar in many respects to the position 
occupied by us this day. I do not think the children of Israel 
could with heartier joy say, “Ebenezer!” than we can. We have 
had many sins, a share of sorrows, and some defeats by reason 
of our own folly. I hope we have humbled ourselves before 
God. I hope we will lament after Him, and desire to behold 
Him. I pray we may desire to dwell very near Him, and that our 
souls bless His name while we renew the covenant again this 
day. And while we come to the watchtower and wait to hear 
what God, the Lord, will speak unto us. Come, then, all in this 
great house which the Lord’s favor has built for us, let us sing 
together, “Up to now the Lord has helped us.” 

II. We now change the subject to look at the OCCASION 
OF THE ERECTION OF THIS MEMORIAL. 

The tribes had assembled unarmed to worship. The 
Philistines, hearing of their gathering, suspected a revolt. A 
rising was not at that time contemplated, though no doubt 
there was lurking in the hearts of the people a hope that they 
would somehow or other be delivered. The Philistines being as 
a nation, far inferior in numbers, to the children of Israel, had 
the natural suspiciousness of weak oppressors. If we must have 
tyrants, let them be strong ones, for they are never as jealous 
or cruel as those little despots who are always afraid of rebellion! 


270 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


Hearing that the people had come together, the Philistines 
determined to attack them — to attack an unarmed company, 
mark you — who had come together for worship! The people 
were alarmed, and naturally they might be. Samuel, however, 
the prophet of God, was equal to the occasion. He bade them 
bring a lamb. I do not know that the lamb was offered 
according to the Levitical rites, yet prophets in all ages had a 
right to dispense with ordinary laws. This was to show that the 
legal dispensation was not permanent, that there was 
something higher than the Aaronic priesthood — so that 
Samuel and Elijah, men in whom God expressly dwelt — were 
mightier than the ordinary officiating priests of the sanctuary. 
He takes the lamb, puts it on the altar, offers it, and as it smokes 
to heaven, he offers prayer. The voice of man is answered by 
the Voice of God — a great thunder dismays the Philistines, and 
they are put to rout! 

We, 1 think, have been in similar circumstances. Hear the 
parallel. The victory obtained was by the lamb. As soon as the 
lamb was slaughtered, and the smoke went up to heaven, the 
blessing began to descend upon the Israelites, and the curse 
upon the foes. “They smote them” — note the words — they 
“smote them until they came under Bethcar,” which, being 
interpreted, signifies “the house of the lamb.” At the offering 
of the lamb the Israelites began to fight the Philistines, and slew 
them even to the house of the lamb! Brothers and sisters, if we 
have done anything for Christ, if we have achieved any victories, 
if in this house any souls have been converted, any hearts 
sanctified, any drooping spirits comforted — bear witness that 
it has been all through the Lamb! When we have pictured Christ 
slaughtered, have described the agonies which He endured 
upon the cross — when we have tried to preach fully though 
feebly the great doctrine of His substitutionary sacrifice, have 
set Him forth as the propitiation for sins, then it is that the 


271 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


victories have begun! And when we have preached Christ 
ascending up on high, leading captivity captive, and when we 
have glorified in the fact that He always lives to make 
intercession for us, and that He shall come to judge the quick 
and dead, if any good has been accomplished it has been 
through the Lamb — the Lamb slain — or else the Lamb exalted! 
Mark, dear friends, as we pile our Ebenezer this morning, we 
do it honoring Him! “Unto the Lamb once slain is glory forever 
and ever.” You have overcome your foes, you have slaughtered 
your sins, and you have mastered your troubles. How has it 
been? From the altar of that bleeding Lamb, onward to the 
throne of Him who is to reign forever and ever, the whole road 
has been stained with the crimson blood of your enemies — you 
have overcome through the blood of the Lamb! The Lamb 
shall overcome you. He who rides on the white horse goes 
before us; His name is the Lamb. And all the saints shall follow 
Him on the white horses, going forth conquering and to 
conquer! “Ebenezer, up to now the Lord has helped us.” But 
the help has always been through the Lamb, the bleeding, the 
living, the reigning Lamb! 

As in this occurrence the sacrifice was exalted, so also was 
the power of prayer acknowledged. The Philistines were not routed 
except by prayer. Samuel prayed unto the Lord. They said, 
“Cease not to cry unto the Lord for us.” Beloved, let us bear 
our witness this morning that if anything of good has been 
accomplished here, it has been the result of prayer! Often have 
I solaced my heart by the recollection of the prayers offered in 
our former house of meeting at New Park Street. What 
supplications have I heard there; what groans of wrestling 
spirits! There were times when I have not had the heart to say 
a word, because your prayers to God melted me; your 
supplications stopped my utterance, and I could only 
pronounce a benediction and send you away, because the Spirit 


272 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


of God was so present it was hardly the time to speak to man, 
but only to speak to God! I do not think we always have the 
same spirit of prayer here, and yet in this I must and will 
rejoice — I know not where the spirit of prayer is to be found 
more in exercise than in this place! I know you hold up my 
hands, you who are like Aaron and Hur upon the mountains. I 
know that you intercede with God for the conversion of this 
neighborhood, and the evangelization of this great city. Young 
and old, you strive together, that the kingdom of God may 
come, and the Lord’s will may be done. But, oh, we must not 
forget as we look upon this vast church — 2,000 and more 
members walking in the fear of God — we must not forget that 
this increase came as the result of prayer, and that it is in prayer, 
still, that our strength must be! I charge you before the Most 
High, never depend upon my ministry! What am I? What is 
there in me? I speak, and when God speaks through me, I speak 
with a power unknown to men in whom the Spirit dwells not. 
But if He leaves me, I am not only as weak as other men, but 
less than they, for I have no wisdom of years; I have no human 
learning; I have taken no degree in the university, and wear no 
tides of learned honor. If God speaks by me, He must have all 
the glory! If He saves souls by such a frail being, He must have 
all the glory! Give unto the Lord glory and strength — lay every 
particle of the honor at His feet — but do continue to pray; do 
plead with God for me that His power may still be seen, His 
arm still put mightily to His work! Prayer honored must be 
recollected when we set up the Ebenezer and say, “Up to now 
the Lord has helped us.” 

Again, as there was prayer and sacrifice, you must 
remember that in answer to the sweet savor of the lamb, and 
the sweet perfume of Samuel’s intercession,/^^ came forth to 
rout His foes. I read not that Israel shouted a war cry. No, their 
shouts would not have been heard amid those great thunders! 


273 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I find that they dashed to batde, but it was not their bow, their 
spear, or their sword that gained the victory. Listen, my 
brothers and sisters, the voice of God is heard! Crash! Crash! 
Where are you now, you sons of Anak! The heavens shake, the 
earth rocks, the everlasting hills do bow, and the birds of the 
air fly to the forest, to hide themselves, the timid goats, upon 
the mountains seek the clefts of the rocks! Peal on peal of the 
thunders, roll till mountain answers mountain in loud uproars 
of terror! From crag to crag leaps the live lightning, and the 
Philistines are all but blinded by it — and are your bucklers and 
the points thereof? Where are your spears, and the sheen 
thereof? Now let your stand aghast — and then take to their 
heels and flee! Quit yourselves like men, O Philistines, that you 
be not servants to the Hebrews! Quit yourselves like men, but 
unless you are gods, you must now tremble! Where swords 
flash from their scabbards! Now send out your giants and their 
armor-bearers! Now let your Goliaths defy the Lord God of 
hosts! Aha! Aha! You have become like women, you quake! 
You faint! Look, look! They turn their backs and flee before 
the men of Israel, whom they counted but as slaves. They flee! 
The warrior flees, and the stout heart trembles, and the mighty 
man runs like a timid dove to his hiding place. “Glory be unto 
the Lord God of Israel, His own right hand, and His holy arm 
have gotten Him the victory.” 

Beloved, if anything of good has been accomplished, or if 
you and I have routed sin, how has it been? Not by our strength, 
not by our power, but by the glorious voice of God! When the 
gospel is truly preached, it is God thundering; it may sound as 
feebly as a child’s voice when we tell of Jesus crucified, but it is 
God thundering, and I tell you, sirs, the thunders of God never 
so smote the heart of the Philistines as the gospel of Christ does 
the heart of convicted sinners! When we preach and God 
blesses it, it is God’s lightning; it is God’s flashes of divine fire, 


274 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


the glitter of His spear; for never were Philistines so smitten 
with the blaze of lightning in their faces, as sinners are when 
God’s law and gospel flash into their dark eyes! But to God be 
the glory — to God — to God — to God alone! Not a word for 
man, not a syllable for the son of man! “Unto Him who loved 
us, and washed us from our sins in His blood, unto Him be 
glory.” This is the song of perfect saints above. Shall it not be 
the song of imperfect ones below? “Not unto us, not unto us,” 
the seraphs cry as they veil their faces with their wings, and cast 
their crowns at Jehovah’s feet. “Not unto us, not unto us,” 
must we say while we exult in His power and magnify the God 
of our salvation! 

III. This was the occasion then. I need not tarry longer, 
but turn at once to THE INSCRIPTION UPON THE 
MEMORIAL, “Ebenezer, up to now the Lord has helped us.” 
The inscription may be read in three ways. 

You must read, first of all, its central word, the word on 
which all the sense depends, where the fullness of it gathers. 
“Up to now the LORD has helped us.” Note, beloved, that 
they did not stand still and refuse to use their weapons, but 
while God was thundering, they were fighting — and while the 
lightning were dashing in the enemy’s eyes — they were making 
them feel the potency of their steel. So, that while we glorify 
God, we are not to deny or to discard human agency. We must 
fight because God fights for us! We must strike, but, the power 
to strike and the result of striking must all come from Him. 
You see they did not say, “Up to now our sword has helped us, 
up to now Samuel has encouraged us.” No, no — “Up to now 
the Lord has helped us.” Now you must admit that everything 
truly great must be of the Lord. You cannot suppose a thing so 
great as the conversion of sinners, the revival of a church can 
never be man’s work. You see the Thames when the tide is 
ebbing — what a long reach of foul, putrid mud — but the tide 


275 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


returns! Poor sinner, you who thought the river would run out 
till it was all dry, and the ships be left aground — look, the flood 
comes back again, joyfully filling up the stream once more. But 
you are quite certain that so large a river as the Thames is not 
to be flooded except by ocean’s tides, so you cannot see great 
results, and ascribe them to man! Where there is litde work 
done, men often take the credit themselves, but where there is 
great work done, they dare not. If Simon Peter had been 
angling over the side of his ship, and had caught a fine fish, he 
might have said, “Well done, fisherman!” But when the boat 
was full of fish, so that it began to sink, he could not think of 
himself then! No, down he goes with, “Depart from me, for I 
am a sinful man, O Lord.” The greatness of our work compels 
us to confess that it must be of God, it must be of the Lord 
alone! And, dear friends, it must be so if we consider the litde 
with which we began. Jacob said, as he came over Jordan, 
“With my staff I crossed this Jordan, but now have I become 
two bands.” Surely his becoming two bands must be of God, 
for he had nothing but his staff! And do you not remember 
some few of you here present one morning when we crossed 
this Jordan with a staff? Were we a hundred when first I 
addressed you? What hosts of empty pews, what a miserable 
handful of hearers! With the staff we crossed that Jordan. But 
God has multiplied the people, and multiplied the joy, till we 
have become not only two bands but many bands! And this day 
many are gathering to hear the gospel preached by the sons of 
this church, begotten of us, and sent forth by us to minister the 
word of life in many towns and villages throughout these three 
kingdoms — glory be unto God, this cannot be man’s work! 
What effort made by the unaided strength of man will equal 
this which has been accomplished by God? Let the name of the 
Lord, therefore, be inscribed upon the pillar of the memorial! 


276 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


I am always very jealous about this matter. If we do not, as 
a church and a congregation; if we do not as individuals, always 
give God the glory, it is utterly impossible that God should 
work by us! Many wonders I have seen, but I never saw, yet, a 
man who arrogated the honor of God’s work to himself, whom 
God did not leave sooner or later. Nebuchadnezzar said, 
“Behold, this great Babylon that I have built.” Behold that poor 
lunatic whose hair has grown like eagle’s feathers, and his nails 
like bird’s claws — that is Nebuchadnezzar! And that must be 
you, and that must be I, each in our own way, unless we are 
content to always give all the glory to God! Surely, brothers and 
sisters, we shall be a stench in the nostrils of the Most High — 
an offense, even like carrion, before the Lord of Hosts, if we 
credit to ourselves any honor! What does God send His saints 
for? That they may be demigods? Did God make men strong 
that they may exalt themselves into His throne? What? Does 
the King of kings crown you with mercies that you may pretend 
to lord it over Him? What? Does He dignify you that you may 
usurp the prerogatives of His throne? No! You must come with 
all the favors and honors that God has put upon you, and crawl 
to the foot of His throne and say, “What am I, and what is my 
father’s house that You have remembered me.” “Up to now 
the Lord has helped us.” 

I said this text might be read three ways. We have read it 
once by laying stress upon the center word. Now it ought to be 
read looking backward. The word, “Up to now,” seems like a 
hand pointing in that direction. Look back, look back. Twenty 
years — thirty — forty — fifty — sixty — seventy — eighty — “Up to 
now!” Say that each of you! Through poverty — through 
wealth — through sickness — through health — at home — 
abroad — on the land — on the sea — in honor — in dishonor — 
in perplexity — in joy — in trial — in triumph — in prayer — in 
temptation — “Up to now!” Put the whole together! I like 


277 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sometimes to look down a long avenue of trees. It is very 
delightful to gaze from end to end of the long vista, a sort of 
leafy temple with its branching pillars, and its arches of leaves. 
Cannot you look down the long aisles of your years — look at 
the green boughs of mercy overhead — and the strong pillars of 
loving kindness and faithfulness which bear your joys? Are 
there no birds in yonder branches singing? Surely, there must 
be many, and the bright sunshine, and the blue sky yonder; and 
if you turn round in the far distance, you may see heaven’s 
brightness and a throne of gold. “Up to now! Up to now!” 

Then the text may be read a third way — loo king forward. For 
when a man gets up to a certain mark and writes, “Up to now,” 
he looks back upon much that is past, but “Up to now” is not 
the end — there is yet a distance to be traversed! More trials, 
more joys, more temptations, more triumphs, more prayers, 
more answers, more toils, more strength, more fights, more 
victories, more slanders, more comforts, more lions and bears 
to be fought, more tearing of the lion for God’s Davids, more 
deep waters, more high mountains, more troops of devils, more 
hosts of angels. And then come sickness, old age, disease, death. 
Is it over now? No, no, no! We will raise one stone more when 
we get into the river, we will shout Ebenezer there — “Up to 
now the Lord has helped us,” for there is more to come! An 
awakening in His likeness, climbing of starry spheres, harps, 
songs, palms, white raiment, the face of Jesus, the society of 
saints, the glory of God, the fullness of eternity, the infinity of 
bliss. Yes, as sure as God has helped us as far as today, He will 
help us to the close! “I will never leave you, I will never forsake 
you; I have been with you, and I will be with you to the end.” 
Courage, brothers and sisters! And as we pile the stones, saying, 
“Up to now the Lord has helped us,” let us just gird up the 
loins of our minds, and be sober and hope to the end for the 


278 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


500 Ebenezer! - I Sam. 7:12 


divine grace that is to be revealed in us — for as it has been — 
so it shall be world without end! 

I need some oil to pour on this pillar — I need some oil. 
Jacob poured oil upon it, and called upon the name of the Lord. 
Where shall I get my oil? Grateful hearts, have you any oil? 
Prayerful spirits, have you any? Companions of Jesus, have you 
any? You who commune with Him day and night, have you any? 
Pour it out, then! Break your alabaster boxes, oh you Marys! 
Pour out your prayers this morning with mine; offer your 
thanksgivings with my grateful expressions of thanks! Come, 
each of you, pour this oil upon the top of this Ebenezer today! 

I need some oil, I wonder whether I shall get it from yonder 
heart. “Oh,” says one, “my heart is as a flinty rock.” I read in 
Scripture that the Lord brought oil out of the flinty rock. Oh, 
if there should be a soul led to believe in Christ this morning — 
if some heart would give itself up to Christ today! Why not so? 
Why not? The Holy Spirit can melt flint and move mountains! 
Young man, how long are we to preach to you? How long to 
invite you? How long to entreat you? T o implore you? Shall this 
be the day that you will yield? Do you say, “I am nothing”? 
Christ is everything; take Him, trust Him! I know not a better 
way of celebrating this day of Ebenezer, and thanksgiving, than 
by some hearts this day accepting the marriage ring of Christ’s 
love, and being betrothed unto the Son of God forever and 
ever! God grant it may be so. It shall be so if you pray for it, O 
true hearts! 

And unto God be glory forever. Amen. — 

“Great God, we sing that mighty hand, 

By which supported still we stand, 

The opening year Your mercy shows, 

Let mercy crown it till it close! 

By day, by night, at home, abroad, 


279 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Still we are guarded by our God, 

By His incessant bounty fed, 

By His unerring counsel led! 

With grateful hearts the past we own, 
The future, all to us unknown, 

We to Your guardian care commit, 

And peaceful leave before Your feet. 

In scenes exalted or depressed, 

Be You our joy, and You our rest. 

Your goodness all our hopes shall raise, 
Adored through all our changing days. 
When death shall interrupt these songs, 
And seal in silence mortal tongues, 

Our helper God, in whom we trust, 

In a better world our souls shall boast.” 


280 



5oi Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, March 22nd, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“I will love them freely.” — Hosea 14:4 

THIS SENTENCE is a body of divinity in miniature. He who 
understands its meaning is a theologian, and he who can dive 
into its fullness is a true Master in divinity! “I will love them 
freely,” is a condensation of the glorious message of salvation 
which was delivered to us in Christ Jesus our Redeemer. The 
sense hinges upon the word “freely.” “I will love them freely. ” 
Here is the glorious, the suitable, the divine way by which love 
streams from heaven to earth! It is, indeed, the only way in 
which God can love such as we are. It may be that He can love 
angels because of their goodness; but He could not love us for 
that reason. The only manner in which love can come from 
God to fallen creatures is expressed in the word “freely.” Here 
we have spontaneous love flowing forth to those who neither 
deserved it, purchased it, nor sought after it! 

Since the word “freely” is the very keynote of the text, we 
must observe its common meaning among men. We use the 
word “freely” for that which is given without money and 
without price. It is opposed to all idea of bargaining, to all 
acceptance of an equivalent, or that which might be construed 
into an equivalent. A man is said to give freely when he bestows 
his charity on applicants simply on the ground of their poverty, 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


hoping for nothing to gain. A man distributes freely, when, 
without asking any compensation, he finds it more blessed to 
give than to receive. Now, God’s love comes to men all free 
and unbought — without our having merit to deserve — or 
money to procure it. I know it is written, “Come, buy wine and 
milk,” but is it not added, “Without money and without price”? 
“I will love them freely.” That is, “I will not accept their works 
in barter for My love; I will not receive their love as a 
recompense for Mine; I will love them, all unworthy and sinful 
though they are.” 

Men give “freely ” when there is no inducement. A great many 
presents of late have been given to the Princess of Wales, and 
it is well and good; but the position of the Princess is such that 
we do not view it as any great liberality to subscribe to a 
diamond necklace, since those who give are honored by her 
acceptance. Now, the freeness of God’s love is shown in this — 
that the objects of it are utterly unworthy, can confer no honor, 
and have no position to be an inducement to bless them. The 
Lord loves them freely. Some persons are very generous to 
their own relations, but here, again, they can hardly be said to 
be free, because the tie of blood compels them; their own 
children, their own brother, their own sister — if men will not 
be generous here, they must be mean through and through! But 
the generosity of our God is commended to us in that He loved 
His enemies, and while we were yet sinners, in due time Christ 
died for us! The word “freely” is “exceedingly broad” when 
used in reference to God’s love to men. He selects those who 
have not the shadow of a claim upon Him, and sets them 
among the children of His heart! 

We use the word “freely,” when a favor is conferred without 
its being sought. It can hardly be said that our king in the old 
histories pardoned the citizens of Calais freely when his Queen 
had first to prostrate herself before him, and with many tears 


282 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


to induce him to be merciful. He was gracious, but he was not 
free in his grace! When a person has been long dogged by a 
beggar in the streets, though he may turn round and give 
liberally to be rid of the clamorous applicant, he does not give 
“freely.” Remember, with regard to God, that His grace to man 
was utterly unsought. He does give divine grace to those who 
seek it, but none would ever seek that grace unless unsought 
grace had first been bestowed. Sovereign grace waits not for 
man; neither tarries for the sons of men. The love of God goes 
forth to men when they have no thought after Him — when 
they are hastening after all manner of sin and wantonness. He 
loves them freely, and as the effect of that love, they then begin 
to seek His face. But it is not our seeking, our prayers, our tears, 
which incline the Lord to love us. God loves us at first most 
freely, without any entreaties or beseechings — and then we 
come both to entreat and to beseech His favor. 

That which comes without any exertion on our part comes to us 
“freely.” The rulers dug the well, and as they dug it, they sang, 
“Spring up, O well!” In such a case, where a well must be dug 
with much labor, the water can hardly be described as rising 
freely. But yonder, in the laughing valley, the spring gushes 
from the hillside, and lavishes its crystal torrent among the 
shining pebbles, man pierced not the fountain, he bored not 
the channel, for, long before he was born, or ever the weary 
pilgrim bowed himself to its cooling stream, it had leaped on 
its joyous way right freely, and it will do so, as long as the moon 
endures , freely, freely, freely. Such is the grace of God! No labor 
of man procures it; no effort of man can add to it. God is good 
from the simple necessity of His nature; God is love simply 
because it is His Essence to be so, and He pours forth His love 
in plenteous streams to undeserving, ill-deserving, hell- 
deserving objects — simply because He, “will have mercy on 
whom He will have mercy, and He will have compassion on 


283 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


whom He will have compassion.” It is not of him that wills, 
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy! 

If you ask an illustration of the word “freely,” I point to 
yonder sun. How freely he scatters his lifegiving beams! Precious 
as gold are his rays, but he scatters them like the dust; he sows 
the earth with orient pearls, and decks it with emerald and ruby 
and sapphire — and all most freely. You and I forget to pray for 
the sun’s light, but it comes at its appointed season; yes, on that 
blasphemer who curses God, the day arises, and the sunlight 
warms him as much as the most obedient child of the heavenly 
Father! That sunbeam falls upon the farm of the miser, and 
upon the field of the fool; that sun bids the grain of the wicked 
expand in its genial warmth, and produces its harvest; that sun 
shines into the house of the adulterer, into the face of the 
murderer, and the cell of the thief. No matter how sinful man 
may be, yet the light of day descends upon him unasked for, 
and unsought! Such is the grace of God — where it comes, it 
comes not because it is sought, or deserved, but simply from 
the goodness of the heart of God, which, like the sun, blesses 
as it wills! Mark the gende winds of heaven — the breath of God 
to revive the languishing — the soft breezes. See the sick man at 
the seaside, drinking in health from the breezes of the salt sea; 
those lungs may heave to utter the lascivious song, but the 
healing wind is not restrained; whether it is breast of saint or 
sinner, yet that wind ceases not from any! So in gracious 
visitations, God waits not till man is good before He sends the 
heavenly wind, with healing beneath its wings; even as He 
pleases, so it blows, and to the most undeserving it comes! 
Observe the rain which drops from heaven. It falls upon the 
desert as well as upon the fertile field; it drops upon the rock 
that will refuse its fertilizing moisture, as well as upon the soil 
that opens its gaping mouth to drink it in with gratitude! Look, 
it falls upon the hard streets of the populous city — where it is 


284 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


not required, and where men will even curse it for coming, and 
it falls not more freely where the sweet flowers have been 
panting for it, and the withering leaves have been rustling forth 
their prayers. Such is the grace of God. It does not visit us 
because we ask it, much less because we deserve it, but as God 
wills it, and the bottles of heaven are unstopped, so God wills 
it, and divine grace descends. No matter how vile, black, foul, 
and godless men may be, He will have mercy on whom He will 
have mercy! That free, rich, overflowing goodness of His can 
make the very worst and least deserving the objects of His best 
and choicest love! 

Do understand me. Let me not leave this point till I have 
well defined its meaning. I mean this, dear friends — -when God 
says, “I will love them freely,” He means that no prayers, no 
tears, no good works, no almsgivings are an inducement to Him 
to love men; no, not only nothing, in themselves, but nothing 
anywhere else was the cause of His love to them — not even the 
blood of Christ; not the groans and tears of His beloved Son — 
these are the fruits of His love, not the cause of it. He does not 
love because Christ died — Christ died because the Father loved! 
Remember that this fountain of love has its spring in itself, not 
in you, nor in me, but only in the Father’s own gracious, infinite 
heart of goodness. “I will love them freely” — spontaneously, 
without any motive ab extra, but entirely because I choose to 
do it. 

In the text, we have two great doctrines. 1 will announce the first 
one, and establish it; and then I will endeavor to apply it. 

I. The first great doctrine is this, that THERE IS NOTHING 
IN MAN TO ATTRACT THE LOVE OF GOD TO HIM. 

We have to establish this doctrine, and our first argument is 
found in the origin of that love. The love of God to man existed 
before there was any man. He loved His chosen people before 
any of them had been created; no, before the world had been 


285 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


made upon which man dwells, He had set His heart upon His 
beloved and ordained them unto eternal life! The love of God, 
therefore, existed before there was any good thing in man; and 
if you tell me that God loved men because of the foresight of 
some good thing in them, I reply to that, that the same thing 
cannot be both cause and effect! Now, it is quite certain that any 
virtue which there may be in any man is the result of God’s 
grace. If it is the result of divine grace, it cannot be the cause of 
divine grace! It is utterly impossible that an effect should have 
existed before a cause; but God’s love existed before man’s 
goodness, therefore that goodness cannot be a cause. Brothers 
and sisters, the doctrine of the antiquity of divine love is 
engraved as with the point of a diamond upon the very 
forehead of revelation! When the children were not yet born, 
neither having done good nor evil, the purpose of election still 
stood — while we were yet like clay in the mass of creatureship, 
and God had power to make of the same lump a vessel to 
honor or a vessel to dishonor — He chose to make His people 
vessels unto honor. This could not possibly have been because 
of any good thing in them, for they, themselves, were not, much 
less their goodness! Our Savior’s words — “Even so, Father, for 
so it seemed good in Your sight,” reveal not only the 
sovereignty, but the freeness of divine love. 

Do you not know, dear friends, in the second place, that 
the whole plan of divine goodness is entirely opposed to the old covenant of 
works ? Paul is very strong on this point — he expressly tells us 
that if it is of grace, it cannot be of works; and if it is of works, 
it cannot be of divine grace — the two having no possibility of 
commingling! Our God, speaking by the prophet, says, “Not 
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the 
day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land 
of Egypt; which My covenant they broke, although I was a 
husband unto them.” The covenant of grace is as wide as the 


286 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


poles asunder from the covenant of works! Now, the tenor of 
the covenant of works is this — “This do and you shall live” — 
if, then, we do the thing which the covenant of works requires 
of us, we live — and we live as the result of our own doing. But 
the very opposite must be the case in the covenant of grace. It 
can never be as the result of anything we do that we are saved 
under that covenant, or else the two are the same, or at least 
similar, whereas, the whole Bible through, they are set in 
contradistinction, the one against the other, as arranged upon 
opposite principles, and acting from different springs. Oh, you 
who think that anything in you can make God love you, stand 
at the foot of Sinai and learn the only thing that can lead God 
to accept man on the ground of law is perfect obedience! Read 
the Ten Commandments through, and see if you can keep one 
of them in the fullness of its spirit, and I am sure you will be 
compelled to cry out — “Your commandment is exceedingly 
broad. Great God, I have sinned.” And yet, if you would stand 
on the footing of what you are, you must take the whole ten, 
and you must keep them throughout an entire life — never 
failing in the slightest point — or else you must certainly be 
abhorred of God! The covenant of grace does not speak on 
that wise at all. It views man as guilty, and having nothing to 
merit; and it says, “I will, I will, I will.” It says not, “If they will,” 
but “I will, and they shall; I will sprinkle pure water upon them, 
and they shall be clean, and from all their iniquities I will cleanse 
them.” That covenant does not look upon man as innocent, 
but as guilty! “When I passed by, I saw them in their blood, and 
I said, live; yes, when I saw them in their blood I said, live.” 
The first covenant was a contract — “Do this and I will do that.” 
But the next has not the shadow of a bargain in it. It is — “I will 
bless you, and I will continue to bless you. Though you abound 
in transgressions, yet I will continue to bless till I make you 
perfect, and bring you to My glory at the last.” It cannot be, 


287 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


then, that there is anything in man that makes God love him, 
because the whole plan of the covenant is opposed to that of 
works! 

Thirdly, the substance of God’s love — the substance of the 
covenant which springs from God’s love — clearly proves that 
it cannot be man’s goodness which makes God love him. If you 
should tell me that there was something so good in man that, 
therefore, God gave him bread to eat, and raiment to put on, I 
might believe you. If you tell me that man’s excellence 
compelled the Lord to put the breath into Inis nostrils, and to 
give him the comforts of this life, I might yield to you. But I 
see yonder God Himself made man; I see that God, that man, 
at last fastened to the cross; I see Him on the tree expiring in 
unknown agonies; I hear His awful shriek — “Eloi, Eloi, lama 
Sabachthani;” I see the dreadful sacrifice of God’s only- 
begotten Son, who was not spared, but freely delivered up for 
us all — and I feel certain that it would be nothing short of 
blasphemy if I should admit that man could ever deserve such 
a gift as the death of Christ! The very angels in heaven, with an 
eternity of obedience, could never have deserved so great a gift 
as Christ in the flesh, dying for them! And oh, shall we, who 
are all over foul and defiled; shall we look to that dear cross and 
say, “I deserved that Savior”? Brothers and sisters, this were 
the height of infernal arrogance — let it be far from us; let us 
rather feel that we could not deserve such love as this, and that 
if God loves us so as to give His Son for us, it must be from 
some hidden motive in His own will — it cannot be because of 
any good thing in us! 

Further, if you will remember the objectives of God’s love, as 
well as the substance of it, you will soon see that it could not 
be anything in them which compels God to love them. Who 
are the objects of God’s love? Are they Pharisees, the men who 
fast twice in the week, and pay tithes of all they possess? No, 


288 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


no, no! Are they the moralists who, touching the law, are 
blameless, and walk in all the observances of their religion 
without a slip? No, the publicans and harlots enter the kingdom 
of heaven before they do! Who are they who are the chosen of 
God? Let the whole tribe now in heaven speak for themselves, 
and they will say, “We have washed our robes, (they needed it, 
they were black), and we have made them white in the blood 
of the Lamb.” Appeal to any of the saints on earth, and they 
will tell you that they never could perceive any good thing in 
themselves. 1 have searched my own heart — I hope with some 
degree of earnestness — and so far from finding any reason in 
myself why God should love me, I can find a thousand reasons 
why He should destroy me, and drive me forever from His 
presence! The best thoughts we have are defiled with sin; our 
very faith is mixed with unbelief; the noblest devotion which 
we ever paid to God is far inferior to His desserts, and is marred 
with infirmity and fault! Remember that many of those who are 
the true servants of God were once the very worst servants of 
Satan! Does it not surprise you that men who were the 
companions of the harlot are now saints of the Most High? The 
drunkard, the blasphemer, the man who defied man’s laws as 
well as God’s — such were some of us — but we are washed, we 
are cleansed, we are sanctified! I never did meet, and I never 
expect to meet with any saved soul that would ever, for a 
moment, tolerate the thought of there being any goodness in 
itself to merit God’s esteem! No; vile and full of sin I am, and 
if You have mercy on me, O God, it is because You will, for I 
merit none! 

Further, we are constantly informed in Scripture that the 
love of God and the fruit of the love of God are gifts. “The wages of sin 
is death, but the gift of God is eternal life.” Now, if the Lord 
stands bargaining with you and with me, and says, “I will give 
you this if — if — if — ,” then He does not love freely. But if, on 


289 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the other hand, it is simply, purely, and only a gift bestowed as 
such, not for any recompense afterwards to be given — then the 
gift is a pure gift, a true gift, and so the text is warranted in 
saying, “I will love them freely.” Now, the gift of God is eternal 
life, and dear friends, if you and I ever get it, we must obtain it 
as a free gift from God — by no means as wages which we have 
earned — for our poor earnings will bring us death! Only God’s 
gift can yield us life. 

Everywhere throughout the Word, the Lord’s love is greatly 
and wonderfully commended. We are told that as high as the heavens 
are above the earth, so high are His ways above our ways. If 
the Lord loved men for some loveliness in them, there would 
be nothing wonderful in it — you and I can do the same! I hope 
I can love a man who possesses moral excellence. You feel, 
each of you, that if a man’s conduct towards you is grateful and 
good, you cannot but love him, or if you do not, it becomes a 
fault on your part. With reverence let me say it — if there is 
something good in man, it is no wonder that God should love 
him; it would be unjust if He did not! If naturally in man there 
is any virtue; if there is any praise, if there is any commendable 
repentance, or any acceptable faith — man ought to be loved! 
This is not a thing to amaze the ages, nor to set the angels 
singing, nor to move the mountains and hills in astonishment; 
but for God to love a man who is evil all over — to love him when 
there is every reason for hating him — when there is not a trace 
of goodness in him — oh, this is enough to make the rocks 
break their silence, and the hills burst forth into music! 

This is the first doctrine. I cannot preach upon it as I would 
this morning, for my voice is very weak, and the pain of 
speaking distracts my mind. But it matters not how I preach 
upon it, for the subject itself is so exceedingly full of comfort 
to a really awakened soul, that it needs no garnishing of mine — 


290 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


choice dainties need no skill in the carver — their own 
lusciousness secures them rich acceptance! 

But what is the practical use of it? Ho you who are going about 
to establish your own righteousness, here is a deathblow to 
your works and carnal trust! God will not love you 
meritoriously; God will only love you freely. Why do you go 
about, then, spending your money for that which is not bread 
and your labor for that which satisfies not? You may boast as 
you will, but you will have to come to God on a par with the 
worst of the worst, and when you do come, you will have to be 
accepted — you who are the best of men — on the same terms 
as if you had been the foulest of the foul! Therefore, go not 
about, busy not yourselves with all this fancied righteousness — 
but come to Jesus as you are! Come now, without any works of 
yours, for you must so come or not at all! God has said, “I will 
love them freely,” and depend upon it, He will never love you 
in any other way! You may think you are toiling to heaven, 
when you shall be only tunneling your way through mountains 
of self-righteousness down to the depths of hell! 

This doctrine offers comfort to those who do not feel fit to come to 
Christ. Do you not perceive that the text is a deathblow to all 
sorts of fitness? “I will love them freely.” Now, if there is any 
fitness necessary in you before God will love you, then He does 
not love you freely — at least this would be a hinder and a 
drawback to the freeness of it. But it is, “I will love you freely. ” 
You say, “Lord, but my heart is so hard.” “I will love you freely.” 
“But I do not feel my need of Christ as I could wish.” “I will 
not love you because you feel your need; I will love you freely. ” 
“But I do not feel that softening of spirit that I would desire.” 
Remember, the softening of spirit is not a condition — there are 
no conditions! The covenant of grace has no conditions 
whatever. These are the unconditional, sure mercies of 
David — so that you, without any fitness — may come and 


291 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


venture upon the promise of God which was made to you in 
Christ Jesus, when He said, “He who believes on Him is not 
condemned.” No fitness is needed — “I will love them freely.” 
Sweep all that lumber and rubbish out of the way! Oh, for grace 
in your hearts to know that the grace of God is free — is free to 
you without preparation, without fitness, without money and 
without price! 

Nor the practical use of our doctrine does not end here. 
There are some of you who say, “I feel this morning that 1 am 
so unworthy; I can well believe that God will bless my mother; 
that Christ will pity my sister; I can understand how yonder 
souls can be saved, but I cannot understand how I can be. I am 
so unworthy.” “I will love them freely.” Oh, does not that meet 
your case? If you were the most unworthy of all created beings; 
if you had aggravated your sin till you had become the foulest 
and most vile of all sinners, yet, “I will love them freely,” puts 
the worst on an equal basis with the best! It sets you, who are 
the devil’s castaways, on a par with the most hopeful! There is 
no reason for God’s love in any man — then if there is none in 
you, you are no worse off than the best of men — for there is 
none in them! The grace and love of God can come as freely 
to you as they can to those who have long been seeking them, 
for “I am found of them who sought Me not.” 

Yet once more here. I think this subject invites backsliders to 
return. Indeed, the text was specially written for such — “I will 
heal their backsliding; I will love them freely.” Here is a son 
who ran away from home. He enlisted as a soldier. He behaved 
so badly in his regiment that he had to be drummed out of it. 
He has been living in a foreign country in so vicious a way that 
he has reduced his body by disease; his back is covered with 
rags; his character is that of the vagrant and felon. When he 
went away, he did it on purpose — to vex his father’s heart — 
and he has brought his mother’s gray hairs, with sorrow, to the 


292 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


grave. One day, the young lad receives a letter full of love. His 
father writes — “Return to me, my son; I will forgive you all; I 
will love you freely.” Now, if this letter had said — “If you will 
humble yourself so much, I will love you; if you will come back 
and make me such-and-such promises, I will love you.” If it 
had said, “If you will behave yourself in the future, I will love 
you” — I can suppose the young man’s proud nature rising — 
but surely this kindness will melt him! I think the generosity of 
the invitation will at once break his heart, and he will say, “I 
will offend no longer, I will return at once.” Backslider, without 
any condition you are invited to return! “I am married unto 
you,” says the Lord. If Jesus ever did love you, He has never 
left off loving you; you may have left off attending to the means 
of divine grace — you may have been very slack at private 
prayer — but if you ever were a child of God, you are a child of 
God, still, and He cries, “How can I give you up? How can I 
set you as Admah? How can I make you as Zeboim? My 
repentings are kindled together; I am God, and not man; I will 
return unto him in mercy.” Return, backslider, and seek your 
injured Father’s face! I think 1 hear a murmur somewhere — 
“ Well, this is very, very, very Antinomian doctrine.” Yes, 
objector, it is such doctrine as you will need one day. It is the 
only doctrine which can meet the case of really awakened 
sinners! “God commends His love toward us, in that, while we 
were yet sinners, in due time, Christ died for the ungodly.” 

II. Since it is written, “I will love them freely,” we believe 
that NOTHING IN MAN CAN BE AN EFFECTUAL BAR TO 

God’s love. 

This is the same doctrine put in another shape. Nothing in 
man can be the cause of God’s love, so nothing in man can be 
an effectual hindrance to God’s love — I mean such an effectual 
hindrance as to prevent God from loving man. How shall I 
prove it? If there is anything in any man which can be a bar to 


293 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


God’s grace, then this would have been an effectual hindrance 
to its coming to any of the human race. All men were in the 
loins of Adam, and if there were a bar in you to God’s love, 
that would have been in Adam — consequently, being in Adam, 
it would have been a block to God’s love to the race altogether! 
If there is some sin in you, I say, which can effectually prevent 
God from showing divine grace to you, then that was in Adam, 
seeing you were in the loins of Adam, and it would, therefore, 
have been an effectual hindrance to God’s grace from the race 
in any of its members. Seeing God’s grace found no barriers 
over which it could not leap, no floodgates which it could not 
burst, no mountains it could not go over, I am persuaded there 
is nothing in you why God should not show His grace to you! 

Besides, one would think that if there is a bar in any, it would 
have prevented the salvation of those who are undoubtedly saved. Mention 
any sin you like, and I will assure you upon divine authority that 
men have committed such sins and have yet been saved. Talk 
of a deed that has blackened the man’s character forever — that 
deed of foul adultery and murder — yet that did not stop God’s 
love from flowing to David! And even if you have gone that 
length, and I suppose there is no person here who has gone 
farther — even that cannot prevent divine love from lighting 
upon you! As God does not love because there is excellence, 
so He does not refuse to love because there is sin! Let me select 
the case of Manasseh. He shed innocent blood very much; he 
bowed before idols. What was worse, he made his children to 
pass through the fire to the son of Hinnon — put his own 
children to death as a sacrifice to the false God, and yet for all 
that, God’s love laid hold upon him, and Manasseh became a 
bright star in heaven, though once as vile as the lost in hell! If 
there is anything in you, then, that makes you think God cannot 
love you, I reply, IMPOSSIBLE! Surely your sins do not exceed 
those of the chief of sinners — Paul says he was the chief of 


294 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


sinners, and he meant it; he spoke by inspiration, and there is 
no doubt he was. Now, if the biggest of sinners has passed 
through the strait gate, there must be room for the next biggest! 
If the greatest sinner in the world has been saved, then there is 
a possibility for you and for me — for we cannot be such great 
sinners as the very chief of sinners. But I will dare to say that 
even if we were, even if we could exceed Paul — even that could 
be no barrier! Man’s sin, to say the most of it, is but the act of 
a finite creature — God’s grace is the act of infinite goodness. 
God forbid that I should depreciate your offenses; they are 
loathsome; they are hellish in themselves; still they are only a 
creature’s deeds, the deeds of a worm that today is, and 
tomorrow is crushed. But the divine grace, the love and the pity 
of God — oh, these are infinite, eternal, everlasting, boundless, 
matchless, quenchless, unconquerable; and therefore, the grace 
of God can overcome and prove itself mightier than your guilt 
and sin! There is no bar, then, or else there would have been a 
bar in the case of others. 

Would it not mar the sovereignty of God it there should be a man 
in whom there was something that would effectually prevent 
God’s love from flowing to him? Then it would not be, “I will 
have mercy on whom I will have mercy.” No, it would be, “I 
will have mercy on those I can have mercy on; but there is such- 
and-such a man — I cannot have mercy on him, for he has gone 
too far.” No, glory be to God for that sentence — “I will have 
mercy upon whom l will have mercy.” The devil may say, 
“What? On that man, on that man? He has gone too far!” “Ah, 
but,” says God, “if I will it, he has not gone too far. I will have 
mercy on him.” I do not know that I ever felt more the 
boundless sovereignty of the grace of God than when I looked 
that text in the face and saw it — not, “I will have mercy on 
those who are willing to have it,” or “I will have mercy on 
penitents.” No — “I will have mercy on whom I will have 


295 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


mercy.” And so, if God wills to save you, there can be no bar 
to it — or else that would be a marring and a limiting of the 
sovereignty of God! 

Would not this be a great slur cast upon the grace of God? 
Suppose I could find a sinner so vile that Jesus Christ could not 
reach him? Why, then the devils in hell would take him through 
their streets as a trophy! They would say, “This man was more 
than a match for God! His sin was too great for God’s grace.” 
What says the Apostle? “Where sin abounded,” that is you, 
poor sinner! “Where sin abounded.” What sins you plunged 
into last night, and on other black occasions! “Where sin 
abounded” — what? Condemnation? Hopeless despair? No, 
“Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. ” I think I see 
the conflict in the great arena of the universe. Man piles a 
mountain of sin, but God will match it, and He raises a loftier 
mountain of divine grace! Man heaps up a still larger hill of 
sin — but the Lord tops it with 1 0 times more grace! And so the 
contest continues till, at last, the mighty God plucks up the 
mountains by the roots and buries man’s sin beneath them as a 
fly might be buried beneath an Alp. Abundant sin is no barrier 
to the superabundant grace of God! 

And then, dear friends, would it not detract glory from the gospel, 
if it could be proved that there was some man in whom the 
gospel could not work its way? Suppose that the gospel, which 
is, “worthy of all acceptation,” could not meet certain cases. 
Suppose I picked out 12 men who were so diseased that the 
gospel remedy could not meet their case? Oh, then I think I 
should stop my mouth from all glorying in the cross; I could 
no more say with the aposde, “God forbid that I should glory 
save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,” for then it would 
not be the power of God unto salvation to everyone who 
believes. No, it would be the power of God to all except that 
dozen! But oh, as often as I come into this pulpit, it gives me 


296 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


joy to know that I have a gospel to preach which is suitable to 
every case! A friend told me the other day that many notorious 
characters stole in at times. Thank God for that! “Ah,” said 
some, “but they come only to laugh.” Never mind! Thank God 
if they come. “Oh, but they will make mockery of the gospel.” 
No, the Lord knows how to turn mockers into weepers; let us 
hope for the worst, and labor for the most hopeless. 

The love of God has provided means to ?neet the most extreme case. 
They are twofold. The power of Christ and the power of the 
Spirit. Do you tell me that sin is a barrier? I answer, “All manner 
of sin and of blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men.” “The 
blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanses from all sin.” The 
atonement of Christ is capable of removing from men all sorts, 
sizes, and dyes of iniquity. “Though your sins are as scarlet, 
they shall be as wool; though they are red like crimson, they 
shall be whiter than snow.” “Ah,” cries one, “man’s hard- 
heartedness stands in the way of God’s love.” Beloved, the 
Holy Spirit is ready to meet the case of the hard heart. “Limit 
not the Holy One of Israel.” Is anything too hard for the Lord? 
You tell me that unbelief is a bar. I answer, “No,” for cannot 
the Holy Spirit make the unbelieving believe? Yes, if the Holy 
Spirit once comes into effectual contact with the most 
unbelieving and obstinate spirit, it must believe at once! Look 
at the jailer; a few minutes ago he had been putting Paul in the 
stocks. What, what, what, what is this that comes over him? 
“What must 1 do to be saved?” “Believe,” says the Aposde, and 
he does believe, and becomes as pliant as a child! Away with 
the men who think that man is master over God! If He willed 
to stop, at this moment, the most bloody persecutor, the most 
filthy and licentious man — if He willed to turn the blackest- 
hearted Atheist into one of the most brilliant of saints — there 
is nothing in His way to stop Him! In a moment, omnipotent 
love can do it. The means are provided, both in the blood of 


297 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Christ for cleansing, and in the power of the Spirit for renewing 
the inner man! Therefore, I say it is established, beyond doubt, 
that there is nothing in man which can conquer divine love! 

“What is the practical use of this,” says one. The practical 
use of this is to set the gate of mercy wide open. I like to always 
preach sermons which leave the door of mercy ajar for the 
worst of sinners — but this morning, I set it wide open! A man 
has dropped in here who has been thinking for years, “I gave 
myself up to sin in my youth, and I have gone astray ever 
since — there is no hope for me.” I tell you, soul, all that you 
have ever done is no bar to God’s love to you — for He does 
not love you because of anything good in you; that which is 
black in you cannot prevent His loving you, if He so wills it. I 
tell you what I would have you do. I have seen those like you 
come to the foot of the cross and they have said — 

“Just as I am, and waiting not 
To rid my soul of one dark blot, 

To You whose blood can cleanse each spot, 

O Lamb of God, I come!” 

If you in your soul can now trust the love of God in Christ, 
you are saved! No matter whoever you may be, you are saved 
this morning, and you shall go out of this house a regenerate 
soul — for, by God’s grace, you have believed in Jesus — 
therefore, the love of God has come to you! All your past life 
is forgotten and forgiven; all your past ingratitude, and 
blasphemy, and sin, are cast into the depths of the sea, and, as 
far as the east is from the west, so far has He removed your 
transgressions from you! I have known the time when, if I had 
heard the sermon of this morning, faint and feeble though it is, 
I should have danced for joy! I feel an intense inward 
satisfaction and delight while preaching it, for I believe it is the 


298 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


501 Grace Abounding - Hos. 14:4 


opening of the prison to them who are bound! Christ died not 
for the righteous, but for sinners! He gave Himself for our sins, 
and not for our righteousness! This old Lutheran doctrine — 
justification by faith in Christ — this grand doctrine which 
shook old Rome to her very foundations, I think must give 
poor sinners comfort and peace! I know that many will see 
nothing in it; of course, none but the sick see any value in the 
healing medicine. I know there are some here who will think 
the sermon is not for them; oh, may the Spirit of God make 
some accept this comfort. But they will not, unless the Spirit of 
God makes them! Too many of us are like foolish patients who 
will not take the physician’s medicine — and he has to hold us, 
and thrust it down before we will take it. This is how the Lord 
deals with many — not against their will — but yet against their 
will as it used to be! He gives them the medicine of His divine 
grace and makes them whole. 

To sum up all in one, what I mean is this — there have 
straggled in here, this morning, the poor working man, the 
struggling mechanic, the young vain dresser, the man who leads 
a fast life, the wretch who leads a coarse life, the woman, 
perhaps, who has gone far astray. I mean to say to such — you 
are lost — but the Son of man is come to seek and to save you! 
I say to you, sons and daughters of moral parents, who are not 
converted but perhaps feel yourselves even worse than the 
immoral — I say to you that you are not yet past hope! God will 
love you freely, and this is how His love is preached to you — 
“Whoever believes on the Lord Jesus Christ shall be saved.” 
Come as you are! God will accept you as you are! Come as you 
are, without any preparation or fitness! Come as you are, and 
where the cross is lifted high with the bleeding Son of God 
upon it, fall flat on your face, accepting the love manifested 
there, willingly receiving this day the divine grace which God 
willingly and freely gives! 


299 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


As sinners, without any qualification, as sinners, as 
undeserving sinners, my Lord will receive you graciously and 
love you freely! Amen. 


300 



502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34 :i 4 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, March 29th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“For the Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God.” — 
Exodus 34:14 

THE PASSION of jealousy in man is usually exercised in an 
evil manner, but it is not in itself necessarily sinful. A man may 
be zealously cautious of his honor, and suspiciously vigilant 
over another, without deserving blame. All thoughtful persons 
will agree that there is such a thing as virtuous jealousy. Self- 
love is, no doubt, the usual foundation of human jealousy, and 
it may be that Shenstone is right in his definition of it as, “The 
apprehension of superiority” — the fear lest another should by 
any means supplant us. Yet the word “jealous ” is so near akin to 
that noble word, “jealous, ” that I am persuaded it must have 
something good in it. Certainly we learn from Scripture that 
there is such a thing as a godly jealousy. We find the Aposde 
Paul declaring to the Corinthian Church, “I am jealous over 
you with a godly jealousy, for I have espoused you to one 
husband that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.” 
He had an earnest, cautious, anxious concern for their holiness, 
that the Lord Jesus might be honored in their lives. Let it be 
remembered, then, that jealousy, like anger, is not evil in itself, 
or it could never be ascribed to God; His jealousy is always a 
pure and holy flame. The passion of jealousy possesses an 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


intense force, it fires the whole nature, its coals are juniper, 
which have a most vehement flame; it resides in the lowest 
depths of the heart, and takes so firm a hold that it remains 
most deeply rooted until the exciting cause is removed; it wells 
up from the inmost recesses of the nature, and like a torrent, 
irresistibly sweeps all before it! Jealously stops at nothing, for it 
is cruel as the grave (Song 8:6), it provokes wrath to the utmost, 
for it is the rage of a man, therefore He will not spare in the 
day of vengeance (Prov 6:34). It overthrows everything in the 
pursuit of its enemy, for, “wrath is cruel, and anger is 
outrageous; but who is able to stand before jealousy?” For all 
these reasons jealousy is selected as some faint picture of that 
tender regard which God has for His own Deity, honor and 
supremacy — and the holy indignation which He feels towards 
those who violate His laws, offend His majesty, or impeach His 
character. 

Not that God is jealous so as to bring Him down to the 
likeness of men, but that this is the nearest idea we can form of 
what the divine being feels — if it is right to use even that word 
toward Him — when He beholds His throne occupied by false 
gods, His dignity insulted, and His glory usurped by others. We 
cannot speak of God except by using figures drawn from His 
works, or our own emotions; we ought, however, when we use 
the images, to caution ourselves, and those who listen to us, 
against the idea that the Infinite mind is really to be compassed 
and described by any metaphors however lofty, or language 
however weighty! We might not have ventured to use the word 
“jealousy,” in connection with the Most High, but as we find it 
so many times in Scripture, let us, with solemn awe, survey this 
mysterious display of the divine mind. I think I hear the 
thundering words of Nahum, “God is jealous, and the Lord 
revenges, the Lord revenges and is furious, the Lord will take 
vengeance on His adversaries, and He reserves wrath for His 


302 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


enemies.” My soul, be humbled before the Lord, and tremble 
at His name! 

I. Reverently, let us remember that the LORD IS 
EXCEEDINGLY JEALOUS OF HIS DEITY. 

Our text is coupled with the command — “You shall 
worship no other God.” When the law was thundered from 
Sinai, the second commandment received force from the divine 
jealousy — “You shall not make unto you any graven image, or 
any likeness of anything that is in the heaven above, or that is 
in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; you 
shall not bow down yourself to them, nor serve them: for I the 
Lord your God am a jealous God.” Since He is the only God, 
the Creator of heaven and earth, He cannot endure that any 
creature of His own hands, or fiction of a creature’s imagination, 
should be thrust into His throne, and be made to wear His 
crown! In Ezekiel we find the false god described as, “The 
image of jealousy which provokes to jealousy,” and the doom 
on Jerusalem for thus turning from Jehovah runs thus, “My 
eyes shall not spare, neither will I have pity, but I will 
recompense their way upon their head.” False gods patiently 
endure the existence of other false gods. Dagon can stand with 
Bel, and Bel with Ashtaroth — how should stone, and wood, 
and silver be moved to indignation? But because God is the 
only living and true God, Dagon must fall before His ark; Bel 
must be broken, and Ashtaroth must be consumed with fire! 
Thus says the Lord, “You shall destroy their altars, break their 
images, and cut down their groves.” The idols He shall utterly 
abolish! My brothers and sisters, do you marvel at this? I felt in 
my own soul, while meditating upon this matter, an intense 
sympathy with God. Can you put yourselves in God’s place for 
a moment? Suppose that you had made the heavens and the 
earth, and all the creatures that inhabit this round globe. How 
would you feel if those creatures should set up an image of 


303 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


wood, or brass, or gold, and cry, “These are the gods that made 
us! These things give us life!”? What? A dead piece of earth set 
up in rivalry with real Deity? What must be the Lord’s 
indignation against infatuated rebels when they so far despise 
Him as to set up a leek, or an onion, or a beetle, or a frog — 
preferring to worship the fruit of their own gardens, or the 
vermin of their muddy rivers — rather than acknowledge the 
God in whose hands their breath is, and whose are all their 
ways? Oh, it is a marvel that God has not dashed the world to 
pieces with thunderbolts, when we recollect that even to this 
day millions of men have changed the glory of the incorruptible 
God into an image made like corruptible man, and to birds and 
four-footed beasts, and creeping things! With what unutterable 
contempt must the living God look down upon those idols 
which are the work of man’s hands — “They have mouths, but 
they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not: they have ears, 
but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not: they have 
hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not: 
neither speak they through their throat.” 

God has long-suffering toward men, and He patiently 
endures this madness of rebellion, but, oh, what patience must 
it be which can restrain the fury of His jealousy, for He is a 
jealous God, and tolerates no rival! It was divine jealousy which 
moved the Lord to bring all His plagues on Egypt. Careful 
reading will show you that those wonders were all aimed at the 
gods of Egypt. The people were tormented by the very things 
which they had made to be their deities, or else, as in the case 
of the cattle, their sacred animals were, themselves, smitten, 
even as the Lord had threatened — “Against all the gods of 
Egypt I will execute judgment: I am Jehovah.” Was it not the 
same with ancient Israel? Why were they routed before their 
enemies? Why was their land so often invaded? Why did famine 
follow pestilence, and war succeed to famine? Because, “They 


304 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


provoked Him to anger with their high places, and moved Him 
to jealousy with their graven images. When God heard this, He 
was furious, and gready abhorred Israel.” (Psa 78:58, 59). How 
was it that at the last, the Lord gave up Jerusalem to the flames 
and bade the Chaldeans carry into captivity the remnant of His 
people? How was it that He abhorred His heritage and gave up 
Mount Zion to be trod under foot by the Gentiles? Did not 
Jeremiah tell them plainly that because they had walked after 
other gods, and forsaken Jehovah, therefore He would cast 
them out into a land which they knew not? 

Brothers and sisters, the whole history of the human race 
is a record of the wars of the Lord against idolatry! The right 
hand of the Lord has dashed in pieces the enemy, and cast the 
ancient idols to the ground! Behold the heaps of Nineveh! 
Search for the desolations of Babylon! Look upon the broken 
temples of Greece! See the ruins of pagan Rome! Journey 
where you will, you behold the dilapidated temples of the gods, 
and the ruined empires of their foolish votaries. The moles and 
the bats have covered with forgetfulness the once famous 
deities of Chaldea and Assyria. The Lord has made bare His 
arm and eased Him of His adversaries, for Jehovah, whose 
name is Jealous, is a jealous God. With what indignation, then, 
must the Lord look down upon that apostate harlot called the 
Roman Catholic Church, when, in all her sanctuaries, there are 
pictures and images, relics and altars — and poor infatuated 
beings are even taught to bow before a piece of bread in this 
country! Popish idolatry is not so barefaced and naked as it is 
in other lands, but I have seen it, and my soul has been moved 
with indignation like that of Paul on Mars’ Hill, when he saw 
the city wholly succumbed to idolatry. I have seen thousands 
adore the wafer, hundreds bow before the image of the Virgin, 
scores at prayer before a crucifix, and companies of men and 
women adoring a rotten bone or a rusty nail, because it is said 


3°5 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


to be the relic of a saint! It is vain for the Roman Catholic to 
assert that he worships not the things, themselves, but only the 
Lord through them, for this, the second commandment 
expressly forbids — and it is upon this point that the Lord calls 
himself a jealous God. How full is that cup, which Babylon 
must drink; the day is hastening when the Lord shall avenge 
Himself upon her, because her iniquities have reached unto 
heaven, and she has blasphemously exalted her Pope into the 
throne of the Most High, and thrust her priests into the office 
of the Lamb. Purge yourselves, purge yourselves of this leaven! 
I charge you before God, the Judge of the quick and the dead, 
if you would not be partakers of her plagues, come out from 
her more and more, and let your protest be increasingly 
vehement against this which exalts itself above all that is called 
God! Let our Protestant Churches, which have too great a 
savor of Popery in them, cleanse themselves of her fornications, 
lest the Lord visit them with fire, and pour the plagues of 
Babylon upon them! Renounce, my brothers and sisters, every 
ceremony which has not Scripture for its warrant, and every 
doctrine which is not established by the plain testimony of the 
Word of God! Let us, above all, never, by any sign, or word, or 
deed, have any complicity with this communion of devils, this 
gathering together of the sons of Belial — and since our God is 
a jealous God, let us not provoke Him by any affinity, 
gentleness, fellowship, or amity with the Roman Catholic 
Church, this Mother of Harlots and abominations of the earth! 

With what jealousy must the Lord regard the great mass of 
the people of this country, who have another God beside Himself! 
With what indignation does He look upon many of you who 
are subject to the prince of the power of the air, the god of this 
world! To you, Jehovah is nothing; God is not in all your 
thoughts; you have no fear of Him before your eyes. Like the 
men of Israel, you have set up your idols inj your heart. Your god 


306 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


is custom, fashion, business, pleasure, ambition, honor. You 
have made unto yourselves gods of these things. You have said, 
“These are your gods, O Israel.” You follow after the things 
which perish, the things of this world which are vanity. O, you 
sons of men, think not that God is blind! He can perceive the 
idols in your hearts! He understands the secret things that your 
souls lust after! He searches your heart, He tries your reins — 
beware lest He find you sacrificing to strange gods — for His 
anger will smoke against you, and His jealousy will be stirred. 
O, you who worship not God, the God of Israel, who give Him 
not dominion over your whole soul, and live not to His honor, 
repent of your idolatry! Seek mercy through the blood of Jesus, 
and provoke not the Lord to jealousy any more. 

Even believers may be reproved on this subject. God is very 
jealous of His Deity in the hearts of His own people. Mother, 
what will He say of you, if that darling child occupies a more 
prominent place in your love than your Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ? Husband, what shall He say to you, and with what 
stripes shall He smite you, when your wife reigns as a goddess 
in your spirit? And wife, you should love your husband — you 
do well in so doing — but if you exalt him above God, if you 
make him to have dominion over your conscience, and are 
willing to forsake your Lord to please him — then you have 
made to yourself another god — and God is jealous with you! 
Yes, and we may thus provoke Him with the dead as well as 
with the living. A grief carried to excess, a grief nurtured until 
it prevents our attention to duty, a grief which makes us 
murmur and repine against the will of providence — is sheer 
rebellion! It has in it the very spirit of idolatry — it will provoke 
the Lord to anger, and He will surely chasten yet again, until 
our spirit becomes resigned to His rod. “Have you not forgiven 
God yet?” was the language of an old Quaker when he saw a 
widow, who for years had worn her black dress, and was 


307 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


inconsolable in her grief — “Have you not forgiven God yet?” 
We may weep under bereavements, for Jesus wept, but we must 
not sorrow so as to provoke the Lord to anger; we must not 
act as if our friends were more precious to us than our God! 
We are permitted to take solace in each other, but when we 
carry love to idolatry, and put the creature into the Creator’s 
place — and rebel and fret, and bitterly repine — then the Lord 
has a rod in His hand, and He will make us feel its weight, for 
He is a jealous God. I fear there are some professors who put 
their house, their garden, their business, their skill — I know not 
what else — at seasons into the place of God. It is not consistent 
with the life of godliness for a man to be perpetually an idolater, 
but even true believers will sometimes be overcome with this 
sin, and will have to mourn over it. Brothers and sisters, set up 
no images of jealousy, but like Jacob of old, cry to yourselves, 
and to your families, “Put away the strange gods that are among 
you, and be clean.” Let me warn those of you who neglect this, 
that if you are the Lord’s people, you shall soon smart for it, 
and the sooner the better — for your own salvation — while, on 
the other hand, to those ungodly persons who continue to live 
for objects other than divine, let me say, you not only will suffer 
in this life by bitter disappointments, but you shall also suffer 
eternal wrath in the life to come! 

Come, let me push this matter home upon your 
consciences; let me carry this as a point of the bayonet. Why, 
my hearers, there are some of you who never worship God! I 
know you come up to His house, but then it is only to be seen, 
or to quiet your conscience by having done your duty. How 
many of you merchants aim only to accumulate a fortune? How 
many of you tradesmen are living only for your families? How 
many young men breathe only for pleasure? How many young 
women exist only for amusement and vanity? I fear that some 
among you make your belly your god, and bow down to your 


308 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


own personal charms or comforts. Talk of idolaters! They are 
here today! If we desire to preach to those who break the first 
and second commandments, we have no need to go to India, 
or traverse the plains of Africa. They are here. Unto you who 
bow not before the Lord, let these words be given, and let them 
ring in your ears — “The Lord whose name is Jealous, is a 
jealous God.” Who shall stand before Him when once He is 
angry? When His jealousy burns like fire, and smokes like a 
furnace, who shall endure the day of His wrath? Beware, lest 
He tear you into pieces and there be none to deliver you. 
Dreadful shall it be for you, if at the last you shall behold an 
angry God sitting in judgment. Pause now and meditate upon 
your doom, and imagine you see the Almighty robed in tempest 
and whirlwind — 

“His throne a seat of dreadful wrath, 

Girt with devouring flames! 

The Lord appears consuming fire, 

And Jealous is His name!” 

God save you for Jesus’ sake. 

II. The Lord IS JEALOUS OF HIS SOVEREIGNTY. 

He who made heaven and earth has a right to rule His 
creatures as He wills. The potter has power over the clay to 
fashion it according to his own good pleasure; and we creatures, 
being made, are bound to be obedient to our Lord. He has a 
right to issue commands, He has done so — they are holy and 
just — and wise men are bound to obey. But, alas, they 
continually revolt against His sovereignty, and will not obey 
Him! No, there are men who deny altogether that He is King 
of kings, and others who take counsel together saying, “Let us 
break His bands in sunder, and cast away His cords from us.” 
He who sits in the heavens is moved to jealousy by these sins; 


309 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


He will defend the rights of His crown against all comers, for 
the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods! 

This reminds us of the Lord’s hatred of sin. Every time we sin, 
we as much as say, “I do not acknowledge God to be my 
sovereign; I will do as I please.” Each time we speak an ill word, 
we really say, “My tongue is my own, He is not Lord over my 
lips.” Yes, and every time the human heart wanders after evil, 
and lusts for that which is forbidden, it attempts to dethrone 
God and to set up the evil one in His place! The language of 
sin is, “Who is the Lord, that I should obey His voice? I will 
not have God to reign over me.” Sin is a deliberate treason 
against the majesty of God, an assault upon His crown, an 
insult offered to His throne. Some sins, especially, have 
rebellion written on their forehead — presumptuous sins — 
when a man’s conscience has been enlightened, and he knows 
better, but still forsakes the good, and follows after evil. When 
a man’s conscience has been awakened through some judgment, 
or sickness, or under a faithful ministry — if that man returns, 
like a dog to his vomit — he has, indeed, insulted the sovereignty 
of God! But have we not all done this, and are there not some 
here, in particular, of whom we once had good hope, but who 
have turned back again to crooked ways? Are there not some 
of you who, Sunday after Sunday, get your consciences so 
quickened that you cannot be easy in sin as others are? And 
though you may, perhaps, indulge in sin, yet it costs you very 
dearly, for you know better! Did I not hear of one who sits in 
these seats often, but is as often on the ale bench? Did I not 
hear of another who can sing with us the hymns of Zion, but 
is equally at home with the lascivious music of the drunkard? 
Do we not know of some who in their business are anything 
but what they should be, yet for a show, can come up to the 
House of God? Oh, sirs, oh, sirs, you provoke the Lord to 
jealousy! Take heed, for when He comes out of His resting 


310 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


place, and takes to Himself Pits sword and buckler, who are you 
that you should stand before the dread majesty of His presence? 
Tremble and be still! Humble yourselves, and repent of this, 
your sin! 

Surely, if sin attacks the sovereignty of God, self-righteousness 
is equally guilty of treason — for as sin boasts, “I will not keep God’s 
law.” Self-righteousness exclaims, “I will not be saved in God’s 
way; I will make a new road to heaven; I will not bow before 
God’s grace; I will not accept the atonement which God has 
worked out in the person of Jesus; I will be my own redeemer! 

I will enter heaven by my own strength, and glorify my own 
merits.” The Lord is very angry against self-righteousness; I do 
not know of anything against which His fury burns more than 
against this, because this touches Him in a very tender point — 
it insults the glory and honor of His Son Jesus Christ! Joshua 
said to the children of Israel, when they promised to keep the 
law — “You cannot serve the Lord, for He is a holy God; He is 
a jealous God; and He will not forgive your transgressions, nor 
your sins.” So I may well say to every self-righteous person, 
‘You cannot keep the law, for God is a jealous God,” carefully 
marking every fault, and just to mark your iniquities; nor will 
He forgive your iniquities so long as you attempt to win His 
favor by works of the law. Throw away your self-righteousness, 
you proud one! Cast it with all other idols to the moles and to 
the bats, for there is no hope for you as long as you cling to it. 
Selfrighteousness is, in itself, the very height and crowning 
point of rebellion against God. For a man to say, “Lord, I have 
not sinned,” is the gathering up, the emphasis, the climax of 
iniquity — and God’s jealousy is hot against it! 

Let me add, dear friends, I feel persuaded that false doctrine, 
inasmuch as it touches God’s sovereignty, is always an object 
of divine jealousy. Let me indicate especially the doctrines of 
free will. I know there are some good men who hold and preach 


311 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


them, but I am persuaded that the Lord must be grieved with 
their doctrine though He forgives them their sin of ignorance. 
Free will doctrine — what does it do? It magnifies man into God! 
It declares God’s purposes null and void, since they cannot be 
carried out unless men are willing; it makes God’s will a waiting 
servant to the will of man, and the whole covenant of grace 
dependent upon human action! Denying election on the 
ground of injustice, it holds God to be a debtor to sinners, so 
that if He gives divine grace to one, He is bound to do so to all. 
It teaches that the blood of Christ was shed equally for all men, 
and since some are lost, this doctrine ascribes the difference to 
man’s own will — thus making the atonement, itself, a 
powerless thing until the will of man gives it efficacy! Those 
sentiments dilute the Scriptural description of man’s 
depravity — and by imputing strength to fallen humanity, rob 
the Spirit of the glory of His effectual calling grace. This theory 
says, in effect, that it is of him who wills, and of him who runs, 
and not of God who shows mercy! Any doctrine, my brothers 
and sisters, which stands in opposition to this truth of God — 
“I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,” provokes 
God’s jealousy! I often tremble in this pulpit lest I should utter 
anything which should oppose the sovereignty of my God; and 
though you know I am not ashamed to preach the 
responsibility of man to God — if God is sovereign, man must 
be bound to obey Him — on the other hand, I am equally bold 
to preach that God has a right to do what He wills with His 
own, that He gives no account of His matters, and none may 
stay His hand, or say to Him, “What are You doing?” I believe 
that the free will heresy assails the sovereignty of God, and 
mars the glory of His dominion! In all faithfulness, mingled 
with sorrow, I persuade you who have been deluded by it, to 
see well to your ways, and receive the truth of God which sets 
God on high, and lays the creature in the dust. “The Lord 


312 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


reigns” — let this be our joy! The Lord is our King, let us obey 
Him and defend to the death the crown rights of the King of 
kings, for He is a jealous God! 

While tarrying upon this subject, I ought also to remark 
that all the boastings of ungodly ?>jen, whenever they exalt 
themselves, seeing that they are a sort of claim to sovereignty, 
must be very vexatious to God, the Judge of all. When you 
glory in your own power, you forget that power belongs only 
to God, and you provoke His jealousy. When kings, 
parliaments, or synods, trespass upon the sacred domains of 
conscience, and say to men, “Bow down, that we may go over 
you” — when we make attempts to lord over another man’s 
judgment, and to make our own opinions supreme, the Lord is 
moved to jealousy — for HE retains the court of conscience for 
Himself alone to reign in! Let us humbly bow before the dignity 
of the Most High and pay our homage at His feet — 

“Glory to the eternal King, 

Clad in majesty supreme! 

Let all heaven His praises sing, 

Let all worlds His power proclaim! 

O let my transported soul 
Ever on His glories gaze! 

Ever yield to His control, 

Ever sound His lofty praise!” 

Let us crown Him every day! Let our holy obedience, our 
devout lives, our hearty acquiescence in all His will, our 
reverent adoration before the greatness of His majesty, all 
prove that we acknowledge Him to be King of kings, and Lord 
of lords, lest we provoke a jealous God to anger! 

III. The Lord is jealous of his glory. 


313 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


God’s glory is the result of His nature and acts. He is 
glorious in His character, for there is such a store of everything 
that is holy, good, and lovely in God, that He must be glorious. 
The actions which flow from His character, the deeds which 
are the outgoings of His inner nature — these are glorious, too! 
And the Lord is very careful that all flesh should see that He is 
a good, and gracious, and just God; and He is mindful, too, that 
His great and mighty acts should not give glory to others, but 
only to Himself. 

How careful, then, should we be when we do anything for God that 
God is pleased to accept as our doings, that we never congratulate ourselves. 
The minister of Christ should disrobe himself of every rag of 
praise. “You preached well,” said a friend to John Bunyan one 
morning. ‘You are too late,” said honest John, “the devil told 
me that before 1 left the pulpit.” The devil often tells God’s 
servants a great many things which they should be sorry to hear. 
Why, you can hardly be useful in a Sunday school but he will 
say to you — “How well you have done it!” You can scarcely 
resist a temptation, or set a good example, but he will be 
whispering to you — “What an excellent person you must be!” 
It is, perhaps, one of the hardest struggles of the Christian life 
to learn this sentence — “Not unto us, not unto us, but unto 
Your name be glory.” Now God is so jealous on this point that, 
while He will forgive His own servants a thousand things, this 
is an offense for which He is sure to chasten us. Let a believer 
once say, “I am,” and God will soon make him say, “I am not. ” 
Let a Christian begin to boast, “I can do all things,” without 
adding, “through Christ who strengthens me,” and before long 
he will have to groan, “I can do nothing,” and bemoan himself 
in the dust! Many of the sins of true Christians, I do not doubt, 
have been the result of their glorifying themselves. Many a man 
has been permitted by God to stain a noble character, and to 
ruin an admirable reputation, because the character and the 


3H 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


reputation had come to be the man’s own, instead of being laid, 
as all our crowns must be laid, at the feet of Christ. You may 
build the city, but if you say with Nebuchadnezzar, “Behold 
this great Babylon which 1 have built!” you shall be smitten to 
the earth! The worms which ate Herod when he gave not God 
the glory are ready for another meal — beware of vainglory! 

How careful ought we to be to walk humbly before the Lord. 
The moment we glorify ourselves — since there is only room 
for one glory in the universe — we set ourselves up as rivals to 
the Most High! Penitent souls are always accepted, because 
they are not in God’s way; proud souls are always rejected, 
because they are in God’s way. Shall the insect of an hour glorify 
itself against the sun which warmed it into life? Shall the 
potsherd exalt itself above the man who fashioned it upon the 
wheel? Shall the dust of the desert strive with the whirlwind? 
Or the drops of the ocean struggle with the tempest? O, you 
nothingness and vanity, you puny mortal called man — humble 
yourself and reverence your Great Creator! 

Let us see to it that we never misrepresent God, so as to rob Him 
of His honor. If any minister shall preach of God so as to 
dishonor Him, God will be jealous against that man. I fear that 
the Lord has heavy wrath against those who lay the damnation 
of man at God’s door, for they dishonor God, and He is very 
jealous of His name. And those, on the other hand, who ascribe 
salvation to man, must also be heavily beneath God’s 
displeasure, for they take from Him His glory. Ah, thieves! Ah, 
thieves! Will you dare to steal the crown jewels of the universe? 
Where do you go, where do you bear the bright pearls which 
ought to shine upon the brow of Christ? Do you dare put them 
on the brow of man? Stop! Stop! The Lord will not give His 
glory to another! Give unto the Lord, all you righteous, give 
unto the Lord, glory and strength! Give unto Him the honor 


315 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


that is due unto His name! Any doctrine, which does not give 
all the honor to God, provokes Him to jealousy. 

Be careful, dear friends, that you do not misrepresent God 
yourselves. You who murmur; you who say that God deals 
harshly with you — you give God an ill character! When you 
look so melancholy, worldlings say, “The religion of Jesus is 
intolerable.” And so you stain the honor of God. Oh, do not 
do this, for He is a jealous God, and He will surely use the rod 
upon you if you do! 

A flash of holy pleasure crosses my mind. I am glad that 
He is a jealous God. It is enough to make us walk very carefully, 
but, at the same time it should make us very joyful to think that 
the Lord is very jealous of His own honor. Then, brothers and 
sisters, if we believe in Christ, you and I are safe, because it 
would dishonor Him if we were not. For His own name’s sake, 
and for His faithfulness’ sake, He will never leave one of His 
people. “His honor is engaged to save the meanest of His 
sheep.” Now, if Christ could trifle with His own honor, if He 
had no jealousy, you and I might be afraid that He would allow 
us to perish, but it never shall be! It shall be said on earth, and 
sung in heaven at the last, that God has allowed no 
dishonorable defeats from the hands of either men or devils. “I 
chose My people,” says the Eternal Father, “and they are Mine 
now that I make up My jewels.” “I bought My people,” says 
the eternal Son, “I became a surety for them before the Most 
High, and the infernal lion could not rend the meanest of the 
sheep.” “I quickened My people,” says the Holy Spirit; “The 
temptations of hell could not throw them down; their own 
corruptions could not overpower them; I have gotten the 
victory in every one of them, not one of them is lost; they are 
all brought safely to My right hand.” Hide yourselves, then, 
under the banner of Jehovah’s jealousy! It is bloody red, I 
know — its ensign bears a thunderbolt and a flame of fire — but 


316 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


hide yourselves, hide yourselves under it, for what enemy shall 
reach you there? If it is to God’s glory to save me, I am 
entrenched behind munitions of stupendous rock. If it would 
render God inglorious to let me, a poor sinner, descend into 
hell — if it would open the mouths of devils, and make men say 
that God is not faithful to His promise — then am I secure, for 
God’s glory is wrapped up with my salvation, and the one 
cannot fail because the other cannot be tarnished! Beloved, let 
us mind that we are very jealous of God’s honor, ourselves, 
since He is jealous of it. Let us say with Elijah — “I am very 
jealous for the Lord God of hosts.” May our lives and conduct 
and conversation prove that we are jealous of our hearts lest 
they should once depart from Him; and may we smite with 
stern and unrelenting hand every sin, and every thought of 
pride that might touch the glory of our gracious God — living 
to Him as living before a jealous God! 

IV. In the highest sense, THE LORD IS JEALOUS OVER 
HIS OWN PEOPLE. 

Let me only hint that human jealousy, although it will 
exercise itself over man’s reputation, rights and honor, has one 
particularly tender place — jealousy guards, like an armed man, 
the marriage covenant. A suspicion here is horrible. Even good old 
Jacob, when he came to die, could not look upon his son 
Reuben without remembering his offense. “He went up to my 
couch,” said the old man — and, as if the remembrance were 
too painful for him, he hurried on from Reuben to the next. 
The Lord has been graciously pleased to say of His people, “I 
am married unto you.” The covenant of divine grace is a 
marriage covenant , and Christ’s Church has become His spouse! 
It is here that God’s jealousy is peculiarly liable to take fire. Men 
cannot be God’s favorites without being the subjects of His 
watchfulness and jealousy — that which might be looked over 
in another — will be chastened in a member of Christ. As a 


317 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


husband is jealous of his honor, so is the Lord Jesus much 
concerned for the purity of His Church. 

The Lord J esus Christ, of whom I now speak, is very jealous 
of your love, O believer! Did He not choose you? He cannot bear 
that you should choose another! Did He not buy you with His 
own blood? He cannot endure that you should think you are 
your own, or that you belong to this world. He loved you with 
such a love that He could not stay in heaven without you; He 
would sooner die than that you should perish; He stripped 
Himself to nakedness that He might clothe you with beauty; 
He bowed His face to shame and spit that He might lift you up 
to honor, and He cannot endure that you should love the world, 
and the things of the world. His love is strong as death towards 
you, and therefore will be cruel as the grave. He will be as a 
cruel one towards you if you do not love Him with a perfect 
heart. He will take away that husband; He will smite that child; 
He will bring you from riches to poverty, from health to 
sickness, even to the gates of the grave — because He loves you 
so much that He cannot endure that anything should stand 
between your heart’s love and Him! Be careful, Christians, you 
who are married to Christ — remember — you are married to a 
jealous husband. 

He is very jealous of your trust. He will not permit you to 
trust in an arm of flesh. He will not endure that you should hew 
out broken cisterns, when the overflowing fountain is always 
free to you. When we come up from the wilderness leaning 
upon our beloved, then is our beloved glad, but when we go 
down to the wilderness leaning on some other arm; when we 
trust in our own wisdom, or the wisdom of a friend — worst of 
all, when we trust in any works of our own — He is angry, and 
will smite us with heavy blows that He may bring us to Himself. 

He is also very jealous of our company. It were well if a 
Christian could see nothing but Christ. When the wife of a 


318 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


502 A Jealous God - Ex. 34:14 


Persian noble had been invited to the coronation of Darius, the 
question was asked of her by her husband — “Did you not think 
the king a most beautiful man?” And her answer was — “I cared 
not to look at the king; my eyes are for my husband only, for 
my heart is his.” The Christian should say the same. There is 
nothing beneath the spacious arch of heaven comparable to 
Christ — there should be no one with whom we converse so 
much as with Jesus. To abide in Him only — this is true love! 
To commune with the world, to find solace in our comforts, to 
love this evil world — this is vexing to our jealous Lord! Do you 
not believe that nine out of 10 of the troubles and pains of 
believers are the result of their love to some other person than 
Christ? Nail me to Your cross, my bleeding Savior! Put Your 
crown of thorns upon my head to be a hedge to keep my 
thoughts within its bounds! O, for a fire to burn up all my 
wandering loves! O, for a seal to stamp the name of my Beloved 
indelibly upon my heart! O, divine love, expel from me all 
carnal worldly loves, and fill me with Yourself! 

Dear friends, let this jealousy which should keep us near to 
Christ be also a comfort to us. If we are married to Christ, and He 
is jealous of us, depend upon it — this jealous husband will let 
none touch His spouse! Joel tells us that the Lord is jealous for 
His land, and Zechariah utters the words of the Lord, “I am 
jealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion with a great jealousy;” and 
then He declares that He will punish the heathen. And will He 
not avenge His own elect who cry unto Him day and night? 
There is not a hard word spoken but the Lord shall avenge it! 
There is not a single deed done against us, but the strong hand 
of Him who once died, but now lives for us, shall take terrible 
vengeance upon all His adversaries! I am not afraid for the 
Church of God! I tremble not for the cause of God! Our 
jealous Husband will never let His Church be in danger! If any 
smite her, He will give them a double blow! The gates of hell 


3D 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


shall not prevail against His Church, but she shall prevail 
against the gates of hell! Her jealous Husband shall roll away 
her shame; her reproach shall be forgotten; her glory shall be 
fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with 
banners — for He who is jealous of Himself is jealous for her 
fair fame. The subject is large and deep; let us prove that we 
understand it, by from now on walking very carefully; and if 
any say, “Why are you so precise?” let this be our answer — “I 
serve a jealous God.” 


320 



503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 6:8-11 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, April 5 th, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“Now if we are dead with Christ, we believe that we shall 
also live with Him, knowing that Christ, being raised from the 
dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion over Him. For 
in that He died, He died unto sin once: but in that He lives, He 
lives unto God. Likewise reckon you also yourselves to be dead 
indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our 
Lord.” — Romans 6:8-11 

THE APOSTLES never traveled far from the simple facts of 
Christ’s life, death, resurrection, ascension, exaltation and 
second advent. These things, of which they were the witnesses, 
constituted the staple of all their discourses. Newton has very 
properly said that the two pillars of our religion are the work of 
Christ for us, and His work in us by the Holy Spirit. If you want 
to find the aposdes, you will surely discover them standing 
between these two pillars; they are either discoursing upon the 
effect of the passion in our justification, or, its equally delightful 
consequence, in our death to the world and our newness of life. 
What a rebuke this should be to those in modern times who 
are always straining after novelties. There may be much of the 
Athenian spirit among congregations, but that should be no 
excuse for its being tolerated among ministers; we, of all men, 
should be the last to spend our time in seeking something new. 
Our business, my brothers and sisters, is the old labor of 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


apostolic tongues — to declare Jesus — who is the same 
yesterday, today, and forever. We are mirrors reflecting the 
transactions of Calvary, telescopes manifesting the distant 
glories of an exalted Redeemer. The nearer we keep to the cross, 
the nearer, I think, we keep to our true vocation. When the 
Lord shall be pleased to restore to His Church once more a 
fervent love to Christ, and, when once again we shall have a 
ministry that is not only flavored with Christ, but of which 
Jesus constitutes the sum and substance, then shall the 
churches revive — then shall the set time to favor Zion come! 
The goodly cedar which was planted by the rivers of old, and 
stretched out her branches far and wide has become, in these 
modern days, like a tree dwarfed by Chinese art; it is planted by 
the rivers as before, but it does not flourish; only let God the 
Holy Spirit give to us, once again, the bold and clear preaching 
of Christ crucified in all simplicity and earnestness, and the 
dwarf shall swell into a forest giant, each expanding bud shall 
burst into foliage, and the cedar shall tower aloft again, until 
the birds of the air shall lodge in its branches! I need offer you 
no apology, then, for preaching on those matters which 
engrossed all the time of the apostles, and which shall shower 
unnumbered blessings on generations yet to come. 

I. The facts referred to in these four verses 

CONSTITUTE THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL WHICH WE PREACH. 

1. The first fact here very clearly indicated is that Jesus died. 
He who was divine, and therefore, immortal, bowed His head 
to death! He whose human nature was allied to the 
omnipotence of His divine nature, was pleased to voluntarily 
submit Himself to the sword of death. He who was pure and 
perfect, and therefore deserved not death, which is the wages 
of sin, nevertheless, condescended for our sake to yield Himself 
up to die. This is the second note in the gospel scale. The first 
note is incarnation — Jesus Christ became a man — angels 


322 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


thought this worthy of their songs, and made the heavens ring 
with midnight melodies. The second note is this, I say, that, 
being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. He 
died as a sacrifice. I think, after many lambs from the flocks of 
men had poured out their blood at the foot of the altar, it was 
a strange spectacle — to see God’s Lamb brought to that same 
altar to be sacrificed! He is without spot or blemish, or any such 
thing; He is the firstling of the flock; He is the only one of the 
Great Master — a right royal, heavenly Lamb! Such a Lamb had 
never been seen before. He is the Lamb who is worshipped in 
heaven, and who is to be adored world without end. Will that 
sacred head condescend to feel the axe? Will that glorious 
victim really be slain? Is it possible that God’s Lamb will 
actually submit to die? He does so without a struggle; He is 
dumb in the shambles before the slaughterers; He gives up the 
warm blood of His heart to the hand of the executioner, that 
He might expiate the wrath of God. Let heaven ring with music 
and let hell be filled with confusion! Jesus, the Eternal Son of 
God, the Lamb of Jehovah’s passover died! His hands were 
pierced; His heart was broken; to prove how surely the spear 
had struck the mark, the vital fluid flowed in a double flood, 
even to the ground — Jesus died! If there were any doubt about 
this, there is doubt about your salvation and mine; if there were 
any reason to question this fact, then we might question the 
possibility of salvation! But Jesus died, and sin is put away. The 
sacrifice smokes to heaven — -Jehovah smells a sweet savor, and 
is pleased — through Christ, the victim — to accept the prayers, 
the offerings, and the persons of His people. Nor did He die as 
the victim only. He died as the substitute l We were drawn as 
soldiers for the great warfare, but we could not go, for we were 
feeble, and would have fallen in the batde, and have left our 
bones to be devoured by the dogs of hell. But He, the mighty 


323 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Son of God, became the substitute for us; He entered the 
batdefield; He sustained the first charge of the adversary in the 
wilderness — three times He repulsed the grim fiend and all his 
host, smiting His assailants with the sword of the Spirit until 
the enemy fled, and angels waited upon the weary Victor. 

The conflict was not over, the enemy had but retired to 
forge fresh artillery, and recruit his scattered forces for a yet 
more terrible batde. For three years the great Substitute kept 
the field against continual onslaughts from the advance guard 
of the enemy, remaining conqueror in every skirmish. No 
adversary dared to show his face, or if he shot an arrow at Him 
from a distance, our substitute caught the arrow on His shield 
and laughed His foes to scorn! Devils were cast out of many 
that were possessed; whole legions of them were compelled to 
find refuge in a herd of swine, and Lucifer himself fell like 
lightning from the heaven of His power. At last the time came 
when hell had gathered up all its forces — and now was also 
come the hour when Christ, as our substitute, must carry His 
obedience to the utmost length; He must be obedient unto 
death! He has been a substitute up till now; will he now throw 
down His vicarious character? Will He now renounce our 
responsibilities, and declare that we may stand for ourselves? 
Not He! He undertook, and must go through. Sweating great 
drops of blood, He flinches not from the dread assault. 
Wounded in hands, and in feet, He still maintained His ground, 
and though, for the sake of obedience. He bowed His head to die, 
yet in that dying He slew death! He put His foot upon the 
dragons’ neck, crushed the head of the old serpent, and beat 
our adversaries as small as the dust of the threshing floor. Yes, 
the blessed substitute has died. I say if there were a question 
about this, then m might have to die — but inasmuch as He died 
for us — the believer shall not die! The debt is discharged to the 
utmost farthing. The account is cleared. The balance is struck. 


324 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


The scales of justice turn in our favor — God’s sword is 
sheathed forever — and the blood of Christ has sealed it in its 
scabbard. We are free, for Christ was bound! We live, for Jesus 
died! Dying, thus, as a sacrifice, and as a substitute, it is a 
comfort to us to know that He also died as Mediator between God 
and ?>jan. There was a great gulf fixed, so that if we would pass 
to God, we could not, neither could He pass to us if He would 
condescend to do so. There was no way of filling up this gulf, 
unless there should be found one who, like the old Roman, 
Curtius, would leap into it. Jesus comes, arrayed in His 
pontifical garments, wearing the breastplate, bearing the 
ephod — a priest forever after the order of Melchisedek. His 
kingly character is not forgotten, for His head is adorned with 
a glittering crown, and over His shoulders He bears the 
prophet’s mantle. How shall I describe the matchless glories of 
the prophet-king, the royal priest? Will He throw Himself into 
the chasm? He will! Into the grave He plunges, the abyss is 
closed! The gulf is bridged, and God can have communion with 
man! I see before me the heavy veil which shields from mortal 
eyes the place where God’s glory shines. No man may touch 
that veil or he must die. Is there any man found who can rend 
it? — that man may approach the mercy seat. O, that the veil 
which parts our souls from Him who dwells between the 
Cherubim could be torn throughout its utmost length! Strong 
archangel, would you dare to rend it? Should you attempt the 
work, your immortality would be forfeited, and you must expire. 

But Jesus comes, the King Immortal, Invisible, with His 
strong hands rends the veil from top to bottom — and now 
men draw near with confidence — for when Jesus died, a living 
way was opened! Sing, O heavens, and rejoice O earth! There 
is now no wall of partition, for Christ has dashed it down! 
Christ has taken away the gates of death, posts and bars, and 
all — and like another Samson — carried them upon His 


325 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


shoulders far away. This, then, is one of the great notes of the 
gospel — the fact that Jesus died! Oh, you who would be saved, 
believe that Jesus died! Believe that the Son of God expired! 
Trust that death to save you, and you are saved! It is no great 
mystery; it needs no learned words, no polished phrases — 
Jesus died — the sacrifice smokes; the substitute bleeds; the 
Mediator fills up the gap! Jesus dies; believe and live! 

2. But Jesus rises — this is no mean part of the gospel. He 
dies; they lay Him in a new sepulcher; they embalm His body 
in spices — His adversaries are careful that His body shall not 
be stolen away. The stone, the seal, the watch, all prove their 
vigilance. Aha! Aha! What do you do, men? Can you imprison 
immortality in a tomb! The fiends of hell, too, I doubt not, 
watched the sepulcher, wondering what it all could mean. But 
the third day comes, and with it the messenger from heaven! 
He touches the stone — it rolls away. He sits upon it, as if he 
would defy the whole universe to roll that stone back again. 
Jesus awakes, as a mighty man from his slumber — unwraps the 
napkin from His head, and lays it by itself — unwinds the grave 
clothes in which love had wrapped Him; He puts them by 
themselves — for He had abundant leisure. He was in no haste. 
He was not about to escape like a felon who bursts out of 
prison, but like one whose time of deliverance from jail has 
come. He lawfully and leisurely leaves His cell; He steps to the 
upper air, bright, shining, glorious and fair; He lives! He died 
once, but He rose again from the dead. There is no need for us to 
enlarge here. We only pause to remark that this is one of the 
most jubilant notes in the whole gospel scale, for you see, 
brothers and sisters, the rich mysteries, which, like the many 
seeds of the pomegranate, are all enclosed in the golden apple 
of resurrection! Death is overcome! Here is found a man, who 
by His own power, was able to struggle with death, and hurl 
him down! The grave is opened; there is found a man able to 


326 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


dash back its bolts, and to rifle its treasures! And thus, brothers 
and sisters, having delivered Himself, He is able, also, to deliver 
others. Sin, too, was manifestly forgiven. Christ was in prison 
as a hostage, kept there as a surety. Now that He is allowed to 
go free, it is a declaration on God’s behalf that He has nothing 
against us! Our substitute is discharged. We are discharged! He 
who undertook to pay our debt is allowed to go free. We go 
free in Him! “He rose again for our justification.” No — 
more — inasmuch as He rises from the dead, He gives us a 
pledge that hell is conquered! This was the great aim of hell — 
to keep Christ beneath its heel. “You shall bruise His heel.” 
They had gotten the heel of Christ, His mortal flesh, beneath 
their power, but that bruised heel came forth unwounded! 
Christ sustained no injury by His dying; He was as glorious, 
even in His human nature, as He was before He expired. “You 
will not leave My soul in hell, neither will You suffer Your holy 
One to see corruption.” Beloved, in this will we triumph — that 
hell is worsted — Satan is put to confusion, and all his hosts are 
fallen before Immanuel! Sinner, believe this; it is the gospel of 
your salvation. Believe that Jesus of Nazareth rose again from 
the dead, and trust Him, trust Him to save your soul! Because 
He burst the gates of the grave, trust Him to bear your sins, to 
justify your person, to quicken your spirit, and to raise your 
dead body — and verily, verily, I say unto you — you shall be 
saved! 

3. We now strike a third note, without which the gospel 
would not be complete. Inasmuch as J esus died, He is now living. 
He does not, after 40 days, return to the grave; He departs from 
earth, but it is by another way. From the top of Olivet He 
ascends until a cloud receives Him out of their sight, and now, 
at this very day, He lives! There at His Father’s right hand He 
sits — bright like a sun — clothed in majesty; the joy of all the 
glorified spirits, He is His Father’s intense delight. There He 


327 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sits, Lord of Providence — at His belt swing the keys of heaven, 
and earth, and hell. There He sits, expecting the hour when His 
enemies shall be made His footstool. I think I see Him, too, as 
He lives to intercede; He stretches His wounded hands, points 
to His breastplate bearing the names of His people, and for 
Zion’s sake He does not hold His peace, and for Jerusalem’s 
sake He does not rest day nor night, but always pleads — “Oh 
God! Bless Your heritage; gather together Your scattered ones; 
1 will that they whom You have given Me be with Me where I 
am.” Believer, this is a cluster of camphor to you, a bundle of 
myrrh — be comforted exceedingly — 

“He lives! The great Redeemer lives! 

What joy the blessed assurance gives!” 

Trembling penitent, let a living Savior cheer you. Exercise 
faith in Him, only, who has immortality. He lives to hear your 
prayer — cry to Him — He lives to present that prayer before 
His Father’s face. Put yourself in His hands; He lives to gather 
together those whom He bought with His blood, to make those 
the people of His flock who were once the people of His 
purchase. Sinner, do you believe this as a matter of fact? If so, 
rest your soul on it, and make it shine as a matter of 
confidence — and then you are saved! 

4 . One more note and our gospel song need not rise higher. 
Jesus died; He rose; He lives; and He lives forever! Hz lives forever. 
He shall not die again. “Death has no more dominion over 
Him.” Ages shall follow ages, but His raven locks shall never 
be blanched with years. “You have the dew of Your youth.” 
Disease may visit the world, and fill graves, but no disease or 
plague can touch the immortal Savior. The shock of the last 
catastrophe shall shake both heaven and earth, until the stars 
shall fall like withered fig leaves from the tree, but nothing shall 


328 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


move the unchanging Savior. He lives forever! There is no 
possibility that He should be overcome by a new death — 

“No more the bloody spear, 

The cross and nails no more. 

For hell itself shakes at His name, 

And all the heavens adore.” 

Would it not be a strange doctrine indeed if any man 
should dream that the Son of God would again offer His life as 
a sacrifice? He dies no more. This, too, reveals another part of 
our precious gospel — for now it is certain, since He lives 
forever — that no foes can overcome Him! He has so routed 
His enemies, and driven His foes off the batdefield, that they 
will never venture to attack Him again. This proves, too, that 
His people’s eternal life is sure. Let Jesus die, and His people 
die; let Christ leave heaven, and, O you glorified ones, you must 
all vacate your thrones, and leave your crowns without heads 
to wear them — and your harps untouched by fingers that shall 
wake them to harmony. He lives forever! Oh, seed of Abraham, 
you are saved with an everlasting salvation by the sure mercies 
of David! Your standing in earth and heaven has been eternally 
confirmed! God is honored, saints are comforted, and sinners 
are cheered, for “He is able also to save them to the uttermost 
who come unto God by Him, seeing He ever lives to make 
intercession for them.” 

Now, I would to God, that on one of these four anchors 
your faith might be able to get rest. Jesus died, poor trembler; if 
He died and took your griefs, will not His atonement save you? 
Rest here. Millions of souls have rested on nothing but Jesus’ 
death — and this is a granite foundation — no storms of hell can 
shake it. Get a good handhold on His cross — hold it and it will 
hold you! You cannot depend on His death and be deceived. 


329 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Try it — taste and see, and you shall find that the Lord is good — 
and that none can trust a dying Savior without being with Him 
in Paradise. But if this suffices you not, He rose again! Fasten 
upon this. He is proved to be victor over your sins, and over 
your adversary; can you not, therefore, depend upon Him? 
Doubtless, there have been thousands of saints who have 
found the richest consolation from the fact that Jesus rose 
again from the dead. He rose again for our justification. Sinner, 
hang on that. Having risen He lives; He is not a dead Savior, a 
dead sacrifice; He is able to hear our plea, and to present His 
own. Depend on a living Savior — depend on Him NOW. He 
lives forever, and therefore, it is not too late for Him to save you. 
If you cry to Him, He will hear your prayer, even though it is 
in life’s last moment, for He lives forever. Though the ends of 
the earth were come, and you were the last man, yet, He ever 
lives to intercede before His Father’s face. Oh, gad not about 
to find any other hope! Here are four great stones for you — 
build your hope on these! You cannot want surer 
foundations — He dies, He rises, He lives, He lives forever! I 
tell you, soul, this is my only hope, and though I lean there with 
all my weight, it bends not. This is the hope of all God’s people, 
and they abide contented in it. Do, I pray, come now and rest 
on it. May the Spirit of God bring many of you to Christ! We 
have no other gospel. You thought it a hard thing, a scholarly 
thing, a matter that a college must teach you, that the university 
must give you. It is no such matter for learning and scholarship. 
Your little child knows it, and your child may be saved by it. 
You without education — you who can scarcely read the Bible, 
you can comprehend this! He dies; there is the cross. He rises; 
there is the open tomb. He lives; there is the pleading Savior. 
He lives forever; there is the perpetual merit. Depend on Him! 
Put your soul in His hands, and you are saved! 


330 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


If I have brought you under the first head of my discourse 
to a sufficient height, you can now take another step, and 
mount to something higher. I do not mean higher as to real 
value, but higher as a matter of knowledge, because it follows 
upon the fact as a matter of experience. 

II. The great facts mentioned in our text represent THE 
GLORIOUS WORK WHICH EVERY BELIEVER FEELS WITHIN 
HIMSELF. 

In the text, we see death, resurrection, life, and eternal life. 
You observe that the Apostle only mentions these to show our 
share in them. I will read the text again — “Now if we are dead 
with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with Him: 
knowing that Christ, being raised from the dead, dies no more; 
death has no more dominion over Him. For in that He died, 
He died unto sin once: but in that He lives, He lives unto God. 
Likewise reckon you, yourselves, also to be dead, indeed, unto 
sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.” 

Well, then, it seems that as Christ was, so we also are dead. 
We are dead to sin because sin can no ttjore condemn us. All the 
sins which God’s people have ever committed dare not 
accuse — much less can they condemn those for whom Jesus 
died. Sin can curse an unbeliever, but it has no power so much 
as to mutter half a curse against a man in Christ. I cannot claim 
a debt of a dead debtor, and although I am a debtor to the law, 
yet since I am dead, the law cannot claim anything of me; nor 
can sin inflict any punishment upon me. He who is dead, as 
says the preceding verse, is freed from sin; being dead to sin, 
we are free from its entire jurisdiction! We fear not its curse; we 
defy its power. The true believer, in the day when He first came 
to Christ, died to sin as to its power; Sin had been sitting on a 
high throne in his heart, but faith pulled the tyrant down, and 
rolled him in the dust; and though it still survives to vex us, yet 
its reigning power is destroyed! From the day of our new birth, if 


33i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


we are, indeed, true Christians, we have been dead to all sin’s 
pleasures. Madame Bubble can no longer bewitch us; the 
varnish and gilt have been worn off from the palaces of sin; we 
defy sin’s most skillful enchantments; it might warble sweet 
music, but the dead ear is not to be moved by melodies. Keep 
your bitter sweets, O earth, for those who know no better 
delicacies! Our mouths find no flavor in your dainties; we are 
dead to sin’s bribes. We curse the gold that would have bought 
us to be untruthful, and abhor the comforts which might have 
been the reward of iniquity. We are dead to its threats, too. 
When sin curses us, we are as little moved by its curses as by its 
promises! A believer is mortified and dead to the world. He can 
sing with Cowper — 

“I thirst, but not as once I did 
The vain delights of earth to share. 

Your wounds, Emmanuel, all forbid 
That I should seek my pleasures there. 

It was the sight of Your dear cross 
First weaned my soul from earthly things, 

And taught me to esteem as dross 
The mirth of fools and pomp of kings.” 

I am compelled, however, to say that this mortification is 
not complete. We are not so dead to the world as we should be. 
Instead of saying, here, what the Christian is, I think I may 
rather say what he should be, for where am I to look for men 
who are dead to the world nowadays? I see professing 
Christians quite as fond of riches; I see them almost as fond of 
gaiety and vanity; do I not see those who wear the name of 
Jesus, whose dress is as full of vanity as that of the worldling, 
whose conversation has no more savor of Christ in it than that 
of the open sinner? I find many who are conformed to this 


332 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


world, and who show but little renewing of their minds. Oh, 
how slight is the difference nowadays between the Church and 
the world! We ought to be, in a spiritual sense, evermore 
Dissenters — dissenting from the world — standing out and 
protesting against it! We must be to the world’s final day 
Nonconformists, not conforming to its ways and vanities, but 
walking outside the camp, bearing Christ’s reproach. Do some 
of you recollect the day when you died to the world? Your 
friends thought you were mad! They said you knew nothing of 
life, so your ungodly friends put you in the sepulcher, and 
others of them rolled a great stone against you. They, from that 
day, put a ban upon you. You are not asked out now where you 
once were. The seal is put upon you — they call you by some 
derogatory epithet, and so far as the world is concerned, you 
are like the dead Christ! You are put into your grave, and shut 
out from the world’s life; they do not want you any more at 
their merry-makings — you would spoil the party. You have 
now become such a Methodist — such a mean hypocrite, as they 
put it — that they have buried you out of sight! They have rolled 
the stone, and sealed it, and set watchers at the door to keep 
you there. Well — and what a blessed thing that is — for if you 
are dead with Christ — you shall also live with Him! 

If we are thus dead with Christ, let us see that we live with 
Him. It is a poor thing to be dead to the world unless we are 
alive unto God. Death is a negative, and a negative in the world 
is of no great use by itself. A Protestant is less than a nobody if 
he only protests against a wrong. We need a proclaimer, one who 
proclaims the truth of God as well as protests against error, and 
so, if we are dead to sin, we must have, also, the life of Christ! 
And I trust, beloved, we know, and it is not a matter of theory 
to us — I trust we know that in us there is a new life to which 
we were once strangers. To our body and our soul there has 
been superadded a spirit, a spark of spiritual life. Just as J esus had 


333 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a new life after death, so have we a new life after death, by 
which, I trust, we rise from the grave. But we must prove it! 
Jesus proved His resurrection by infallible signs. You and I, too, 
must prove to all men that we have risen out of the grave of 
sin. Perhaps our friends did not know us when we first rose 
from the dead. Like Mary, they mistook us for somebody else; 
they said, “What? Is this William who used to be such a 
hectoring, proud, ill-humored, domineering fellow? Can he put 
up with our jokes and jeers so patiently?” They supposed us to 
be somebody else, and they were not far from the mark, for we 
were new creatures in Christ Jesus! We talked with some of our 
friends, and they found our conversation so different from 
what it used to be, that it made their hearts burn within them — 
just as Jesus Christ’s disciples when they went to Emmaus. But 
they did not know our secret; they were strangers to our new 
life. Do you remember, Christians, how you first revealed 
yourselves to your brothers and sisters, the Church? In the 
breaking of bread, they first knew you; that night, when the 
right hand of fellowship was given to you, the new life was 
openly recognized and they said — “Come in, you blessed of the 
Lord, why do you stand outside?” I trust, in resurrection-life, 
you desire to prove to all men that this is not the common life 
you lived before — a life which made you serve flesh and the 
lusts thereof — but that you are living now with higher aims, 
and purer intentions, by a more heavenly rule, and with the 
prospect of a more divine result. As we have been dead with 
Christ, dear brothers and sisters, I hope we have also, in our 
measure, learned to live with Him! 

But now, remember, Christ lives forever and so do m. Christ, 
being raised from the dead, dies no more; death has no more 
dominion over Him. The 14th verse is wonderfully similar — 
“Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under 
the law, but under grace.” Sin made us die once in Adam, but 


334 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


we are not to be slain by it again! If Christ could die now, we 
could die; but since Christ can never die again, so the believer 
can never again go back to his old sin. He dies to sin no more — 
he lives, and sin has no more dominion over him! Oh, this is a 
delightful theme! I know not how to express the joy my own 
heart feels at the sense of security arising from the fact that 
Christ dies no more. Death has no more dominion over Him, 
and sin has no more dominion over me, if I am in Christ. 
Suppose, my brothers and sisters, suppose for a moment, that 
Christ could die again. Bring out your funeral music! Let the 
muffled drums beat the march of the dead! Let the heavens be 
clothed in sackcloth, and let the green earth be robed in 
blackness, for the atonement, earth’s great hope, is incomplete! 
Christ must die again! The adversaries we thought were routed 
have gathered their strength again! Death is not dead; the grave 
is not open; there will be no resurrection! The saints tremble. 
Even in heaven, they fear and quake. The crowns upon 
glorified heads are trembling. The hearts that have been 
overflowing with eternal bliss are filled with anxiety, for the 
throne of Christ is empty! Angels suspend their songs. The 
howling of hell has silenced the shouts of heaven — the fiends 
are holding high holiday and they scream for joy — “Jesus dies 
again! Jesus dies again! Prepare your arrows! Empty your 
quivers! Come up, you legions of hell! The famous conqueror 
must fight, and bleed, and DIE AGAIN! We shall overcome 
Him yet!” God is dishonored, the foundations of heaven are 
removed, and the eternal throne quivers with the shock of 
Christ subjected to a second death! Is it blasphemy to suppose 
this? Of course it is! Yet, my brothers and sisters, it were equal 
blasphemy to suppose a true believer going back again to his 
old lusts, and dying again by sin, for that were to suppose that 
the atonement were incomplete! I can prove that it involves the 
very same things. It supposes an unfinished sacrifice, for if the 


335 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sacrifice is finished, then those for whom it was offered must 
be saved! It supposes hell triumphant — Christ had bought the 
soul, and the Spirit had renewed it — but the devil wipes away 
the blood of Christ, expels the Spirit of the living God, and gets 
to himself the victory! A saint perish? Then, God’s promise is 
not true, and Christ’s word is false — “I give unto My sheep 
eternal life, and they shall never perish.” If one saint perishes, 
the foundations are removed, eternal justice is just a name, the 
divine honesty is suspect, the purposes of God are frustrated, 
and the crown of sovereignty rolls in the mire! Weep, angels! 
Be astonished, O heavens! Rock, O you hills with earthquake! 
And hell, come up and hold riot — for God Himself has ceased 
to be God — since His people perish! “Because I live, you shall 
live also,” is a divine necessity! And if dominion can ever be 
had by sin over a believer again, then, mark you, death can again 
have dominion over Christ! But that is impossible; therefore, 
rejoice and be glad, you servants of God! 

You will notice, that as they live, so, like Jesus Christ, they 
live unto God. This completes the parallel. “In that He lives, He 
lives unto God.” So do we! The 40 days which Christ spent on 
earth, He lived unto God, comforting His saints, manifesting 
His person, giving forth gospel precepts. For the few days we 
have to live here on earth, we must live to comfort the saints, 
to set forth Christ, and to preach the gospel to every creature. 
And now that Christ has ascended, He lives unto God. What 
does that mean? He lives, my brothers and sisters, to manifest 
the divine character. Christ is the permanent revelation of an 
invisible God. We look at Christ and we see justice, truth, 
power, Love. We see the whole of the divine attributes in Him. 
Christian, you are to live unto God — God is to be seen in you! 
You are to show forth the divine heart of compassion, long- 
suffering, tenderness, kindness, patience. You are to manifest 
God — living unto God. Christ lives unto God, for He 


336 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


completes the divine purpose by pleading for His people, by 
carrying on His people’s work above. You are to live for the 
same, by preaching that sinners may hear, and that the elect 
may live — by teaching that the chosen may be saved; teaching 
by your life, by your actions, that God’s glory may be known, 
and that His decrees may be fulfilled. Jesus lives unto God, 
delighting Himself in God. The immeasurable joy of Christ in 
His Father, no tongue can tell. Live in the same way, Christian! 
Delight yourself in the Lord! Be blessed. Be happy! Rejoice in 
the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice! Our Redeemer lives 
unto God, that is, He lives in constant fellowship with God. 
Cannot you do so, too, by the Holy Spirit? You are dead to 
sin — see to it that you live forever in fellowship with the Father, 
and with His Son, Jesus Christ. 

Now, I have been talking riddles to some of you. How 
many of you understand these things? If any are troubled 
because they understood the first part, and they do trust in 
Christ’s death, but they do not understand the second part — 
ah, beloved, you shall understand one of these days! If you are 
resting on Christ’s death, that death shall yet be made mighty 
in you. But you who have known something of this, I pray you 
struggle after more. Ask the Lord to mortify you altogether, to 
fill you with the divine life, and to help you to persevere unto 
the end. Pray that you may live unto God and unto God alone! 

III. Having brought you this far, there is only one other 
step to take, and then we have done. Let us notice that the facts 
of which we have spoken are PLEDGES OF THE GLORY 
WHICH IS TO BE REVEALED IN US. 

Christ died. Possibly we shall die. Perhaps we shall not; we 
may be alive, and remain at the coming of the Son of man. But 
it may be we shall die. I do not think we should be as certain of 
death as some Christians are, because the Lord’s coming is 
much more certain than our dying! Our dying is not certain, for 


337 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


He may come before we die. However, suppose we shall die — 
Christ rose and so shall we — 

“What though our inbred sins require 
Our flesh to see the dust, 

Yet as the Lord our Savior rose, 

So all His followers must!” 

Do not, my brothers and sisters, think of the cemetery with 
tears, nor meditate upon the coffin and the shroud with gloomy 
thoughts. You only sojourn there for a little season, and to you 
it will not appear a moment; your body will sleep, and if men 
sleep all through a long night it only seems an hour to them, a 
very short moment. The sleeping time is forgotten, and to your 
sleeping body it will seem no time at all — -while to your glorified 
soul it will not seem long because you will be so full of joy that 
a whole eternity of that joy would not be too long! But you shall 
rise again. I do not think we get enough joy out of our 
resurrection. It will probably be our happiest moment, or rather 
the beginning of the happiest life that we shall ever know! 
Heaven is not the happiest place; heaven at present is happy, 
but it is not the perfection of happiness, because there is only the 
soul there, though the soul is full of pleasure. But the heaven 
that is to be — when body and soul will both be there — surpasses 
all thought! resurrection will be our marriage day; body and soul 
have been separated, and they shall meet again to be remarried 
with a golden ring, no more to be divorced, but as one 
indissolubly united body to go up to the great altar of 
immortality and there to be espoused unto Christ forever and 
ever! I shall come again to this flesh, no longer flesh that can 
decay, no longer bones that ache — I shall come back to these 
eyes and these ears, all made channels of new delight! Say not 
this is a materialistic view of the matter. We are at least onehalf 


338 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


503 Death and Life in Christ - Rom. 

6:8-11 


material, and so long as there is material about us, we must 
always expect joy that shall not only give spiritual, but even 
material delight to us. This body shall rise again. “Can these dry 
bones live?” is the question of the unbeliever. “They will live,” 
is the answer of faith. Oh, let us expect our end with joy, and 
our resurrection with transport. Jesus was not detained a 
prisoner, and therefore no worm can keep us back; no grave, 
no tomb can destroy our hope. Risen He lives and we shall rise 
to live forever. Anticipate, my brothers and sisters, that happy 
day — no sin, no sorrow, no care, no decay, no approaching 
dissolution! He lives forever in God — so shall you and I — close 
to the Eternal — swallowed up in His brightness, glorified in 
His glory, overflowing with His love! 1 think at the very 
prospect we may well say — 

“Oh, long-expected day begin, 

Dawn on these realms of woe and sin.” 

We may well cry to Him to bid His chariots hasten and 
bring the joyous season! He comes! He comes, believer! Rejoice 
with joy unspeakable! You have but a little time to wait, and 
when you have fallen asleep you shall leap — 

“From beds of dust and silent clay, 

To realms of everlasting day.” 

And you — 

“Far from a world of grief and sin 
With God eternally shut in, 

Shall be forever blessed!” 

May the Lord add His blessing, for Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


339 



504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives - 
Job 19:25-27 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, April 12 th, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“For I know that my Redeemer lives, and He shall stand at 
the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms 
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall 
see for myself and my eyes shall behold, and not another; 
though my reins be consumed within me.” — Job 19:25-27 

THE HAND of God has been upon us heavily this week. 
An aged deacon, who has been for more than 50 years a 
member of this Church, has been removed from our midst; and 
a sister, the beloved wife of another of our Church officers, a 
member for nearly the same term of years, has fallen asleep. It 
is not often that a church is called to sorrow over the departure 
of two such venerable members — let not our ears be deaf to 
such a double admonition to prepare to meet our God! That 
they were preserved so long, and upheld so mercifully for so 
many years, was not only a reason of gratitude to them, but to 
us also. I am, however, so against the preaching of what are 
calledfuneral sermons, that I forbear, lest, I appear to eulogize the 
creature, when my only aim should be to magnify the divine 
grace of God. 

Our text deserves our profound attention; its preface 
would hardly have been written had not the matter been of the 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


utmost importance in the judgment of the patriarch who 
uttered it. Listen to Job’s remarkable desire — “Oh that my 
words were now written! Oh that they were printed in a book! 
That they were engraved with an iron pen and lead in the rock 
forever!” Perhaps, hardly aware of the full meaning of the 
words he was uttering, yet his holy soul was impressed with a 
sense of some weighty revelation concealed within his words; 
he therefore desired that it might be recorded in a book! His 
desire, by God’s grace, was granted, the Book of books 
embalms the words of Job! He wished to have them engraved 
on a rock — cut deep into it with an iron pen — and then the 
lines inlaid with lead; or he would have them engraved, 
according to the custom of the ancients, upon a sheet of metal, 
so that time might not be able to eat out the inscription. He has 
not had his desire in that respect, except that upon many and 
many a sepulcher, those words of Job stand recorded, “I know 
that my Redeemer lives.” It is the opinion of some 
commentators that Job, in speaking of the rock here, intended 
his own rock-hewn sepulcher, and desired that this might be 
his epitaph; that it might be cut deep, so that ages should not 
wear it out — that when any asked, “Where does Job sleep?” as 
soon as they saw the sepulcher of the patriarch of Uz, they 
might learn that he died in hope of resurrection, resting upon 
a living Redeemer! Whether such a sentence adorned the 
portals of Job’s last sleeping place, we know not, but certainly 
no words could have been more fitly chosen. Should not the 
man of patience, the mirror of endurance, the pattern of trust, 
bear as his memorial this golden line — which is as full of all the 
patience of hope, and hope of patience — as mortal language 
can be? Who among us could select a more glorious motto for 
his last escutcheon? 

I am sorry to say that a few of those who have written upon 
this passage cannot see Christ or the resurrection in it at all! 


34i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Albert Barnes, among the rest, expresses his intense sorrow 
that he cannot find the resurrection here, and for my part, I am 
sorry for him. If it had been Job’s desire to foretell the advent 
of Christ, and his own sure resurrection, I cannot see what 
better words he could have used! And if those truths of God 
are not taught here, then language must have lost its original 
objective, and must have been employed to mystify and not to 
explain; to conceal and not to reveal! What, I ask, does the 
patriarch mean, if not that he shall rise again when the 
Redeemer stands upon the earth? Brothers and sisters, no 
unsophisticated mind can fail to find here what almost all 
believers have here discovered! I feel safe in keeping to the old 
sense, and we shall, this morning, seek no new interpretation; 
we shall adhere to the common one, with or without the 
consent of our critics! 

In discoursing upon them I shall speak upon three things. 
First, let us, with the patriarch, descend into the grave and behold the 
ravages of death; then, with him, let us look up on high for present 
consolation; and, still in his admirable company, let us, in the third 
place, anticipate future delights. 

I. First of all then, with the patriarch of Uz, LET US 
DESCEND INTO THE SEPULCHER. 

The body has just been divorced from the soul. Believers 
who loved most tenderly have said — “Bury my dead out of my 
sight.” The body is borne upon the bier and consigned to the 
silent earth; it is surrounded by the earthworks of death. Death 
has a host of troops. If the locusts and the caterpillars are God’s 
army, the worms are the army of death. These hungry warriors 
begin to attack the city of man. They commence with the 
outworks. They storm the defenses and overturn the walls. The 
skin, the city wall of manhood, is utterly broken down, and the 
towers of its glory covered with confusion! How speedily the 
cruel invaders deface all beauty; the face gathers blackness; the 


342 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


countenance is defiled with corruption; those cheeks, once fair 
with youth, and ruddy with health, have fallen in, even as a 
bowing wall, and a tottering fence! Those eyes, the windows of 
the mind where joy and sorrow looked forth by turns, are now 
filled up with the dust of death; those lips, the doors of the soul, 
the gates of Mansoul, are carried away, and its bars are broken. 
Alas, you windows of agates, and gates of carbuncle, where are 
you now? How shall I mourn for you, O you captive city, for 
the mighty men have utterly spoiled you? Your neck, once like 
a tower of ivory, has become as a fallen column; your nose, so 
lately comparable to, “the tower of Lebanon, which looks 
toward Damascus,” is as a ruined hovel; and your head, which 
towered like Carmel, lies low as the clods of the valley. Where 
is beauty now? The loveliest cannot be known from the most 
deformed! The vessel so daintily worked upon the potter’s 
wheel is cast away upon the dunghill with the vilest potsherds. 
Cruel have you been, you warriors of death, for though you 
wield no axes, and bear no hammers, yet have you broken 
down the carved work, and though you speak not with tongues, 
yet have you said in your hearts, “We have swallowed her up, 
certainly this is the day that we have looked for — we have 
found, we have seen it.” The skin is gone. The troops have 
entered into the town of Mansoul. And now they pursue their 
work of devastation; the pitiless marauders fall upon the body 
itself; there are those noble aqueducts, the veins through which 
the streams of life were custom to flow, these, instead of being 
rivers of life, have become blocked up with the soil and wastes 
of death, and now they must be pulled to pieces! Not a single 
relic of them shall be spared! 

Mark the muscles and sinews — like great highways that 
penetrating the metropolis, they carry the strength and wealth 
of manhood along — their curious pavement must be pulled up, 
and they that do traffic there must be consumed. Each tunneled 


343 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


bone, and curious arch, and knotted bond must be snapped and 
broken. Fair fabrics, glorious storehouses, costly engines, 
amazing machines — all, all must be pulled down, and not one 
stone left upon another! Those nerves, which like telegraphic 
wires connected all parts of the city together to carry thought, 
and feeling, and intelligence — these are cut, no matter how 
artistic the work might be — and certainly we are fearfully and 
wonderfully made, and the anatomist stands still and marvels 
to see the skill which the eternal God has manifested in the 
formation of the body. But these ruthless worms pull 
everything to pieces, till, like a city sacked and spoiled, that has 
been given up for days to pillage and to flame, everything lies 
in a heap of ruin — ashes to ashes, dust to dust! But these 
invaders stop not here — Job says that next they consume his 
reins. We are accustomed to speak of the heart as the great 
citadel of life, the inner keep and tower, where the captain of 
the guard holds out to the last. The Hebrew does not regard 
the heart, but the lower viscera, the reins, as the seat of the 
passions, and of mental power. The worms spare not! They 
enter the secret places of the tabernacle of life — and the 
standard is plucked from the tower. Having died, the heart 
cannot preserve itself, and falls like the rest of the frame — a 
prey to worms. It is gone, it is all gone! The skin, the body, the 
vitals, all, all has departed. There is nothing left. In a few years 
you shall turn up the sod and say, “Here slept so-and-so, and 
where is he now?” And you may search and hunt and dig, but 
you shall find no relics. Mother Earth has devoured her own 
offspring! 

Dear friends, why should we wish to have it otherwise? 
Why should we desire to preserve the body when the soul has 
gone? What vain attempts men have made with coffins of lead, 
and wrappings of myrrh and frankincense! The embalming of 
the Egyptians, those master robbers of the worm, what has it 


344 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


done? It has served to keep some poor shriveled lumps of 
mortality above ground to be sold for curiosities, to be dragged 
away to foreign climes, and stared upon by thoughtless eyes! 
No, let the dust go, the sooner it dissolves, the better. And what 
does it matter how it goes? What if it is devoured of beasts, if 
it is swallowed up in the sea, and become food for fishes! What 
if plants with their roots suck up the particles? What if the 
fabric passes into the animal and from the animal into the earth 
and from the earth into the plants and from the plant into the 
animal again? What if the winds blow it along the highway? 
What if the rivers carry it to the ocean waves? It is ordained 
that somehow or other it must be all separated — “Dust to dust, 
ashes to ashes.” It is part of the decree that it should all perish! 
The worms or some other agents of destruction must destroy 
this body. Do not seek to avoid what God has purposed; do 
not look upon it as a gloomy thing; regard it as a necessity — 
no, more — view it as the platform of a miracle, as the lofty stage 
of resurrection, since Jesus shall surely rise again from the dead, 
the dead particles of this body, however divided from one 
another! We have heard of miracles, but what a miracle is the 
resurrection! All the miracles of Scripture, yes, even those 
worked by Christ, are small compared with this! The 
philosopher says, “How is it possible that God shall hunt out 
every particle of the human frame?” He can do it! He has but 
to speak the word, and every single atom, though it may have 
traveled thousands of leagues, though it may have been blown 
as dust across the desert, and later have fallen upon the bosom 
of the sea, and then have descended into its depths to later be 
cast up on a desolate shore, sucked up by plants, fed on again 
by beasts, or passed into the fabric of another man — I say that 
individual atom shall find its fellow — and the whole company 
of particles at the trumpet of the archangel shall travel to their 


345 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


appointed place, and the body, the very body which was laid in 
the ground, shall rise again! 

I am afraid I have been somewhat uninteresting while 
tarrying upon the exposition of the words of Job, but I think 
very much of the essence of Job’s faith lay in this, that he had 
a clear view that the worms would, after his skin, destroy his 
body — and yet, that in his flesh he should see God! You know 
we might regard it as a small miracle if we could preserve the 
bodies of the departed. If, by some process, with spices and 
gums, we could preserve the particles, for the Lord to make 
those dry bones live, and to quicken that skin and flesh were 
certainly a miracle, but not tangibly and plainly so great a marvel 
as when the worms have destroyed the body. When the fabric 
has been absolutely broken up, the tenement all pulled down, 
ground to pieces, and flung in handfuls to the wind so that no 
relic of it is left — and yet when Christ stands in the latter days 
upon the earth, all the structure shall be brought together, bone 
to bone — then shall the might of Omnipotence be seen! This, 
then, is the doctrine of the resurrection of the body. Happy is 
he who finds no difficulty here — who looks at it as being an 
impossibility with man, but a possibility with God — and lays 
hold upon the omnipotence of the Most High and says, “You 
say it, and it shall be done!” I comprehend You not, great God; 
I marvel at Your purpose to raise my moldering bones; but I 
know that You do great wonders, and I am not surprised that 
You should conclude the great drama of Your creating works 
here on earth, by recreating the human frame by the same 
power by which You did bring from the dead the body of Your 
Son Jesus Christ, and by that same divine energy which has 
regenerated human souls in Your own image! 

II. Now, having thus descended into the grave, and seen 
nothing there but what is loathsome, LET US LOOK UP WITH 


346 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


THE PATRIARCH, AND BEHOLD A SUN SHINING WITH 
PRESENT COMFORT. 

“I know,” he said, “that my Redeemer lives.” The word 
“Redeemer” here used, is in the original, “goeP — kinsman. The 
duty of the king, man, or goel, was this — suppose, an Israelite 
had alienated his estate, as in the case of Naomi and Ruth. 
Suppose an inheritance which had belonged to a family had 
passed away through poverty. It was the god’s business, the 
redeemer’s business, to pay the price as the next of kin, and to 
buy back the heritage. Boaz stood in that relation to Ruth. Now, 
the body may be looked upon as the heritage of the soul — the 
soul’s small farm — that little plot of earth in which the soul has 
been accustomed to walk and delight, as a man walks in his 
garden or dwells in his house. Now it becomes alienated. Death, 
like Ahab, takes away the vineyard from us who are as Naboth. 
We lose our patrimonial estate. Death sends his troops to take 
our vineyard, and to spoil its vines, and ruin it. But we turn 
round to Death and say, “I know that my Goel lives, and He 
will redeem this heritage; I have lost it; you take it from me 
lawfully, O Death, because my sin has forfeited my right; I have 
lost my heritage through my own offenses, and through that of 
my first parent, Adam; but there lives one who will buy this 
back.” Brothers and sisters, Job could say this of Christ long 
before He had descended upon earth! “I know that He lives,” 
and now that He has ascended up on high, and led captivity 
captive, surely we may, with double emphasis, say, “I know that 
my Goel, my Kinsman lives, and that He has paid the price so 
that I should have back my inheritance, so that in my flesh I 
shall see God.” Yes, my hands, you are redeemed with blood — 
bought not with corruptible things, as with silver and gold — 
but with the precious blood of Christ! Yes, heaving lungs and 
palpitating heart, you have been redeemed! He who redeemed 
the soul to be His altar, has also redeemed the body, that it may 


347 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


be a temple for the Holy Spirit. Not even the bones of Joseph 
can remain in the house of bondage. No smell of the fire of 
death may pass upon the garments which His holy children 
have worn in the furnace! 

Remember, too, that it was always considered to be the 
duty of the goel, not merely to redeem by price, but where that 
failed, to redeem by power. Hence, when Lot was carried away 
captive by the four kings, Abraham summoned his own hired 
servants, and the servants of all his friends, and went out 
against the kings of the East and brought back Lot and the 
captives of Sodom. Now, our Lord Jesus Christ, who once has 
played the kinsman’s part by paying the price for us, lives — and 
He will redeem us by power! O Death, you tremble at this name! 
You know the might of our Kinsman! Against His arm you 
cannot stand! You did once meet Him foot to foot in stern 
battle, and O Death, you did, indeed, tread upon His heel. He 
voluntarily submitted to this, or else, O Death, you had no 
power against Him. But He slew you, Death! He slew you! He 
rifled all your caskets, took from you the key of your casde, 
burst open the door of your dungeon, and now, you know, 
Death, you have no power to hold my body. You may set your 
slaves to devour it, but you shall give it up, and all their spoil 
must be restored. Insatiable Death, from your greedy mouth 
shall return the multitudes whom you have devoured; you shall 
be compelled by the Savior to restore your captives to the light 
of day. I think I see Jesus coming with His Father’s servants; 
the chariots of the Lord are twenty thousand, even thousands 
of angels. Blow the trumpet! Blow the trumpet! Immanuel rides 
to batde! The Most Mighty in majesty girds on His sword; He 
comes! He comes to snatch by power His people’s lands from 
those who have invaded their portion. Oh, how glorious the 
victory! There shall be no battle. He comes, He sees, He 
conquers! The sound of the trumpet shall be enough! Death 


348 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


shall flee in fear; and at once from beds of dust and silent clay, 
to realms of everlasting day, the righteous shall arise! 

To linger here a moment, there was yet, very conspicuously, 
in the Old Testament, we are informed, a third duty of th egoel, 
which was to avenge the death of his friend. If a person had 
been slain, the goel was the avenger of blood. Snatching up his 
sword, he at once pursued the person who had been guilty of 
bloodshed. So now let us picture ourselves as being lulled by 
Death; his arrow has just pierced us to the heart, but in the act 
of expiring, our lips are able to boast of vengeance and in the 
face of the monster we cry, “I know that my Goel lives.” You 
may flee, O Death, as rapidly as you will, but no city of refuge 
can hide you from Him; He will overtake you! He will lay hold 
upon you, O you skeleton monarch, and He will avenge my 
blood on you.” I would that 1 had powers of eloquence to work 
out this magnificent thought. Chrysostom or Christmas Evans 
could picture the flight of the King of Terrors, the pursuit by 
the Redeemer, the overtaking of the foe, and the slaying of the 
destroyer. Christ shall certainly avenge Himself on Death for 
all the injury which Death has done to His beloved kinsmen. 
Comfort yourself then, O Christian! You have always living, 
even when you die, one who avenges you; one who has paid 
the price for you, and one whose strong arms shall yet set you 
free! 

Passing on in our text to nodce the next word, it seems that 
Job found consolation not only in the fact that he had a Goel, a 
Redeemer, but that this Redeemer lives! He does not say, “I 
know that my Goel shall live, but that He lives ” — having a clear 
view of the self-existence of the Lord Jesus Christ, the same 
yesterday, today and forever. And you and I, looking back, do 
not say, “I know that He did live, ” but, “He lives today.” This 
very day you who mourn and sorrow for venerated friends, 
your prop and pillar in years gone by — you may go to Christ 


349 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


with confidence, because He not only lives — He is the Source 
of life! And you can, therefore, believe that He can give forth 
out of Himself, life to those whom you have committed to the 
tomb. He is the Lord and giver of life originally, and He shall 
be especially declared to be the resurrection and the life when 
the legions of His redeemed shall be glorified with Him! If I 
saw no fountain from which life could stream to the dead, I 
would yet believe the promise when God said that the dead 
shall live; but when I see the fountain provided, and know that 
it is full to the brim and runs over, I can rejoice without 
trembling. Since there is one who can say, “I am the 
resurrection and the life,” it is a blessed thing to see the means 
already before us in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us 
look up to our Goel , then, who lives at this very time! 

Still, the marrow of Job’s comfort, it seems to me, lays in 
that little word, “My.” “I know that MY Redeemer lives.” Oh, 
to get hold of Christ! I know that in His offices He is precious, 
but, dear friends, we must have a part in Him before we can 
really enjoy Him! What is honey in the woods to me, if like the 
fainting Israelites, I dare not eat? It is honey in my hands, honey 
on my lips, which enlightens my eyes like those of Jonathan. 
What is gold in the mine to me? Men are beggars in Peru, and 
beg for their bread in California; it is gold in my purse which 
will satisfy my necessities, purchasing the bread I need. So, 
what is a kinsman if he is not a kinsman to me ? What is a 
Redeemer that does not redeem me; an avenger who will never 
stand up for my blood; of what worth are such? But Job’s faith 
was strong and firm in the conviction that the Redeemer was 
his. Dear friends, dear friends, can all of you say, “I know that 
my Redeemer lives”? The question is simple and simply put, but 
oh, what solemn things hang upon your answer! “Is He MY 
Redeemer?” I charge you, rest not, be not content until by faith 
you can say, “Yes, I cast myself upon Him; I am His, and 


350 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


therefore He is mine.” I know that full many of you, while you 
look upon all else that you have as not being yours, yet can say, 
“My Redeemer is mine.” He is the only piece of property which 
is really ours. We borrow all else — the house, the children, no, 
much more — our very body we must return to the Great Lender. 
But Jesus, we can never leave, for even when we are absent 
from the body we are present with the Lord, and I know that 
even death cannot separate us from Him! The body and soul 
are truly with Jesus even in the dark hours of death, in the long 
night of the sepulcher, and in the separate state of spiritual 
existence. Beloved, have you Christ? It may be that you hold 
Him with a feeble hand; you half think it is presumption to say, 
“He is my Redeemer.” Yet remember, if you have but faith as a 
grain of mustard seed, that little faith entities you to say, and 
say now, “I know that MY Redeemer lives!” 

There is another word in this consoling sentence which, no 
doubt, served to give a zest to the comfort of Job. It was that 
he could say, “I KNOW” — “I KNOW that my Redeemer lives.” 
To say, “I hope so, I trust so,” is comfortable, and there are 
thousands in the fold ofjesus who hardly ever get much further. 
But to reach the marrow of consolation you must say, “I 
KNOW.” Ifs, huts and perhapses, are sure murderers of peace 
and comfort! Doubts are dreary things in times of sorrow. Like 
wasps they sting the soul! If I have any suspicion that Christ is 
not mine, then there is vinegar mingled with the gall of death; 
but if I know that Jesus is mine, then darkness is not dark; even 
the night is light about me. Out of the lion comes honey; out 
of the eater comes forth sweetness. “I know that my Redeemer 
lives.” This is a brightly-burning lamp cheering the dampness 
of the sepulchral vault, but a feeble hope is like flickering 
smoking flax, just making darkness visible, but nothing more! I 
would not like to die with a mere hope mingled with suspicion. 

1 might be safe with this, but hardly happy; but oh, to go down 


35i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


into the river knowing that all is well, confident that as a guilty, 
weak, and helpless worm, I have fallen into the arms of Jesus — 
and believing that He is able to keep that which I have 
committed to Him! I would have you, dear Christian friends, 
never look upon the full assurance of faith as a thing impossible 
to you. Say not, “It is too high; I cannot attain unto it.” I have 
known one or two saints of God who have rarely doubted their 
interest at all. There are many of us who do not often enjoy any 
ravishing ecstasies, but on the other hand, we generally 
maintain the even tenor of our way, simply hanging upon 
Christ, feeling that His promise is true, that His merits are 
sufficient, and that we are safe! Assurance is a jewel for worth, 
but not for rarity. It is the common privilege of all the saints if 
they have but the divine grace to attain unto it; and this grace, 
the Holy Spirit gives freely! Surely if Job in Arabia, in those dark 
misty ages when there was only the morning star, and not the 
sun — when they saw but litde, when life and immortality had 
not been brought to light — if Job, before the coming and 
advent, still could say, “l know, ’’you and I should not speak less 
positively! But God forbid that our positiveness should be 
presumption; let us try ourselves, and see that our marks and 
evidences are right, lest we form an ungrounded hope, for 
nothing can be more destructive than to say, “Peace, peace, 
where there is no peace.” But oh, let us build for eternity, and 
build solidly; let us not be satisfied with the mere foundation, for 
it is from the upper rooms that we get the widest prospect. Let 
us pray the Lord to help us to pile stone on stone, until we are 
able to say as we look at it, “Yes, I know, I KNOW that my 
Redeemer lives.” So this, then, for present comfort today in the 
prospect of departure. 

III. And now, in the third and last place — THE 
ANTICIPATION OF FUTURE DELIGHT. Let me call to your 
remembrance the other part of the text. Job not only knew that 


352 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


his Redeemer lived, but he anticipated the time when He 
should stand in the latter day upon the earth. No doubt Job referred 
here to our Savior’s first advent, to the time when Jesus Christ, 
“the goel” the kinsman, should stand upon the earth to pay in 
the blood of His veins the ransom price, which had, indeed, in 
bond and stipulation, been paid before the foundation of the 
world in promise. But I cannot think that Job’s vision stayed 
there; he was looking forward to the second advent of Christ as 
being the period of the resurrection. We cannot endorse the 
theory that Job rose from the dead when our Lord died, 
although certain Jewish believers held this idea very firmly at 
one time. We are persuaded that, “the latter day,” refers to the 
advent of glory rather than to that of shame. Our hope is that 
the Lord shall come to reign in glory where He once died in 
agony. The bright and hallowed doctrine of the second advent 
has been greatly revived in our churches in these latter days, 
and I look for the best results in consequence! There is always 
a danger lest it be perverted, and turned by fanatical minds, by 
prophetic speculations, into an abuse; but the doctrine in itself 
is one of the most consoling and, at the same time, one of the 
most practical, tending to keep the Christian awake — because 
the bridegroom comes at such an hour as we think not. Beloved, 
we believe that the same Jesus who ascended from Olivet shall 
so come in like manner as He ascended up into heaven! We 
believe in His personal Advent and reign; we believe and expect 
that when both wise and foolish virgins shall slumber — in the 
night when sleep is heavy upon the saints, and when men shall 
be eating and drinking as in the days of Noah — we believe then, 
that, suddenly as the lightning flashes from heaven, so Christ 
shall descend with a shout, and the dead in Christ shall rise and 
reign with Him! We are looking forward to the literal, personal 
and actual standing of Christ upon earth as the time when 


353 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Creation’s groans shall be silenced forever — and the earnest 
expectation of the creature shall be fulfilled. 

Mark that Job describes Christ as standing. Some 
interpreters have read the passage, “He shall stand in the latter 
days against the earth;” that as the earth has covered up the 
slain, as the earth has become the sepulchral of the dead, Jesus 
shall arise to the contest and say, “Earth, I am against you; give 
up your dead! You clods of the valley cease to be custodians of 
My people’s bodies! Silent deeps and you, you caverns of the 
earth, deliver, once and for all, those whom you have 
imprisoned!” Machpelah shall give up its precious treasure, 
cemeteries and graveyards shall release their captives, and all 
the deep places of the earth shall resign the bodies of the 
faithful. Well, whether that is so or not, the posture of Christ, 
in standing upon the earth, is significant. It shows His triumph. 
He has triumphed over sin, which once, like a serpent in its 
coils, had bound the earth. He has defeated Satan — on the very 
spot where Satan gained his power — Christ has gained the 
victory! Earth, which was a scene of defeated goodness, where 
mercy once was all but driven out, where virtue died, where 
everything heavenly and pure, like flowers blasted by 
pestilential winds, hung down their heads, withered and 
blighted — on this very Earth — everything that is glorious shall 
grow and blossom in perfection! And Christ Himself once 
despised and rejected of men, fairest of all the sons of men, 
shall come in the midst of a crowd of courtiers, while kings and 
princes shall do Him homage, and all the nations shall call Him 
blessed. “He shall stand in the latter day upon the earth.” 

Then, at that auspicious hour, says Job, “In my flesh I shall 
see God.” Oh, blessed anticipation — “I shall see God.” He 
does not say, “I shall see the saints” — doubtless we shall see 
them all in heaven — but, “I shall see God. ” Note he does not 
say, “I shall see the pearly gates, I shall see the walls of jasper, 


354 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


I shall see the crowns of gold, and the harps of harmony,” but, 
“I shall see God”; as if that were the sum and substance of 
heaven! “In my flesh shall I see God. ” The pure in heart shall 
see God. It was their delight to see Him in the ordinances by 
faith. They delighted to behold Him in communion and in 
prayer. There in heaven they shall have a vision of another sort. 
We shall see God in heaven, and be made completely like He 
is! The divine character shall be stamped upon us; and being 
made like He is, we shall be perfecdy satisfied and content. 
Likeness to God — what more can we wish for? And a sight of 
God — what better desire can we anticipate? We shall see God, 
and so there shall be perfect contentment to the soul, and a 
satisfaction of all the faculties. Some read the passage, “Yet, I 
shall see God in my flesh,” and therefore think that there is 
here an allusion to Christ, our Lord Jesus Christ, as the word 
made flesh. Well, be it so, or be it not so, it is certain that we 
shall see Christ — and He, as the divine Redeemer — shall be 
the Subject of our eternal vision! Nor shall we ever need any 
joy beyond simply that of seeing Him. Think not, dear friend 
that this will be a narrow sphere for your mind to dwell in. It is 
but one source of delight, “I shall see God,” but that source is 
infinite! His wisdom, His love, His power, all His attributes 
shall be subjects for your eternal contemplation, and as He is 
infinite under each aspect, there is no fear of exhaustion! His 
works, His purposes, His gifts, His love to you, and His glory 
in all His purposes, and in all His deeds of love — why, these 
shall make a theme that can never be exhausted! You may, with 
divine delight, anticipate the time when in your flesh you shall 
see God! 

But I must have you observe how Job has expressly made 
us note that it is in the same body. “Yet, in my flesh shall I see 
God.” And then he says again, “whom I shall see for myself, 
and my eyes shall behold, and not another.” Yes, it is true that 


355 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I, the very man standing here, though I must go down to die, 
yet I shall as the same man most certainly arise, and shall behold 
my God! Not part of myself, though the soul, alone, shall have 
some view of God, but the whole of myself — my flesh, my soul, 
my body, my spirit shall gaze on God. We shall not enter 
heaven, dear friends, as a dismasted vessel is tugged into harbor; 
we shall not get to glory, some on boards, and some on broken 
pieces of the ship — but the whole ship shall be floated safely 
into the haven — body and soul both being safe! Christ shall be 
able to say, “All that the Father gives to Me shall come to Me,” 
not only all the persons, but all o/’the persons — each man in his 
perfection! There shall not be found in heaven one imperfect 
saint; there shall not be a saint without an eye, much less a saint 
without a body. No member of the body shall have perished; 
nor shall the body have lost any of its natural beauty. All the 
saints shall be all there and all of all; the same persons precisely, 
only that they shall have risen from a state of grace to a state of 
glory. They shall be ripened; they shall be no more the green 
blades, but the full corn in the ear — no more buds but 
flowers — not babes but men and women! 

Please notice, and then I shall conclude, how the patriarch 
puts it as being a real personal enjoyment, “Whom my eye shall 
behold, and not another.” They shall not bring me a report as 
they did the Queen of Sheba, but I shall see Solomon, the King, 
for myself! I shall be able to say, as they did who spoke to the 
woman of Samaria, “Now I believe, not because of your word 
who did bring me a report, but I have seen Him for myself.” 
There shall be personal discussion with God; not through the 
Book, which is but as a glass; not through the ordinances, but 
direcdy — in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ — we shall be 
able to commune with the Deity as a man talks with his friend. 
“Not another.” If I could be a changeling, and could be altered, 
that would mar my comfort. Or if my heaven must be enjoyed 


356 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


504 I Know That My Redeemer Lives 
- Job 19:25-27 


by proxy, if draughts of bliss must be drunk for me, where is 
the hope? Oh, no! For myself, and not through another, shall I 
see God! Have we not told you a hundred times that nothing 
but personal religion will do, and is not this another argument for 
it, because resurrection and glory are personal things? “Not 
another.” If you could have sponsors to repent for you, then, 
depend upon it, you would have sponsors to be glorified for 
you! But as there is not another to see God for you, so you 
must, yourself, see — and yourself find an interest — in the Lord 
Jesus Christ! 

In closing, let me observe how foolish have you and I been 
when we have looked forward to death with shudders, with 
doubts, with loathing. After all, what is it? Worms! Do you 
tremble at those base crawling things? Scattered particles! Shall 
we be alarmed at these? To meet the worms we have the angels, 
and to gather the scattered particles we have the voice of God. 
I am sure the gloom of death is altogether gone now, that the 
lamp of resurrection burns! Disrobing is nothing now, that 
better garments await us! We may long for evening to undress, 
that we may rise with God. 1 am sure my venerable friends now 
present, in coming so near, as they do now to the time of the 
departure, must have some visions of the glory on the other 
side of the stream! Bunyan was not wrong, my dear brothers 
and sisters, when he put the land Beulah at the close of the 
pilgrimage. Is not my text a telescope which will enable you to 
see across the Jordan? May it not be as hands of angels to bring 
you bundles of myrrh and frankincense? You can say, “I know 
that my Redeemer lives.” You cannot want more; you were not 
satisfied with less in your youth, you will not be content with 
less now. Those of us who are young, are comforted by the 
thought that we may soon depart. I say comforted, not alarmed 
by it; and we almost envy those whose race is nearly run, 
because we fear — and yet we must not speak thus, for the 


357 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Lord’s will be done — I was about to say, we fear that our batde 
may last long, and that perhaps our feet may slip; only He who 
keeps Israel does not slumber nor sleep. So since we know that 
our Redeemer lives, this shall be our comfort in life — that 
though we fall, we shall not be utterly cast down; and since our 
Redeemer lives, this shall be our comfort in death — that 
though worms destroy this body, yet in our flesh we shall see 
God! 

May the Lord add His blessing on the feeble words of this 
morning, and to Him be glory forever. Amen. 

“Grave, the guardian of our dust! 

Grave, the treasury of the skies! 

Every atom of your trust 
Rests in hope again to rise! 

Hark! The judgment trumpet calls! 

Soul, rebuild your house of clay, 

Immortality your walls, 

And Eternity your day!” 


358 



505 The Root of the Matter - Job 19:28 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, April 12 th, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“The root of the matter is found in me.” — Job 19:28 

FOR THE LAST three or four Lord’s-day evenings, I have 
been trying to fish with a net of small meshes. It has been my 
anxious desire to gather in and draw to shore the Much-Afraids, 
the Fearings, the Despondencies, and those of Litde-Faith who 
seem to think it scarcely possible that they could belong to the 
people of God at all. I hope those sermons which have taken 
the lowest evidences of Christian life, and have been adapted 
rather to babes in divine grace, than to those who are strong 
men in our Israel, will furnish comfort to many who beforetime 
had been bowed down with distress. 

In pursuance of the same purpose this evening, I take up 
the expressive figure of our text to address myself to those who 
evidendy have the grace of God embedded in their hearts, 
though they put forth litde blossom and bear little fruit; that 
they may be consoled, if there is clear evidence that at least the 
root of the matter is found in them. Incidentally, however, the 
same truth may be profitable, not only to the saplings in the 
garden of the Lord, but to the most goodly trees; for there are 
times and seasons when their branches do not put out much 
luxuriant foliage, and the hidden life furnishes the only true 
argument of their vitality. 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I. Our first aim then will be TO SPEAK OF THOSE THINGS 
WHICH ARE ESSENTIAL TO TRUE GODLINESS IN 
CONTRAST, OR, I might better say, IN COMPARISON WITH 
OTHER THINGS WHICH ARE TO BE REGARDED AS SHOOTS 
RATHER THAN AS ROOT AND GROUNDWORK. 

The tree can do without some of its branches, though the 
loss of them might be an injury; but it cannot live at all without 
its roots — the roots are essential — take those away, and the 
plant must wither. And thus, my dear friends, there are things 
essential in the Christian religion! There are essential doctrines, 
essential experiences, and there is essential practice. 

With regard to essential doctrines, it is very desirable for us 
to be established in the faith. A very happy thing it is to have 
been taught from one’s youth up the sound and solid doctrines 
which comforted the Puritans — which made blessed the heart 
of Luther and of Calvin, fired the zeal of Chrysostom and 
Augustine — and flashed like lightning from the lips of Paul! By 
such judicious training, we are no doubt delivered from many 
doubts and difficulties which an evil system of theology would 
be sure to encourage. The man who is sound in the faith, and 
who understands the higher and more sublime doctrines of 
divine revelation, will have wells of consolation which the less 
instructed cannot know. But we always believe, and are always 
ready to confess, that there are many doctrines which, though 
exceedingly precious, are not so essential. We believe a person 
may be in a state of divine grace, and yet not receive them. For 
instance — God forbid that we should regard a belief in the 
doctrine of election as an absolute test of a man’s salvation — for 
no doubt, there are many precious sons of God who have not 
been able to receive that precious truth of God; of course, the 
doctrine is essential to the great scheme of grace, as the 
foundation of God’s eternal purpose — but it is not, therefore, 


360 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


necessarily the root of faith in the sinner’s reception of the 
gospel. 

And, perhaps, too, I may put the doctrine of the final 
perseverance of the saints in the same list. There are many who, no 
doubt, will persevere to the end, but who cannot accept the 
possibility of being assured of the fact; they are so occupied 
with the thoughts of their probation that they come not to the 
mature knowledge of their full salvation. They are securely kept 
while they credit not their security, just as there are thousands 
of the elect who cannot believe in election. Though Calvinistic 
doctrine is so dear to us — we feel ready to die in its defense — 
yet, we would by no means set it up as being a test of a man’s 
spiritual state! We wish all our brothers and sisters agreed with 
us, but a man may be almost blind, and yet he may live; a man 
with weak eyesight and imperfect vision may be able to enter 
into the kingdom of heaven — indeed, it is better to enter there 
having but one eye, than, having two eyes and being orthodox 
in doctrine — to be cast into hell fire! But, there are some 
distinct truths of revelation that are essential in such a sense that 
those who have not accepted them cannot be called Christians, 
and those who willfully reject them are exposed to the fearful 
anathemas which are hurled against apostasy! I shall not go into 
a detailed list. Let it suffice, that I give you a few striking 
illustrations. The doctrine of the Trinity, we must always look upon as 
being one of the roots of the matter. When men go unsound here, we 
suspect that, before long, they will be wrong everywhere! The 
moment you get any suspicion of a man’s wavering about the 
divinity of Christ, you have not long to wait before you 
discover that, on all other points, he has gone wrong. Well did 
John Newton express it — 

“What you think of Christ is the test 
To try both your state and your scheme! 


361 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


You cannot be right in the rest, 

Unless you think rightly of Him!” 

Almost all the forms of error that have sprung up since the 
days of Dr. Doddridge, when sundry gentlemen began to talk 
against the proper Deity of the Son of God — all the forms of 
error, I say, whatever department of the Christian system they 
may have been supposed to attack — have really stabbed at the 
Deity of our Redeemer! That is the one thing that they are angry 
at, as if their mother-wit taught them it was the true line of 
demarcation between natural and revealed religion! They 
cannot bear that the glorious Lord should be unto us a place of 
broad rivers and streams, and so they try to do without Him; 
but their tacklings are loosed, they cannot well strengthen their 
mast, they cannot spread the sail! A gospel without belief in the 
living and true God — Trinity in Unity, and LTnity in Trinity — 
is a rope of sand! As well hope to make a pyramid stand upon 
its apex as to make a substantial gospel when the real and 
personal Deity of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit is left 
as a moot or disputed point. But I ought to mention the strange 
incoherency of that discourse which sets forth the influences 
of the Spirit without a due regard to His Personal Agency. Oh, 
how litde is the Holy Spirit known! We get beyond the mere 
exercise of opinions when we believe in Christ, know the 
Father, and receive the Holy Spirit. This is to have knowledge 
of the true God and eternal life. Likewise essential is the 
doctrine of the vicarious sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ. Any bell 
that does not ring sound on that point had better be melted 
down at once! I do not think we have many in our 
denomination — we do have some who are not very clear — still, 
I think we have but few who are unsound in the doctrine of the 
real substitution of Christ. But there are plenty elsewhere; 
perhaps I need not indicate the locality, for in the denomination 


362 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


where they seem to be tolerably prolific, they have one earnest 
tongue, and one ready pen that is always willing at all times to 
expose the degenerates who thus do damage to the cause of 
Christ by giving up the precious blood of Jesus as the sole cause 
of the remission of sins, and the only means of access to God. 
Why, my brothers and sisters, we have nothing else left after 
we have given up this choice seal of the everlasting covenant, 
on which all our hopes depend! Renounce the doctrine of Jesus 
dying in our place? Better for us all to be offered as one great 
slaughter, one mighty sacrifice to God on one fire, than to 
tolerate for a moment any doubts about that which is the 
world’s hope, heaven’s joy, hell’s terror, and eternity’s song! 

I marvel how men are permitted to stand in the pulpit and 
preach at all, who dare to say anything against the atonement 
of Christ! I find in the Dutch Church, in the French Church, 
and in the German Churches, that men are accepted as 
Christian ministers who will yet speak hard things against the 
atonement, itself, and even against the Deity of Him by whom 
the atonement was made! There is no other religion in the 
world that has been false to its own doctrines in the way that 
Christianity has been! Imagine a Muslim allowed to come 
forward in the pulpit and preach against Mohammed! Would it 
be tolerated for a single moment? Suppose a Brahmin, fed and 
paid to stand up in a temple, and speak against Brahma! Would 
it be allowed? Surely not! Nor is there an infidel lecturer in this 
country but would find his pay stopped at once, if, while 
pretending to be in the service of Atheism, he renounced the 
sentiments he was sworn to advocate! How is it? Why is it? In 
the name of everything that is reasonable and instinctively 
consistent, where can it be that men can be called Christian 
ministers after the last vestige of Christianity has been 
treacherously repudiated by them? How is it that they can be 
tolerated to minister in holy things to people who profess and 


363 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


call themselves sincere followers of Jesus, when they tread 
under foot the precious blood of Christ, and, “reduce the 
mystery of godliness to a system of ethics”? To use the words 
of a divine of the last century, “Degrade the Christian Church 
into a school of philosophy; deny the expiation made by our 
Redeemer’s sacrifice; obscure the brightest manifestation of 
divine mercy; undermine the principal pillar of practical religion; 
and to make a desperate shipwreck of our everlasting interests, 
they dash themselves to death on the very rock of salvation.” No; 
we must have the atonement, and that not quiedy 
acknowledged, but openly set forth! Charity can go a good way, 
but charity cannot remove the altar from the door of the 
Tabernacle, or admit the worshipper into the most Holy Place 
without the blood of propitiation. So, again, the doctrine of 
justification by faith is one of the roots of the matter. You know 
Luther’s saying; I need not repeat it; it is the article of a standing, 
or falling church, “By grace are you saved through faith, and 
that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God; not of works lest 
any man should boast.” Do you preach that doctrine? My hand 
and my heart are stretched out to you! Do you deny it? Do you 
stutter over it? Are you half-afraid of it? My back must be 
turned against you; I know nothing of you; you are none of the 
Lord’s! What says the Apostle Paul to you? Would he have 
communed with you? He lifts his hand to heaven, and he 
says — “If any man preaches any other gospel than that you 
have received, let him be accursed!” That is Paul’s saintly 
greeting! That is Paul’s Apostolic malediction — an “Anathema 
Maranatha” upon the man who preaches not the Lord Jesus, 
and who does not vindicate the great doctrine of salvation by 
grace and not by works! Well now, friend, you may have come 
in here to listen to our doctrine, and to judge whether you can 
hold fellowship with us. We have been talking about the root 
of the matter. Permit me to say that if you are sound on these 


364 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


three points, the One God in Trinity, the glorious doctrine of 
the substitution of Christ in the place of sinners, and the plan 
of salvation by simple faith in Jesus, then, inasmuch as these 
roots of the matter are in you, God forbid that we should 
exclude you as heretical. If you are in other points 
unenlightened and groping about in uncertainty, doubtless the 
Lord will teach you — but we believe the root of the matter is 
in you as far as doctrine is concerned! 

Turning to another department of my subject; there are 
certain root matters in reference to experience. It is a very happy thing 
to have a deep experience of one’s own depravity. It may seem 
strange, but it is so, a man will scarcely ever have high views of 
the preciousness of the Savior who has not also had deep views 
of the evil of his own heart! High houses, you know, need deep 
foundations; and when God digs deep, and throws out the mire 
of self-sufficiency, He then puts in the great stone of Christ’s 
allsufficiency, and builds us up high in union and fellowship 
with Him! To read the guilt of sin in the lurid glare of Mount 
Sinai, to hear the thunder, and shrink back in wild dismay at the 
utter hopelessness of approach to God by the law is a most 
profitable lesson! Yes, and to see the guilt of sin in the mellow 
light of Mount Calvary, and to feel that contrition, which a view 
of Christ crucified alone can produce — this is to prepare the 
heart for such an ecstasy of joy in God, through whom we have 
now received the atonement, as surpasses, I verily believe, the 
common experience of Christians! Still I dare not make a 
criterion of the profound depths of anguish with which some 
of us have had the sentence of death in ourselves. But it is 
absolutely essential that you should be brought to the end of all 
perfection in the flesh — that all your hopes of legal 
righteousness should expire — that you should be dead to the 
law, in order that you may live unto God! This death may be 
with painful struggles, or it may be tranquil as a sleep; you may 


365 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


be smitten suddenly, as though an arrow from the Almighty 
were transfixed in your heart; or you may pine away by a slow 
and tedious consumption. Yet die you must, before you can be 
made partaker of resurrection! This much, however, I will 
venture to say — you may be really a child of God, and yet the 
plague of your own heart may be but very little understood; you 
must know something of it, for no man ever did or ever will 
come to Christ unless he has first learned to loathe himself and 
to see that in him, that is, in his flesh, there dwells no good 
thing! You may not be able to talk, as some do, of conflicts 
within, and of the fountain of the great deep of your natural 
sin — and yet you may be, for all that — a true child of God. It 
is a happy thing, too, to have an experience which keeps close to 
Christ Jesus. To know what the word “communion,” means, 
without needing to take down another man’s biography — to 
understand Solomon’s Song without a commentary; to read it 
through and through, and say, “Precious Book! You express 
just what I have felt, but what I never could have expressed.” 
But, dear friends, though all this is well, remember, it is not 
essential! It is not a sign that you are not converted because you 
cannot understand what it is to sit under His shadow with great 
delight. You may have been converted, and yet hardly have 
come as far as that. Always distinguish between the branches 
of the matter and the root of the matter. It is well to have 
branches like the cedars, and to send up your shoots towards 
heaven — but it is the root that is the all-important thing — the 
root of the matter! 

Now, what is the root of the matter experientially ? Well, 1 
think the real root of it is what Job has been talking about in 
the verses preceding the text — “I know,” he says, “that my 
Redeemer lives.” We talked of that this morning — (See Sermon 
#504). The root of the matter in Christian experience is to 
know that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is able to save to the 


366 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


uttermost all them who come unto God by Him, and to know 
this by a personal appropriation of Pits power to save by a simple 
act of faith. In other words, dear friend, you have the root of the 
matter in you if your soul can say — 

“My hope is built on nothing less 
Than Jesus’ blood and righteousness! 

I dare not trust the sweetest frame, 

But wholly lean on Jesus’ name — 

On Christ the solid rock I stand, 

All other ground is sinking sand.” 

There must be in connection with this the repentance of sin, 
but this repentance may be far from perfect, and your faith in 
Christ may be far from strong; but, oh, if you hate sin, if you 
desire to be rid of it, if it is your plague, your burden, your grief; 
if Christ Jesus is your only comfort, your help, your hope, your 
trust — then understand — this is the root of the matter! I wish 
there were more than the root, but inasmuch as that is there, it 
is enough — you are accepted before God — for the root of the 
matter is in you. A living faith in a living Savior, and a real death 
to all creature merit, and to all hope in creature strength — this, 
I take it, is that which is the root of the matter in spiritual 
experience! 

Did I not say that there was a root of the matter practically? 
Yes, and I would to God that we all practically had the branches 
and the fruits! These will come in their season, and they must 
come, if we are Christ’s disciples; but nobody expects to see 
fruit on a tree a week after it has been planted. You know there 
are some trees that do not bring forth any great fruit till they 
have been in the ground some two or three years; and then at 
last, when the favorable season comes, they are white with 
blossoms, and by-and-by are bowed to the earth with luscious 


367 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


fruit. It is very desirable that all Christians should be full of zeal, 
should be vehemently earnest, should go about doing good, 
should minister to the poor, should teach the ignorant, and 
comfort the distressed; yet, these things cannot be called the 
real root of the matter! The real root of the matter practically is 
this — “One thing I know, whereas I was blind, now I see; the 
things I once loved I now hate; the things I once hated I love; 
now, it is no more the world, but God; no more the flesh, but 
Christ; no more pleasure, but obedience; no more what I will, 
but what Jesus wills.” If any of you can, from your souls, say 
that you desire the tenor of your life to be, “Lord, not as I will, 
but as You will,” you have got the root of the matter practically! 

Let me guard this part of my subject with one further 
remark. There are those who do certain duties with a 
conscientious motive, in order to ntake themselves Christians — 
such as observing the Sabbath, holding daily worship of God 
with their families, and attending the public services of the 
Lord’s house with regularity. But they do not distinguish 
between these external acts — which may be but the ornaments 
that clothe a graceless life, and those fruits of good living that 
grow out of a holy constitution, which is the root of genuine 
obedience. Some habits and practices of godly men may be 
easily counterfeited. Yet, I think that there are certain virtues 
of God’s children which defy imitation. “To bear reproach for 
Christ, and to suffer wrong patiendy,” is, to my mind, very 
much like the root in practical godliness. Perhaps there is a 
timid girl now present who has braved for many a month the 
persecution of her father and mother to serve that Savior 
whom her parents never knew. Nobody knows what rough 
words and harsh treatment she has had to encounter — all 
because she will come to chapel, and she will steal away into 
her own room, sometimes, always with her Bible in her hand 
when she goes in, and she generally looks as if she had been 


368 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


crying when she comes out. Ah, poor soul! I doubt not the root 
of the matter is in you! Or, see there a young man who has 
risked losing his employment because he will not conceal his 
attachment to Christ. Such as these are sometimes brought into 
great straits; they do not see any precept that plainly says, “You 
shall do this,” or, “You shall not do that,” but they find they 
must be one thing or the other. They make their choice, and it 
is against their worldly interests — it is done for the love they 
bear to the Savior’s name. Their gentle courage I admire. Their 
little faith takes a strong grip. Oh, I cannot doubt the root of 
the matter is found in them! There is practical evidence of it. 

Let me pause here for a moment, before leaving this first 
point, to notice that you may generally ascertain whether you 
have got the root of the matter by its characteristic properties. 
You know a root is a fixing thing. Plants without roots may be 
thrown over the wall; they may be passed from hand to hand; 
but a root is a fixed thing! How firmly the oaks are rooted in the 
ground! You may think of those old oaks in the earth — ever as 
far off you have seen the roots coming out of the ground, and 
then they go in again, and you have said — “Why, what do these 
thick fibers belong to?” Surely they belong to one of those old 
oaks ever so far away; they had sent that root there to act a 
good hold, so that when the March winds come through the 
forest, and other trees are torn up — fir trees, perhaps — trees 
that have outgrown their strength at the top, while they have 
too litde hold at bottom — the old oaks bow to the tempest, 
curtsey to the storm, and later, they lift up their branches again 
in calm dignity; they cannot be blown down. Well now, if you 
have got the root of the matter, you are fixed; you are fixed to 
God, fixed to Christ, fixed to things divine! If you are tempted, 
you are not soon carried away. Oh, how many professors there 
are who have no roots! Get them into godly company, and they 
are such saints, but get them with other company, and what if 


369 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I say that they are devils? There you have them! Their mother 
is come up from the country, and she asked them to come 
tonight to hear Spurgeon. Here they are. Mother does not 
know but what John is one of the best lads anywhere while she 
is in town. Ah, but if it happens to be Uncle William who comes 
up to London in a month’s time, and he should ask John to go 
to a theater, O yes, he will go there, too; and you would never 
know that J ohn had any religion, for he will put that by until 
mother comes back again! He has no roots. Give me the man 
that is bound hard and fast to Christ; lashed to the cross by 
cords that even the knives of hell cannot sever — lashed to the 
cross forever! You have no roots unless you can say, “O God, 
my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed! By stern resolve and by firm 
covenant I am Yours; bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto 
the horns of the altar.” 

Again, a root is not only a fixing thing, but a quickening thing. 
What is it that first sets the sap flowing in the spring? Why, it 
is the root! Down below, beneath the earth, it begins to feel the 
genial influence of the coming spring, and it talks to the trunk 
and says, “It is time to set the sap flowing.” So the sap begins 
to flow, and the buds begin to burst. Ah, and you must have a 
vital principle; you must have a living principle. Some 
Christians are like those toys they import from France, which 
have sand in them; the sand runs down, and some little 
invention turns and works them as long as the sand is running, 
but when the sand is all out, it stops. So on Sunday morning, 
these people are just turned right, and the sand runs, and they 
work all Sunday; but the sand runs down by Sunday night, and 
then they stand still, or else go on with the world’s work just as 
they did before. Oh, this will never do! There must be a living 
principle — something that shall be a mainspring within — a 
wheel that cannot help running on, and that does not depend 
upon external resources! 


370 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


A root, too, is a receiving thing. The botanists tell us a great 
many things about the ends of the roots; they can penetrate 
into the soil hunting after the particular food upon which the 
tree is fed. Ah, and if you have got the root of the matter in 
you, when you come to hear a sermon, you will be sending out 
your root to look after the particular food which your soul 
needs. You will send those roots into the pages of Scripture — 
sometimes into a hymn book — often into the sermon; even 
into a brother’s experience, and into God’s providence, seeking 
that something upon which your soul can feed. 

Therefore, it follows that the root becomes a supplying thing 
because it is a receiving thing. We must have a religion that lives 
upon God, and that supplies us with strength to live for God. 
Oh, how divinely blessed are those men in whom the root of 
the matter is found! 

II. Let me briefly notice, in the second place, that 
WHEREVER THERE IS THE ROOT OF THE MATTER, THERE 
IS VERY MUCH GROUND FOR COMFORT. 

Sounds there in my ears, the sigh, the groan, the sad 
complaint — “I do not grow as I wish; I am not as holy as I want 
to be; I cannot praise and bless the Lord as I desire; I am afraid 
I am not a fruitful bough whose branches run over the wall”? 
Yes, but is the root of the matter in you? If so, cheer up, you 
have cause for gratitude! Remember, that in some things you are 
equal to the greatest and most fullgrovm Christian. You are as much 
bought with blood, O little saints, as are the holy brotherhood. 
He who bought the sheep, bought the lambs, too. You are as 
much an adopted child of God as any other Christian! A babe 
of a span long is as true a child of its parents as is the full-grown 
man. You are as truly justified, for your justification is not a 
thing of degrees. Your little faith has made you clean every whit; 
it could have done no more had it been the strongest faith in 
the world! You have as much right to the precious things of the 


37i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


covenant as the most advanced believers, for your right to 
covenant mercies lies not in your growth, but in the covenant 
itself, and your faith in Jesus may not attempt to measure the 
extent of your inheritance in Him. So then, you are as rich as 
the richest, if not in enjoyment, yet in real possession! You are 
as dear to your Father’s heart as the greatest among us! If there 
is a weakling in a family, the father often loves it the most, or 
at least indulges it with the most caresses, and when there is a 
child that has lost one of its senses, be it sight or hearing, you 
will notice with what diligent care the parents watch over that 
one! You are possibly such a tender one, and Christ is very 
tender over you. You are like the smoking flax — anybody else 
would say, “Put out that smoking flax; what a smell! How it fills 
the room with a foul and offensive odor!” “But the smoking 
flax He will not quench.” You are just like a bruised reed. There 
used to be some music in you, but now the reed is broken, and 
there is no tuneful note at all to be brought out from the poor, 
bruised, crooked and broken reed. Anyone else but the Chief 
Musician would pull you out and throw you away. You might 
think He would be sure to say, “I do not want a bruised reed; 
it is of no use at all among the pipes.” But He will not break 
the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax! Instead of being 
downcast by reason of what you are, you should begin to 
triumph in Christ. Am I but little in Israel? Yet in Christ I am 
made to sit in heavenly places! Am I poor in faith? Still, in 
Christ, I am heir of all things! Do I sometimes wander? Yet 
Jesus Christ comes after me, and brings me back! Though, “less 
than nothing I can boast, and vanity confess,” yet if the root of 
the matter is in me, I will rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the 
God of my salvation! 

III. This brings me to the third and closing part — 

WHEREVER THE ROOT OF THE MATTER IS, THERE WE 


372 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


SHOULD TAKE CARE THAT WE WATCH IT WITH 
TENDERNESS AND WITH LOVE. 

Some of you may have the notion that you are advanced in 
knowledge, that you have much skill in interpreting the Word 
of God, and that you understand the mysteries of the kingdom 
of heaven. It is highly possible that your notion is correct. You 
go out into the world, and you meet with people who do not 
know quite as much as you do, and who have not yet learned 
all the doctrines of grace as they are threaded together in the 
divine plan of salvation. May I persuade you not to get into 
controversy, not to be continually lighting and quarrelling with 
people who do not hold to just your sentiments? If you 
discover the root of the matter in any man, say at once — “Why 
should I persecute you? Why should we fall to quarrelling with 
each other, seeing that the root of the matter is in us both?” 
Save your swords for Christ’s real enemies! The way to make 
men learn the truth of God is not to abuse them. We shall never 
make a brother see a doctrine by smiting him in the eye! Hold 
your lantern up and let him see. I remember, when in my 
boyhood, I sometimes held a candle at night for a man sawing 
who was a worldling. He used to say to me — “Now, my lad, 
hold the candle so that you can see yourself, and you may 
depend upon it that I can see, too.” And I have generally found 
that if you hold up the doctrines in such a way that you can see 
them yourselves, and just tell to others the way in which you 
have been led, by His grace, to see them — and how you see 
them now — you will often give a light to other men, if they 
have the root of the matter in them. Quarrel not — fight not 
with them — but be friends and especially show yourself 
friendly. 

Then, again, if you meet with young professors who have 
the root of the matter in them, do not begin condemning them 
for lack of knowledge. I have heard of some old believers, yes, 


373 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and of some not very old, too, who had read a great deal and 
had, perhaps, more in the head than in the heart; and when 
young inquirers came to see them, they began to ask them — 
“Which theory do you hold, sublapsarian or supralapsarian?” I 
do not mean that they exacdy said those very words, but they 
suggested some knotty points or something of that sort; and 
the young people have said — “I am sure I do not know, sir.” It 
has sometimes been the case that these young inquirers have 
been dealt very harshly with. I remember one case where a 
certain brother — a good man, too, in his way, said — “Well, 
now, I am sorry to tell you that you are no child of God; if you 
die as you are, you will be lost” — only because the poor child 
did not exacdy know the difference between two things that 
are amazingly alike after all! I do not think we ought to do this; 
it is not for us to go about killing all the lambs, for if we do this, 
where will the sheep come from? If we are always condemning 
those who have only begun as yet to learn their letters, we shall 
never have any readers! People must begin to say, “Two times 
two are four,” before they can ever come to be very learned in 
mathematics! Should we stop them at once, and say — “You are 
no child of God, because you do not know how to compute 
the logarithms of divine grace”? Why, then at once we have put 
out of the synagogue those who might have been its best 
ornaments! Remember, my dear friends, that wherever we see 
the root of the matter, Christ has accepted the person, and 
therefore, we ought to accept him, too. 

This is why I love to think that, when we break bread at 
this table, we always receive among us, as far as we know, all 
those who have got the root of the matter in them. I have heard 
a story of the late good Dr. Stedman, when he was tutor of 
Bradford College. It appears he was a very strict-communion 
Baptist, and carried it out conscientiously. One day, he 
preached for some Independents, and in the afternoon, after 


374 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


the service, there was to be the communion. Now Mr. Stedman 
prayed most earnestly that the Lord would be pleased 
graciously to vouchsafe His presence to the dear brothers and 
sisters when they met around His table. After the service was 
over, he was going to the vestry to put on his great coat, 
intending to go home. One of the deacons said — “Doctor, you 
will stop with us, will you not, to the communion?” “Well, my 
dear brother,” he said, “it is no lack of love, but, you see, it 
would compromise my principles. I am a strict-communion 
Baptist, and I could not well stop and commune with you who 
have not been baptized; do not think it is any want of love, now, 
but it is only out of respect to my principles.” “Oh,” said the 
deacon, “but it is not your principles, because what did you 
pray for, Doctor? You prayed your Master, the Lord Jesus, to 
come to our table; and if according to your principles, it is 
wrong for you to go there, you should not ask your Master to 
come where you must not go yourself. But if you believe that 
your Lord and Master will come to the table, surely where the 
Master is, it cannot be wrong for the servant to be.” The 
deacon’s reasoning appears to me very sound. And it is in the 
same spirit I say of any, or to any whose sincere faith I have no 
reason to doubt — if they have got the root of the matter in 
them, “Come and welcome!” We are sorry that when our 
friends ought to keep the feast of tabernacles with great 
branches of trees, they only pull small twigs, and so do not get 
the benefit of the broader shadow. We are sorry that when 
Christ tells them to be immersed, they go and sprinkle — but 
that is their own business and not ours. To their own Master 
they must stand or fall. But if the root of the matter is there, 
why persecute them? Seeing that the root of the matter is found 
in them let them come! God has received them, and let us do 
the same. 


375 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


That matter about encouraging young believers and not 
putting stumbling blocks in their path may seem to some of 
you decidedly unimportant, but I am persuaded that there are 
many young Christians who have been made to suffer for years 
through the roughness of some more advanced believers. 
Christians, you who are strong — be very tender towards the 
weak — for the day may come when you will be weaker than 
they! Never did bullock push with side and shoulder the lean 
catde of the herd when they came to drink, but what the Lord 
took away the glory from the fat bull of Bashan, and made him 
willing to associate with the very least of the herd. You cannot 
intimidate a child of God without making his Father angry; and 
though you are a child of God yourself — if you deal harshly 
with one of your brothers and sisters — you shall smart for it! 
The Master’s rod is always ready, even for His own beloved 
children, when they are not tender with the sons and daughters 
of Zion, who are kept as the apple of God’s eye. Remember, 
too, brothers and sisters that the day may come when you will 
need consolation from the very friend whom you have treated 
so roughly. I have known some great people — some very great 
people — that have at last been made to sit at the feet of those 
whom before they called all sorts of ill names. God has His 
ways of taking the wind out of men’s sails. While their sails were 
full, and the wind blew, they said, “No, no! We do not care 
about that litde port over yonder; we do not care to put in there; 
it is only a miserable little fishing village.” But when the wind 
came howling on, and the deep rolled heavily, and it seemed as 
if the dread artillery of God were all mustering for the battle, 
ah, how with the reef sail they have tried to fly, as best they 
could, into the litde harbor! Do not speak ill of the litde harbor! 
Do not be ashamed of litde Christians! Stand up for the 
weaklings of the flock, and let this be your motto, you strong 
Christians — 


376 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


505 The Root of the Matter - Job 
19:28 


“There’s not a lamb amidst Your flock 
I would disdain to feed; 

There’s not a foe before whose face 
I’d fear Your cause to plead.” 

Now, I ask you, by way of solemn searching investigation, 
have you the root of the matter in you? I have spoken for your 
encouragement, in case you have the root of the matter in you. 
If you have not, there awaits you nothing but destruction — but, 
by His grace, you are not hopelessly lost! The root of the matter 
is still to be had! The Holy Spirit can yet give you a new heart 
and a right spirit! Jesus Christ is still able and willing to save! 
Oh, look there! I see His five wounds; they flow with rivers of 
blood! Look there, sinner! And as you look, by His grace, you 
shall live! Whoever you may be, though you are the worst 
sinner out of hell, yet — 

“While the lamp holds out to burn, 

The vilest sinner may return.” 

Look there, sinner, look, and look and live! I think I have 
closed my sermon each night lately with those words, and I will 
do so again tonight. There is life in a look at a crucified Savior. 
There is life at this moment for you. Oh, look to Him, and you 
shall find that life for yourself! God bless you, for Jesus’ sake. 

May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of 
God our Father, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with 
all who love Jesus, now and eternally. Amen. Amen. 


377 



506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, April 19th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“But strong meat belongs to them who are of full age, even 
those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to 
discern both good and evil.” — Hebrews 5:14 

IN MOST LARGE HOUSES we shall find humanity in all its 
stages. We shall see the infant in its cradle, children laughing in 
their play, young men working with vigor, and the old man 
resting in peace. In such a mansion, if a careful Martha is in 
charge, provisions will be made for all the different ages. There 
will be milk provided for the babes, and the pantry will not be 
without solid meat for the full-grown men. Now in our Father’s 
great house, His family is always so large that you will always 
find believers in all stages of growth. Perhaps there is never a 
moment in the year in which there is not a new birth unto God 
by the Holy Spirit. The sighing of repentance, and the crying of 
simple faith, are always in our heavenly Father’s ears, giving 
Him delight. He has men, women, babes, and for these He has 
abundance of nourishing food. But we bless His name that they 
are not all babes in the house; some are young men, who are 
strong, and have overcome the wicked one, and there are a few 
fathers who have known Him, that is, from the beginning. For 
the young men and for the hoary sires there is as plentiful, and 
as fitting a provision as for the infants. He opens His hands, 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


and supplies the need of every living thing, and this is true, not 
only of the temporals which He gives to man and beast alike, 
but also of the spirituals which He dispenses liberally to all the 
new creatures in Christ Jesus! Now it were unfitting to give milk 
to the man of full age, and equally improper to present the 
strong meat to those who are but infants; our Lord has, 
therefore, been pleased to dictate directions as to the persons 
for whom the various provisions of His table are intended. 

Our text talks of strong and solid ?neat, and it describes the 
persons who are to feed thereon. The context gives a mild rebuke to those 
who, by reason of indolence and sloth, have not attained to years of 
discernment, and cannot, therefore, feed on substantial diet. 

I. Let us, first of all, BRING FORTH SOME OF THIS 
STRONG MEAT AND SET IT UPON THE TABLE BEFORE YOU. 

A careful examination of the context will inform you that 
one form of strong meat which is only fit for full grown 
Christians is the allegorical exposition of Scriptural history. You 
will mark that the aposde was about to allegorize upon 
Melchizedek; he had intended to set forth that that venerable 
and priesdy king was, as far as Scriptural information goes, 
without father, without mother, without descent — having 
neither beginning of years nor end of life — and that he was 
superior to Levi seeing that Levi’s progenitor paid tithes to him, 
and received his blessing. The aposde was about to show that 
Melchizedek was a type of Jesus, who, as a priest, is without 
father, without mother, without descent, having neither 
beginning of days, nor end of years, but is a priest forever 
according to the power of an endless life. But the aposde 
paused, for he felt that this allegory of Melchizedek was too 
strong a meat for those who were not full grown men. Beyond 
a doubt, the historical parts of Scriptures are intended to be 
instructive allegories, setting forth heavenly mysteries. Look 
how the aposde Paul used several of them. There is the case of 


379 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Hagar and Sarah. Since the promise was not performed to 
Sarah, and no offspring had been born to Abraham, Sarah 
suggests that Abraham should take to himself a concubinary 
wife, Hagar. He does so, and she brings forth according to the 
flesh, and by the power of the flesh, Ishmael. Now the aposde 
goes on to show that Ishmael was not the seed which God had 
promised, and that, consequendy, in later years, Isaac was 
born — not according to the power of the flesh — since his 
father and mother were past age — but according to the promise 
fulfilled by the power of God alone! He then goes on to show 
that this is an allegory; that the children of the flesh, that is, 
those who are the seed of Abraham, by natural birth, like 
Ishmael, are not the true seed, but that those who, like Isaac, 
are the fruit of God’s promise, and having been once as dead, 
are given to Abraham, as Isaac was on the mountain in a 
figure — that these are the true seed, concerning whom the 
covenant was made, and as Sarah said concerning Hagar — 
“Cast out the bondwoman and her son, for the son of the 
bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.” 
So the gospel says — “Cast out the law, for the children of the 
law, those who hope to be saved by legal works, shall not be 
heirs with My sons, even with those who are saved by the 
promise of grace.” 

Now this allegory is meat for instructed believers. Jacob 
and Esau — born of the same parents, at the same birth, and yet 
separated in destiny by that memorable sentence, “Jacob have 
1 loved and Esau have I hated” — were a type of the election of 
divine grace; and with many other instances, these go to prove 
that Holy Scripture is to be received not only as a literal 
description of facts which really did occur, but as a picture in 
which souls taught by divine grace, illuminated by the Holy 
Spirit, may see, portrayed in express characters, the great gospel 
of the living God. Those of you who are well instructed will 


380 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


have found out by this time that the Book of Genesis is the 
History of Dispensations — that in all its types it sets forth, from 
Adam to Joseph — the various dispensations of primeval 
innocence. It depicts man without law, under law, in covenant, 
and apart from covenant — and many other things of which we 
cannot now particularly speak. You will have discovered that 
Exodus is the Book of Redemptions. Here is redemption by blood 
when the paschal lamb was slain; redemption by power when 
He broke the chivalry of Egypt, smiting Pharaoh in the midst 
of the Red Sea. The Book of Leviticus is the Handbook of 
Communion, the Guide to Access, opening to us the way in which 
God can come to man, and man can go to God. And I am sure 
the least observant of you must have discovered that the Book 
of Numbers is the Record of Experience, for all those journeys of 
the children of Israel to and fro when they lived in the 
wilderness, sometimes by Marah’s bitter fountain, and at other 
times by Elim’s spreading palms, all describe the constant 
marching of the sacred army of God to the Promised Land. 
The Books of Joshua and Judges typify the history of the 
people who have entered into the land of Canaan, who are 
saved, but who have to fight with their corruptions — with the 
Canaanites who are still in the land — and to drive them out 
despite their chariots of iron. I believe that every book of 
Scripture has some special lesson beyond its historical import; 
and perhaps when the history of the world shall have been fully 
worked out, we shall see that the books of the Bible were like 
a prophetic roll sealed to us, but yet fulfilled to the letter! 1 
sometimes think that we live in the days of the Judges. God 
raises up one mighty minister after another, some Shamgar, 
Jephthah, Gideon, or Samson — and when these die the church 
relapses into its former state of coldness and indifference; but 
the time is coming when David the king shall come, and when 
Solomon shall reign from the river, even to the ends of the 


381 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


earth! The Millennial age shall hasten its glories, and what if it 
should be succeeded by a time of falling away, as under the 
kings of Israel, and then the winding up of the dispensation of 
the carrying away of the wicked into their long and last captivity, 
and the setting of the chosen in another and a better land? If 
these things are so, I am not wrong in the remark, that these 
allegories are only fit for strong men, who, by reason of use, 
have had their senses exercised. See, I set the meat before you. 

I feel persuaded that the apostle also, more particularly, 
referred to those mysterious truths of God which have respect 
to the relationships of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to His complex person. 
The very simplest believer understands that Christ is God and 
Man — that Christ stood as the sinner’s Surety, and paid his debt. 
But, brothers and sisters, when we come to meditate much 
upon the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall soon 
discover that there are depths of mystery in which an elephant 
might swim, as well as shallows where a lamb might wade! His 
complex person suggests a thousand thoughts — all of which 
are too high for comprehension or even consideration — until 
our senses have been exercised. The doctrine of Christ’s 
ancient covenant; the striking of hands between Jesus-Jehovah, 
the Surety, and Jehovah of Hosts, who accepted Him as the 
substitute for His people — who but the perfect man can grasp 
this? Christ’s frequent appearances upon earth, too, before His 
incarnation, when His delights were with the sons of men — 
when He talked with Abraham, communed with Moses, spoke 
to Joshua, and trod the coals of fire with the three holy 
children — what a theme! Christ’s eternal Sonship; the 
procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father and the Son; the 
conception of Jesus as to His Humanity in the womb of the 
Virgin, and others of a kindred nature, are all great mysteries. I 
do not believe that these are fit topics for babes in grace. These 
truths of God are as high above us as the heavens are above 


382 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


the earth. But if ever we do come to consider these sublimities, 
we must remember that they are only food for full grown men. 
I might go on to show that our union to Christ, that wonderful 
doctrine of our being members of His body, of His flesh, and 
of His bones, is also a mystery not to be trifled with by children. 
I might show, too, that even in Christ’s Second Advent there 
are lofty questions — mighty difficulties which need the full 
grown intellect of the believer to grapple with them, and, 
therefore, here again you have another dish loaded with solid 
meat! 

The doctrines of grace are also generally esteemed to be very 
strong meat. He who is not full grown in the faith will discover 
much in the doctrine of predestination that will stagger him. 
No doubt many young believers have felt God’s foreordination 
to be like a stone rolled in their way over which they can 
scarcely climb! They have looked upon this glorious truth of 
God as a mountain blocking up their path; they have not 
understood that though it is a mountain, it is one upon whose 
summit God communes with man. How many have been 
distressed with the precious doctrine of election? It is meat; it 
is hallowed meat — meat fit for the priests of God, and for the 
Lord’s mightiest warriors — but many there are who have been 
so scandalized by it, that they have been glad to write bitter 
things against themselves on account of it. So with the doctrine 
of the immutability of God, and the consequent safety of the 
Lord’s people — seeing that because He changes not, the sons 
of Jacob cannot be consumed. This, though sweet as honey 
dropping from the honeycomb, is not a doctrine for every man. 
Only they who do business upon the great waters, and have 
learned the need of solid food can usually feed on these things 
with satisfaction. Oh, dear brothers and sisters, what a mercy it 
is that there are such things as the grand old truths which men 
nickname Calvinism, but which are the very marrow of the 


383 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


gospel! I find when the heart aches, and the spirit is heavy, there 
is nothing like reading the eighth and ninth chapters of Romans; 
and when things go amiss with me, and everything is perversely 
disappointing my hopes, it is very delightful to throw oneself 
back upon the soft couch of God’s eternal purpose, to pillow 
one’s head upon the certainty that what He said He will 
perform, and that what He has commanded shall stand fast. 
Here are royal dainties! Costly cheer for fainting pilgrims! If you 
want the wings of eagles, study these doctrines, and they shall 
bear you aloft; if you would creep along the ground, and be full 
of doubts, fears, miseries, and distractions, live on baser food! 
But if you would walk in the strength of a giant, and fight with 
the valor of a David, live on these loaves of heaven’s best bread, 
and your youth shall be renewed. Yet these things are strong 
meat and are not for babes, but for men. 

I scarcely need mention that other dish — the more advanced 
and inwrought forms of Christian experience. I believe there are saints, 
for instance, who hardly comprehend that passage where the 
aposde speaks of the contest within — “When I would do good, 
evil is present with me.” You know there are many little saints 
who do not comprehend the fight within; the conflict is there, 
but they have not a clear idea of what that conflict is. They do 
not understand, with Paul, that, “It is no more I that do it, but 
sin that dwells in me.” The law of the two natures, and of their 
constant struggle with each other, is not at their fingertips. 
Then, again, communion with Christ is a high mystery that is 
never learned in the preschool of repentance, not often in the 
grammar school of faith — we must go the university of 
repentance to learn it — leaning our head on Jesus’ bosom, and 
having foretastes of the fellowship which makes heaven what 
it is! This is one of those rare experiences which can only 
belong in its frequency to the full grown believer. I do not 
wonder that some people cannot read Solomon’s Song; we do 


384 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


not expect that they should. If I put a book of algebra or a table 
of logarithms into the hand of a child who has just learned the 
multiplication table, I do not marvel that he should not 
understand it! The fact is that the Song is to the whole Bible 
what the Holy of Holies was to the temple. You may walk into 
the Acts of the Aposdes and the Gospels, and say, “Here I am 
in the outer court of the temple.” You may go to the Psalms 
and to the Episdes, and say, “Here I am in the court of the 
priests.” But the Canticles are the holy of holies, and he who 
has not learned to enter with the high priest into that which is 
within the veil, will never be able to read Solomon’s Song! 
These experiences, I say, are for men of full age, who have had 
their senses exercised. 

I have thus set before you the various sorts of strong meat. 
Before we leave the table let me utter a word of caution. Milk you 
may use as you will. You cannot take too much of it; it will not 
do strong men any great amount of good, but it will certainly 
do them no harm. But the strong meat must always be 
accompanied by a word of caution when it is placed before the 
uninstructed and feeble — since such are very apt to do mischief, 
both to themselves, and to others with this strong meat. 

As for the allegories, what a world of nonsense have people 
talked about the allegories of Scripture, trying to make things 
run on all fours that were meant to walk erect! Alas, for those 
silly compounders, who without the genius of old Origen, 
imitated his worst faults. What can I say that would be censure 
severe enough upon Origen himself, who never could read a 
chapter of the Bible but he must twist it from its plain sense to 
make a mystery of it. We have all heard, I dare say, of the divine 
who was foolish enough to take the three baskets full of sweet 
meats that were upon the head of Pharaoh’s baker, and to say 
that they represented the Trinity! I have heard of another who 
preached from this passage in Ezra — “Nine-and-twenty 


385 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


knives,” and went to show that they were types of the four- 
and-twenty elders! What he did with the surplus five I don’t 
know! Was God’s Book ever meant to be a toy for the 
amusement of childish imagination? Surely not! The strong 
meat of allegory must be for half-inspired saints like John 
Bunyan, and those masters in Israel who are not to be carried 
away upon the back of every figure, but who can ride their 
figures like good horsemen with a bit in the mouth of the 
allegory, and make it keep in a straight road, and bear them 
safely on to their destination. How many weak men are like 
boys on unbroken colts? The sooner they are off, the better, 
for they will hurt their steed, and do themselves no good. 

So must it be with the good things concerning the person of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. The mysterious doctrine of the Trinity, and the 
equally mysterious and sublime doctrine of eternal generation 
are best let alone by feeble minds. I do not think there are half- 
a-dozen men alive who ought to meddle with the last. There 
has been a controversy lately, in a magazine, which I sometimes 
read for amusement rather than for instruction, between 
certain self-considered great and able divines of modern times, 
who think they are the men, and that wisdom will die with them! 
They have been denouncing each other most heartily — and this 
seems the only thing they can do thoroughly well — they have 
been denouncing each other heartily because one believes this, 
and the other believes that, about a subject which not one of 
them knows anything at all about! The Sonship of our Lord is 
a great and marvelous mystery, to be meekly and reverently 
received, but never to be disputed about, except by those 
gigantic minds which belong to the past, rather than the present! 
We might like to see two titanic Puritans enter the field of 
controversy — two such men, for instance, as Dr. John Owen, 
and Charnock — one might travel a thousand miles to see them 
grapple one of these lofty subjects; but when the litde men of 


386 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


these days meddle with them, it saddens the humble-minded, 
and affords enlightenment to none! 

In a measure it is so with the doctrines of grace. The doctrines 
of grace are to be handled with caution, for there are some folks 
who are not of full age, and have not, by reason of use, had 
their senses exercised so that they can discern both good and 
evil. Many love high doctrine, but then they want it higher than 
the Bible! Have we not known some who thought themselves 
very wise, but whose senses, I am certain, have never been well 
exercised? They were so fond of the doctrine of Justification 
by Faith that they have denied sanctification by the Holy 
Spirit — and have taught imputed sanctification — which is a 
doctrine of men, indeed! Some have so exaggerated free grace 
that they have denied the practical precepts. This is partly 
through wickedness, and pardy through folly; it is the sure 
result of little minds losing their way in the great truths of God, 
and, slipping from the high road, and falling to flounder in the 
ditch of error! Oh, my dear brothers and sisters, I would sooner 
you would leave these doctrines alone, than that you should fall 
into Antinomianism! Among the most damnable things which 
Satan ever sent is that which shall lead you to deny the practical 
precepts, and to forget that, “Without holiness, no man shall 
see the Lord.” Unholy fatalism is a deep ditch, and the abhorred 
of the Lord shall fall in. Those persons, too, who push the 
doctrines of election, and make it into the doctrine of 
reprobation show that they are foolish; they are not fit to deal 
with the sublime truths of God, and if some persons who are 
renowned for preaching the doctrines of grace would only hold 
their tongues till they understood them, their admirers would 
wait upon a dumb oracle! Oh, it is a grand thing to be able to 
receive the whole truths of God — to learn human 
responsibility as well as divine sovereignty; to see God doing as 
He wills, but man bound to obey; to see Jehovah exalted on 


387 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


His throne, King of kings and Lord of lords, with man’s will 
His subject, and bound to do what God bids, simply and only 
because God commands it! I am sure if we can couple the two 
things, free-agency and predestination, together, we shall be 
saved from Antinomianism on the one hand, and from 
infidelity on the other! It is not holding half the truth of God 
that marks the man, that is the attainment of a babe; but to hold 
all — and to be afraid neither of high doctrines nor of low 
doctrines — neither of Calvinism nor of Arminianism, nor any 
other ism as long as there is the truth of God in it; to pick the 
truth of God out, and to hold fast that which is good — this is 
the conduct of a full grown, well-developed believer! May you 
have divine grace, dear friends, as touching these truths, to feed 
upon them as men and women who are of full age. 

I shall not say anything upon the other point, except that it 
is just the same as to advanced experience. There are some who 
have run to the extreme of despondency and others to the 
verge of levity through not knowing that strong meat is only 
for men of full age. But I have said enough, and, therefore, I 
now leave this point to turn to a second. 

II. Secondly, let me INVITE THE QUALIFIED PERSONS 
TO COME TO THE FEAST. 

Who are they? They are here described as being persons of 
full age. Understand, dear friends, that there is no reference here 
at all to the age of a person as to human life. The Greek word 
is, “Men that are perfect.” It signifies, therefore, spiritual men 
and women who have attained to the highest degree of spiritual 
development. Now this is not the result of years, for there are 
some gray heads that have no more wisdom than when they 
first began; and, on the other hand, there are some youthful 
believers who are worthy to be called fathers in Israel, through 
the progress which they have made in divine grace. Growth in 
grace does not run side by side with growth in years! As old 


388 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


Master Brooks says, “There are some few believers who seem 
to be born with beards.” They are ripe Christians at a very early 
stage of their spiritual existence; and there are some who, if 
they tarry at Jericho till their beards are grown, will be long in 
seeing the King’s face! They are always babes, needing the 
spoon and the rocking chair, even in old age! The expression 
in the text, then, has no reference to age, but is used in a spiritual 
and ?>jetaphorical sense. 

But what is meant by men who are full grown? Well, you 
know a babe has the same parts as a man; the babe is perfect in 
its measure, but it is not perfecdy perfect. Those limbs must 
expand; the little hand must get a wider grasp; the trembling 
feet must become strong pillars for ripening manhood — the 
man must swell and grow, and expand, and enlarge, and be 
consolidated. Now, when we are born to God, we have all the 
parts of the advanced Christian — faith, hope, love, patience — 
they are all there, but they are all little, all in miniature — and 
they must all grow. And he is of full age whose faith is vigorous, 
whose love is inflamed, whose patience is constant, whose 
hope is bright, who has every grace, in full fashion. 

Nor is it only development. The full grown man is stronger 
than the babe. His sinews are knit; his bones have become fuller 
of solid material; they are no longer soft and cartilaginous, there 
is more solid matter in them. So with the advanced Christian — 
he is no longer to be bent about and twisted — his bones are as 
iron, and his muscles as steel; he moves himself in stately paces, 
neither needs he any upon whom to lean; he can plow the soil, 
or reap the corn; deeds that were impossible to infancy are 
simplicities to the full grown man. Now you understand what 
the full grown Christian is. He can do, and dare, and suffer what 
would have frightened him before! He can fight with dragons, 
though once he would have fled before a grasshopper! He can 
now endure to pass through deep waters, though once a little 


389 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


brook would have swept him away; there is as much difference, 
in fact, between the full grown Christian and the newly-born 
convert as between the strong, hale, hearty man of forty, and a 
babe of three or four. We must, then, before we can venture 
upon things hard to be understood, labor to arrive at full age. 

But then our text tells us that they have had their senses exercised. 
The soul has senses as well as the body; men who have had 
their senses exercised know how to choose between good and 
evil. Now, what are these senses? Well, there are our spiritual 
eyes. When the babe first sees, it has little idea of distances. I 
suppose that to a babe’s eyes everything appears as a flat 
surface. It is the result of experience which enables the man to 
know that such a thing is so many yards off, and that another 
is so many miles distant. Travelers who go to Switzerland for 
the first time soon discover that they have not had their eyes 
exercised; you think that you can reach the peak of yonder 
mountain in half-an-hour. There is the top of yonder rock. You 
dream that a boy might fly his kite to the summit, but it shall 
take you hours to climb there, and weary limbs, alone, can bear 
you to the dizzy height! At a distance young travelers scarcely 
know which is mountain, and which is cloud; all this is the 
result of not having the eyes exercised upon such glorious 
objects. It is just precisely so in spiritual things, unless 
Christians have their eyes exercised. I hope, dear friends, you 
know what it is to see Christ. Your eyes, by faith, have looked 
upon the King in His beauty. You know what it is, too, to see 
self; you have looked into the depravity of your own heart, and 
have been amazed; your eyes have seen the rising and the falling 
of many deceptions. Your eyes have been tried in waiting for 
God in many a dark night, or in beholding Him in the midst of 
many a bright providence. Thus your eyes have been exercised. 
Now, when a doctrine is put before you, a strong doctrine, you 
look at it and say — “Ah, yes, my eye of faith tells me, from what 


390 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


I have seen before, that that is healthy food upon which I may 
feed.” But if you detect something in it that is too high, or too 
low, you at once say — “No, that won’t do for me,” and you put 
it away. Hence it is that the man, the eyes of whose faith has 
been tried with bright visions and dark revelations, is qualified 
to discern between good and evil in those great mysteries which 
would be too high for unexercised believers. Then there is the 
ear. We hear it said of some that they have no ear for music. We 
sometimes hear it said of others that they have an ear for music, 
and they can tell when people are singing half a note amiss. 
How shocked they would sometimes be with some of you who 
will persist in running away from our good leader, and getting 
a whole note amiss! But there are some who cannot tell one 
note from another. So is it in spiritual things, “Blessed are the 
people who know the joyful sound,” but many do not know 
the difference between the joyful sound, and that which is half 
a note lower! Why, dear friends, when a Christian is well taught, 
he knows when a note goes too high and he says — “No, no, 
no! That jars.” Or when it goes too low he says — “No, that is 
out of tune.” He wants to have the keynote of the gospel 
constantly before him, and any divergence from the grand old 
tune of orthodoxy, which he has learned from the Word of 
God, at once makes him feel wretched! He has a fine, keen, 
discerning ear; he can tell at once any mistake, and is not to be 
led astray by it. Hence it is that such persons are fit to hear the 
solid doctrines of the gospel preached, because they have 
listened to the voice of God; they have heard the charms of evil, 
and, by God’s grace, have despised them! They have heard the 
conversation of educated saints, they have been taught in the 
ways of the Lord, and knowing, therefore, the difference 
between this and that, they can discern between good and evil, 
and are not to be led astray. 


39i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Now, I know that there is always a tendency in our large 
congregation for us to lose a drop every now and then of two 
sorts of people. One sort, when they hear an earnest sermon to 
sinners; when the wanderers are exhorted to flee to Jesus, and 
are told that if they perish it will be their own fault. “Oh,” these 
people say, “that is Arminian doctrine!” And off they go to 
some place where they can have the hyperism undiluted! And, 
then, if on another morning God’s predestination is proclaimed, 
and men are told that God has chosen His people, that, “it is 
not of him who wills, nor of him who runs, but of God who 
shows mercy,” then certain people say, “Ah, I did not get on 
this morning; it was too high for me.” The fault is not in either 
of the doctrines, for they are both Scriptural — the evil lies in 
these people’s ears! They do not know the note which is the 
happy medium between the two systems — the note which 
takes in both, which shows the sinner his own responsibility — 
and yet shows to both saint and sinner, God’s real sovereignty. 
Happy is he whose ear is well tuned to discern both good and 
evil! Then, dear friends, comes the nose, the intention of which 
sense is to smell things afar off. True Christians have smelt the 
fragrance of Christ’s fellowship. “While the king sits at his table, 
My spikenard sends forth the smell thereof.” Advanced 
Christians know the fragrance of heaven; the angels have 
brought them bundles of myrrh from the other side of the 
stream; they have had their nostrils exercised, and you know 
the nostrils are of very essential use in reference to food. The 
nostrils can soon detect decay or that spiciness which the crafty 
trader employs to conceal! There are certain persons whose 
ministry is putrid, but they lay on thick, very excellent spice 
about the safety of the believer, and the joy and peace that there 
are in Christ — so that the rottenness is somewhat checked; and 
some Christian people eat the nauseous morsels, forgetting, or 
not knowing what they really are, because of the sweet smell 


392 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


and flavor in which the whole is wrapped up! But our nostrils 
are given us on purpose to detect the craft and mischief of 
designing men; and the spiritual nostril that has been made to 
perceive the difference between the righteous and the wicked 
will soon be able to perceive what is true food, and what is 
carrion. Then, you know, there is the taste; and this sense needs 
educating, too. Some men have no taste; to them flavor is no 
luxury. There are many who have no taste spiritually. Give them 
a cup of mingle-mangle — “perhapses,” “ifs,” “huts,” “maybes,” 
creature willings, and creature doings — and if it is only warm, 
they will drink it down and say, “Oh, how delightful!” If you 
give them a cup, on the other hand, that is full of divine 
purposes, precious promises, and sure mercies of David — if 
you will only flavor it with a good style of oratory — they will 
drink that sweet potion, too, and relish it! The two things may 
flatly contradict each other, but these people have no 
discernment — they have not had their senses exercised! But 
those of you who have been made to taste the sweets of 
covenant grace, you, especially, who have eaten His flesh and 
drunk His blood — and you, too, who have been made to drink 
the wormwood and the gall till your mouth knows every flavor, 
from the bitterness of death up to the glory of immortality — 
you may taste the strong meat without any fear, for your senses 
are exercised! Lastly, there is the sense of touch, and you know 
how in some men this has been developed to a very high degree. 
Men who are deficient in sight, for instance, have acquired by 
touch the knowledge which would, if they had not been blind, 
have been derived from their eyes. So believers have been made 
to touch the hem of Jesus’ garment; they have exercised the 
sense of feeling by joy, by rapture — perhaps by doubt and by 
fear — and their touch has become so acute, so keen, that 
though their eyes were shut, as soon as they touch a doctrine 
they would know what was of God, and what of man! 


393 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Now, our text says that this comes as the result of use, and 
that use generally comes to us through affliction. Have you ever 
noticed how men get their senses clear through affliction? I 
read in the life of good Dr. Brown, that when he first preached, 
he heard two women at the door talking to one another about 
his sermon. One of them said to the other — “Ah, ‘twas very 
well, but ‘twas almost all tinsel.” A short time after, the good 
preacher lost his wife; his heart was broken, and his whole 
nature affected; the roots went deeper down into the solid truth 
of God, and when he preached again, the same woman said to 
her friend — “It is all gold now.” Afflicted Christians come to 
know the difference between tinsel and gold! I love a people 
who do not always care to have great garlands of fine flowers 
handed out to them; oh, that running after oratory, that seeking 
after fine flowing sentences, that spread-eagle style which some 
adopt — -why this is all folly! What the child of God wants is 
matter! He would like to have the matter given him in a good 
shape, but still it is the matter, the real solid food that he wants, 
and that ministry will always be the most acceptable to 
advanced believers which has the most of truth of God in it; 
they do not care half as much about the style as about the food 
that is served up in the sermon. They want something upon 
which the intellect may meditate, which the soul can masticate, 
which the heart can assimilate, and upon which the whole being 
may be nourished and strengthened! Young Christians very 
frequently like Arminian doctrines, but as we grow older, as 
men who were radicals when they were young grow to be 
conservatives when they are old, so we grow to be Calvinistic, 
for Calvinism is the conservatism of Christianity! It is just the 
conservative principle, the old, solid, stiff, unyielding doctrine. 
Though I am a long way from being anything like old, and do 
not intend to be old if I can help it for another 30 years or so, 
yet I still find a greater and more intense love for the doctrine 


394 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


of election, the doctrine of eternal union to Christ, final 
perseverance, and all those great truths where saints in all ages 
have been custom to find a haven for their spirits! 

III. And now we must conclude. I think our apostle meant 
the text to be a GENTLE REBUKE TO THOSE WHO ARE NOT 
FULL-GROWN MEN. The apostle says that the Hebrew saints 
ought to have been teachers, but that they still remained infants. 

It is very pleasant to see the infant in the house. What joy 
there is in its tender cry! But suppose that our children were 
always to remain infants — that would be no happiness to the 
parent. If you had a son 20 years of age who still needed to be 
carried, who still required to hang upon the nurse’s breast, 
would you not consider it one of the most serious of calamities? 
But you say you would pity the child. Ah, so you would, but 
suppose it was his own willful fault? Suppose the litde one 
could, by some piece of willfulness, prevent itself from growing, 
and would not use the proper means for development? I think 
you would then wisely use the rod as well as show your pity. 
Twenty years of age, and yet still in long clothes! Thirty years 
of age, and still uttering a babbling cry! Forty years of age, and 
still needing milk! Ah, you smile, but did any of you smile at 
yourselves? How long have you been converted to God? How 
long have you known the Savior? Why, I have known some 
converts who have been in long clothes for 30 years after they 
were converted, and are still babies! If you asked them to speak 
for Christ, they could only say a word or two of mere babble; 
and as for their confession of faith, it was not a reason; they did 
declare the hope that was in them, but they did not give a 
reason for it, for they could not give one! Then there are some 
who grow so slowly that their faith is just as weak now as it was 
20 years ago. They go tottering along and cannot run yet; they 
will always want to have preached to them just the simple 
elements, and if you give them a piece of high doctrine they 


395 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


have not cut their wisdom teeth yet, and therefore they cannot 
masticate it, much less can they get any comfort out of it! Have 
I not seen some who ought to have been as patient as Job by 
this time, as fretful as they can well be? 

Dear friends, I must give you a word of rebuke! It must be 
gendy, for you are our brothers and sisters, and if you are but a 
babe, if you have life in you, you are saved. But why should you 
always be a babe, dear brother? Is it not that you have been too 
worldly? You have made money — oh, I wish you had made an 
increase of divine grace! You have been very attentive to those 
carts and horses, and to that farm and to that speculation — you 
have attended very diligently to that sale room and to that 
exchange — oh, if only you had been as diligent in prayer! If 
only you had been as diligent for your Bible as for your 
ledger — and if only you had ridden in the chariots of salvation 
as often as you have been riding your own horse about your 
farm — how much better a Christian you might have been! Do 
you not see, brothers and sisters, you have been stinting 
yourself of food? You do not read the Scriptures, which are the 
food of the saints; you have stinted yourself of breath, and if a 
man is short of breath, he will not have much to boast of! If 
you want to grow, you need to pray more! My dear brothers 
and sisters, surely you have attached too litde importance to 
these things! You have not considered them enough! Why not 
begin to search the Scriptures? Why not try to live nearer to 
God? Why not pant after a greater conformity to Christ’s image? 
Why, what a Christian you might then be! I ask my Lord often 
this one mercy, not only to make this Church, as it is, the largest 
Church in Christendom, but to be pleased to make us also 
strong men and women! Oh, if I can have in this Church a body 
of strong men and women who know what they have received, 
and hold it fast, and grow in grace — who have their eyes lit up 
with enthusiasm because their hearts are burning with a divine 


396 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


506 Strong Meat - Heb. 5:14 


fervor — -why, there is nothing impossible for you! You shall 
make the Church tell upon its age; you shall move London, 
which is the heart of the world, until it shall send out deep heart 
throbs that shall reach throughout the universe! With such 
multitudes as God adds to us continually — what might not be 
done if we had but the baptism of fire? But we must be ready 
for the fire; we must tarry at Jerusalem and then, when the Holy 
Spirit comes down, we may speak each in his own tongue as 
the Spirit shall give us utterance — and who can tell how 
mightily we may serve the Master? Sunday school teachers, I 
would not have you ordinary teachers who merely set children 
reading; I would have you masters of the art of teaching, who 
are able to catechize with clearness and with power! You young 
preachers who stand in the streets — I would not have it said of 
you that you can talk but that there is nothing in it! You young 
men in our college — 1 hope it shall never be said of any of you, 
as you go forth, that you are deficient in spiritual intelligence, 
and that you are unenlightened. May you be strong men, my 
brothers, all of you — and then it shall be my happiness to see 
you like the old guard of Napoleon — marching irresistibly into 
the battle, and this shall be your war cry, if bad and evil times 
shall come — “We can die, but we can never surrender.” For 
God and for His truth you shall make your last charge over 
your enemies, and then enter into the victory which He reserves 
for all them who diligently serve Him! 

I have said nothing to those of you who are unconverted. 
“One word,” says one, “one word; one word.” Well, here it is 
for you — I will give you more this evening, but I will give you 
one word now — “Prepare to meet your God!” “But how?” 
asks one. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be 
saved! Taste and see that the Lord is good. He who believes on 
Him shall never perish, but have everlasting life. To believe is 
to trust. Trust Jesus and be saved! Amen. 


397 



507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, May 3 rd, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“You also helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift 
bestowed upon us by the means of many persons, thanks may 
be given by many on our behalf. For our rejoicing in this, the 
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly 
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we 
have had our conversation in the world and more abundantly to 
you.” — II Corinthians 1:11-12 

THE APOSTLE Paul had, by singular providences, been 
delivered from imminent peril in Asia. During the great riot at 
Ephesus, when Demetrius and his fellow shrine-makers raised 
a great tumult against him, because they saw that their craft was 
in danger, Paul’s life was gready in jeopardy. Consequendy he 
writes, “We were pressed out of measure, above strength, 
insomuch that we despaired even of life.” The aposde 
attributes to God, alone, his singular preservation; and if he 
referred also to the occasion when he was stoned and left for 
dead, there is much appropriateness in his blessing “God which 
raised the dead.” The aposde, moreover, argues from the fact 
that God had thus delivered him in the past, and was still his 
helper in the present, that He would be with him also in the 
future! Paul is a master at all arithmetic. His faith was always a 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


ready-reckoner. We here find him computing by the believer’s 
Rule of Three; he argues from the past to the present and from 
the present to things yet to come. The verse preceding our text 
is a brilliant example of this arriving at a comfortable 
conclusion by the Rule of Three — “Who delivered us from so 
great a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust that He will 
yet deliver us.” Because our God is “the same yesterday, today, 
and forever,” His love in time past is an infallible assurance of 
His kindness today, and an equally certain pledge of His 
faithfulness on the morrow; whatever our circumstances may 
be, however perplexed may be our pathway, and however dark 
our horizon, if we argue by the rule of, “He has, He does, He 
will,” our comfort can never be destroyed! Courage, then, O 
you afflicted seed of Israel; if you had a changeable God to deal 
with, your souls might be full of bitterness — but because He is, 
“the same yesterday, today, and forever,” every repeated 
manifestation of His grace should make it more easy for you to 
rest upon Him! Every renewed experience of His fidelity 
should confirm your confidence in His grace. May the most 
blessed Spirit teach us to grow in holy confidence in our ever 
faithful Lord. 

Although our apostle thus acknowledged God’s hand and 
God’s hand alone, in his deliverance, yet he was not so foolish 
as to deny or undervalue the second causes. On the contrary, 
having first praised the God of all comfort, he now remembers 
with gratitude the earnest prayers of the many loving 
intercessors. Gratitude to God must never become an excuse 
for ingratitude to man! It is true that Jehovah shielded the 
apostle of the Gentiles, but He did it in answer to prayer; the 
chosen vessel was not broken by the rod of the wicked, for the 
outstretched hand of the God of heaven was his defense — but 
that hand was outstretched because the people of Corinth, and 
the saints of God everywhere had prevailed at the throne of 


399 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


grace by their united supplications! With gratitude, those 
successful pleadings are mentioned in the text, “You also 
helping together by prayer for us,” and he desires the brothers 
and sisters now to unite their praises with his, “that for the gift 
bestowed upon us by the means of many persons, thanks may 
be given by many on our behalf.” He adds that he has a claim 
upon their love since he was not as some who were unfaithful 
to their trust, but his conscience was clear that he had preached 
the Word simply and with sincerity. 

While speaking upon these topics, may the anointing Spirit 
now descend to make them profitable to us! We shall, first, 
acknowledge the power of united prayer; secondly, excite you to united 
praise; and then, in the third place, urge our joyful claim upon you — 
a claim which is not ours alone, but belongs to all ministers of God who in 
sincerity labor for souls. 

I. First, then, dear friends, it is my duty and my privilege 
this morning to ACKNOWLEDGE THE POWER OF UNITED 
PRAYER. 

It has pleased God to make prayer the abounding and 
rejoicing river through which most of our choice mercies flow 
to us. It is the golden key which unlocks the well-stored 
granaries of our heavenly Joseph. It is written upon each of the 
mercies of the covenant, “For this will I be inquired of by the 
house of Israel to do it for them.” There are mercies which 
come unsought, for God is found of them that sought not for 
Him, but there are other favors which are only bestowed upon 
the men who ask, and therefore receive — who seek, and 
therefore find — who knock, and therefore gain an entrance. 
Why God has been pleased to command us to pray at all it is 
not difficult to discover, for prayer glorifies God, by putting man 
in the most humble posture of worship! The creature in prayer 
acknowledges his Creator with reverence, and confesses Him 
to be the giver of every good and perfect gift; the eyes are lifted 


400 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


up to behold the glory of the Lord, while the knees are bent to 
the earth in the lowliness of acknowledged weakness. Though 
prayer is not the highest mode of adoration, or otherwise it 
would be continued by the saints in heaven, yet, it is the most 
humble, and so the most fitting to set forth the glory of the 
perfect One as it is beheld by imperfect flesh and blood. From 
the “Our Father,” in which we claim relationship, right on to, 
“the kingdom and the power and the glory,” which we ascribe 
to the only true God, every sentence of prayer honors the Most 
High! The groans and tears of humble petitioners are as truly 
acceptable as the continual, “Holy, holy, holy,” of the 
Cherubim and Seraphim; for in their very essence, all truthful 
confessions of personal fault are but homage paid to the 
infinite perfections of the Lord of hosts. More honored is the 
Lord by our prayers than by the unceasing smoke of the holy 
incense of the altar which stood before the veil. Moreover, the 
act of prayer teaches us our unworthiness, which is no small blessing 
to such proud beings as we are. If God gave us favors without 
compelling us to pray for them, we would never know how 
poor we are, but a true prayer is an inventory of needs, a catalog 
of necessities, a request in forma pauperis, an exposure of secret 
wounds, a revelation of hidden poverty. While it is an 
application to divine wealth, it is a confession of human 
emptiness. I believe that the most healthy state of a Christian is 
to be always empty, and always depending upon the Lord for 
supplies; to be always poor in self and rich in Jesus; weak as 
water personally, but mighty through God to do great exploits; 
and therefore the use of prayer, because while it adores God, it 
lays the creature where he should be — in the very dust. Prayer 
is in itself, apart from the answer which it brings, a great benefit 
to the Christian. As the runner gains strength for the race by 
daily exercise, so for the great race of life, we acquire energy by 
the hallowed labor of prayer. Prayer plumes the wings of God’s 


401 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


young eaglets that they may learn to mount above the clouds! 
Prayer girds the loins of God’s warriors, and sends them forth 
to combat with their sinews braced, and their muscles firm. An 
earnest pleader comes out of his closet, even as the sun rises 
from the chambers of the east, rejoicing like a strong man to 
run his race; prayer is that uplifted hand of Moses which routs 
the Amalekites more than the sword of Joshua; it is the arrow 
shot from the chamber of the prophet foreboding defeat to the 
Syrians. What if I say that prayer clothes the believer with the 
attributes of Deity, girds human weakness with divine strength, 
turns human folly into heavenly wisdom, and gives to troubled 
mortals the serenity of the immortal God? I know not what 
prayer cannot do! I thank You, great God, for the mercy seat, 
a choice gift of Your marvelous loving-kindness. Help us to use 
it aright! 

As many mercies are conveyed from heaven in the ship of 
prayer, so there are many choice and special favors which can only be 
brought to us by the fleets of united prayer. Many are the good things 
which God will give to His lonely Elijahs and Daniels, but if 
two of you agree as touching anything that you shall ask, there 
is no limit to God’s bountiful answers. Peter might never have 
been brought out of prison if it had not been that prayer was 
made without ceasing by all the Church for him! Pentecost 
might never have come if all the disciples had not been, “with 
one accord in one place,” waiting for the descent of the tongues 
of fire. God is pleased to give many mercies to one pleader, but 
at times He seems to say, “You shall all appear before Me and 
entreat My favor, for I will not see your face unless even your 
younger brothers and sisters are with you.” Why is this, dear 
friends? I take it that thus our gracious Lord sets forth His own 
esteem for the communion of saints. “I believe in the 
communion of saints” is one article of the great Christian creed, 
but how few there are who understand it! Oh, there is such a 


402 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


thing as real union among God’s people. We may be called by 
different names — 

“But all the servants of our King 
In heaven and earth are one!” 

We cannot afford to lose the help and love of our brothers 
and sisters. Augustine says, “The poor are made for the rich, 
and the rich are made for the poor.” I do not doubt but that 
strong saints are made for weak saints, and that the weak saints 
bring special benedictions upon the full grown believers. There 
is fitness in the whole body — each joint owes something to 
every other — and the whole body is bound together and 
compacted by that which every joint supplies. There are certain 
glands in the human body which the anatomist hardly 
understands. He can say of the liver, for instance, that it yields 
a very valuable fluid of the utmost value in the bodily economy. 
But there are other secretions whose distinct value he cannot 
ascertain. Yet, doubtless, if that gland were removed, the whole 
body might suffer to a high degree! And so, beloved friends, 
there may be some believers of whom we may say, “I do not 
know the use of them; I cannot tell what good that Christian 
does;” yet, were that insignificant, and apparendy useless 
member removed, the whole body might be made to suffer, the 
whole frame might become sick, and the whole heart faint! This 
is probably the reason why many a weighty gift of heaven’s love 
is only granted to combined petitioning — that we may perceive 
the use of the whole body, and so may be compelled to 
recognize the real vital union which divine grace has made — 
and daily maintains among the people of God. Is it not a happy 
thought, dear friends, that the very poorest and most obscure 
Church member can add something to the body’s strength? We 
cannot all preach; we cannot all rule; we cannot all give gold 


403 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX ClassicChristianLibrary.com 

and silver — but we can all contribute our prayers! There is no 
convert, though he is but two or three days old in divine grace, 
who cannot pray! There is no bedridden sister in Jesus who 
cannot pray! There is no sick, aged, imbecile, obscure, illiterate, 
or penniless believer who cannot add his supplications to the 
general stock! This is the Church’s riches! We put boxes at the 
door that we may receive your offerings to God’s cause — 
remember, there is a spiritual chest within the Church into 
which we should all drop our loving intercessions, as into the 
treasury of the Lord. Even the widow with out her two mites can 
give her offering to this treasury! See, then, dear friends, what 
union and communion there are among the people of God, 
since there are certain mercies which are only bestowed while 
the saints unitedly pray. How we ought to feel this bond of 
union! How we ought to pray for one another! How, as often 
as the Church meets together for supplication, should we all 
make it our bounded duty to be there! I would that some of 
you who are absent from the prayer meeting upon any little 
excuse would reflect how much you rob us all. The prayer 
meeting is an invaluable institution, ministering strength to all 
other meetings and agencies. Are there not many of you who 
might, by a little pinching of your time, and pressing of your 
labors, come among us a little more often? And what if you 
should lose a customer now and then, do you not think that 
this loss could be well made up to you by your gains on other 
days? Or if not so, would not the spiritual profit much more 
than counterbalance any little temporal loss? “Not forgetting 
the assembling of yourselves together as the manner of some 
is.” 

We are now prepared for a further observation. This united 
prayer should especially be made for the ministers of God. It is for them, 
peculiarly, that this public prayer is intended. Paul asks for it — 
“Brethren, pray for us.” And all God’s ministers, to the latest 


404 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


time, will always confess that this is the secret source of their 
strength. The prayers of the people must be the might of the 
ministers. Shall I try to show you why the minister, more than 
any other man in the Church, needs the earnest prayers of the 
people? Is not his position the most perilous ? Satan’s orders to the 
hosts of hell are, “Fight neither with small nor great, but only 
with the ministers of God.” He knows if he can once smite 
through the heart of one of these, there will be a general 
confusion, for if the champion is dead, then the people flee! It 
is around the standard-bearer that the fight is thickest. There 
the battle-axes ring upon the helmets; there the arrows are bent 
upon the armor, for the enemy knows that if he can cut down 
the standard, or cleave the skull of its bearer, he will strike a 
heavy blow and cause deep discouragement. Press around us, 
then, you men at arms! Knights of the red cross, rally for our 
defense, for the fight grows hot! We beseech you, if you elect 
us to the office of the ministry, stand fast at our side in our 
hourly conflicts! I noticed on returning from Rotterdam, when 
we were crossing the bar at the mouth of the Maas, where by 
reason of a deep tide and a bad wind, the navigation was 
exceedingly dangerous, that orders were issued — “All hands on 
deck!” So I think the life of a minister is so perilous, that I may 
well cry, “All hands on deck” — every man to prayer! Let even 
the weakest saint become instant in supplication! The minister, 
standing in such a perilous position, has, moreover, a solemn 
weight of responsibility resting on him. Every man should be his 
brother’s keeper in a measure, but woe to the watchmen of 
God if they are not faithful, for at their hands shall the blood 
of souls be required; at their door shall God lay the ruin of men 
if they preach not the gospel fully and faithfully. There are 
times when this burden of the Lord weighs upon God’s 
ministers until they cry out in pain as if their hearts would burst 
with anguish. I marked the captain as we crossed that bar 


405 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


throwing the lead, himself, into the sea; and when one asked 
why he did not let the sailors do it, he said, “At this point, just 
now, I dare not trust any man but myself to heave the lead, for 
we have hardly six inches between our ship and the bottom.” 
And, indeed, we felt the vessel touch once or twice most 
unpleasandy. So there will come times with every preacher of 
the gospel — if he is what he should be — when he will be in 
dread suspense for his hearers, and he will not be able to 
discharge his duty by proxy, but must personally labor for 
men — not even trusting himself to preach — but calling upon 
his God for help, since he is now overwhelmed with the burden 
of men’s souls. Oh, do pray for us! If God gives us to you, and 
if you accept the gift most cheerfully, do not so despise both 
God and us as to leave us penniless and poverty-stricken 
because your prayers are withheld! 

Moreover, the preservation of the minister is one of the most 
important objectives to the Church. You may lose a sailor from the 
ship, and that is very bad, both for him and for you, but if the 
pilot should fall over, or the captain should be smitten with 
sickness or the helmsman be washed from the wheel, then what 
is the vessel to do? Therefore, though prayer is to be put up for 
every other person in the Church, yet for the minister is it to 
be offered first and foremost, because of the position which he 
occupies. And then, how much more is asked of him than of you? If 
you are to keep a private table for individual instruction, he is, 
as it were, to keep a public table, a feast of good things for all 
comers; and how shall he do this unless his Master gives him 
rich provisions? You are to shine as a candle in a house — the 
minister has to be as a lighthouse — to be seen far across the 
deep — and how shall he shine the whole night long unless he 
is trimmed by his Master, and fresh oil is given him from 
heaven? His influence is wider than yours — if it is for evil, he 
shall be a deadly upas, with spreading boughs poisoning all 


406 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


beneath his shadow; but if God makes him a star in His right 
hand, his ray of light shall cheer with its genial influence whole 
nations, and whole periods of time! If there is any truth in all 
this, I implore you, yield us generously and constandy the 
assistance of your prayers. 

I find that in the original, the word for, “helping together,” 
implies very earnest WORK. Some people’s prayers have no 
work in them, but the only prayer which prevails with God is a 
real workingman’s prayer — where the petitioner, like a Samson, 
shakes the gates of mercy, and labors to pull them up rather 
than be denied an entrance! We do not want fingertip prayers, 
which only touch the burden — we need shoulder prayers — 
which bear a load of earnestness, and are not to be denied their 
desire. We do not want those dainty runaway knocks at the 
door of mercy, which professors give when they show off at 
prayer meetings, but we ask for the knocking of a man who 
means to have, and means to stop at mercy’s gate till it opens 
and all his needs shall be supplied! The energetic, vehement 
violence of the man who is not to be denied, but intends to 
carry heaven by storm until he wins his heart’s desire — this is 
the prayer which ministers covet of their people! Melancthon, 
it is said, derived great comfort from the information that 
certain poor weavers, women and children, had met together 
to pray for the Reformation. Yes, Melancthon — there was solid 
ground for comfort here. Depend on it, it was not only Luther, 
but the thousands of poor persons who sung psalms at the 
plow-tail, and the hundreds of serving men and women who 
offered supplications, that made the Reformation what it was. 
We are told of Paulus Phagius, a celebrated Hebrew scholar, 
very useful in introducing the Reformation into this country, 
that one of his frequent requests of his younger scholars was 
that they would continue in prayer, so that God might be 
pleased to pour out a blessing in answer to them. Have I not 


407 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


said a hundred times that all the blessings that God has given 
us here, all the increase to our Church, has been due, under 
God, to your earnest, fervent supplications? There have been 
heaven-moving seasons both in this house and at New Park 
Street. We have had times when we have felt we could die 
sooner than not be heard; when we carried our Church on our 
bosom as a mother carries her child; when we felt a yearning 
and a travailing in birth for the souls of men! We may truly say, 
when we see our Church daily increasing, and the multitudes 
still hanging upon our lips to listen to the Word, “What has 
God worked?” Shall we now cease from our prayers? Shall we 
now say unto the Great High Priest, “It is enough”? Shall we 
now pluck the glowing coals from the altar, and quench the 
burning incense? Shall we now refuse to bring the morning and 
evening lambs of prayer and praise to the sacrifice? O children 
of Ephraim, being armed and carrying bows, will you turn your 
backs in the day of batde? The flood is divided before you; the 
Jordan is driven back! Will you refuse to march through the 
depths? God, even your God, goes up before you! The shout 
of a King is heard in the midst of your hosts! Will you now be 
cowardly and refuse to go up and possess the land? Will you 
now lose your first love? Shall “Ichabod” be written upon the 
forefront of this tabernacle? Shall it be said that God has 
forsaken you? Shall the day come in which the daughters of 
Philistia shall rejoice, and the sons of Syria shall triumph? If not, 
to your knees again, with all the force of prayer! If not, to your 
vehement supplications once more! If not, if you would not see 
good blighted, and evil triumphant, clasp hands again — and in 
the name of Him who always lives to intercede — once more 
be prevalent in prayer that the blessing may again descend! 
“You also helping together by prayer for us.” 

II. We must now EXCITE YOU TO PRAISE. 


408 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


Praise should always follow answered prayer; the mist of 
earth’s gratitude should rise as the sun of heaven’s love warms 
the ground. Has the Lord been gracious to you, and inclined 
His ear to the voice of your supplication? Then praise Him as 
long as you live! Deny not a song to Him who has answered 
your prayer, and given you the desire of your heart. To be silent 
over God’s mercies is to incur the guilt of shocking ingratitude, 
and ingratitude is one of the worst of crimes. I trust, dear 
friends, you will not act as basely as the nine lepers, who after 
they had been healed of their leprosy, returned not to give 
thanks unto the healing Lord. To forget to praise God is to 
refuse to benefit ourselves, for praise, like prayer, is exceedingly 
useful to the spiritual man. It is a high and healthful exercise. 
To dance, like David, before the Lord, is to quicken the blood 
in the veins, and make the pulse beat at a healthier rate. Praise 
gives to us a great feast, like that of Solomon, who gave to every 
man a good piece of meat, and a flagon of wine. Praise is the 
most heavenly of Christian duties! The angels pray not, but they 
cease not to praise both day and night. To bless God for 
mercies received is to benefit our fellow men — “The humble 
shall hear thereof and be glad.” Others who have been in like 
circumstances shall take comfort if we can say, “Oh, magnify 
the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together, this poor 
man cried, and the Lord heard him!” Tongue-tied Christians 
are a sad dishonor to the Church. We have some such — some 
whom the devil has gagged — and the loudest music they ever 
make is when they are champing the bit of their silence. I would, 
my brothers and sisters, that in all such cases the tongue of the 
dumb may sing. 

To go a step further here, as praise is good and pleasant, 
blessing man and glorifying God, united praise has a very special 
commendation. United praise is like music in concert. The sound 
of one instrument is exceedingly sweet, but when hundreds of 


409 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


instruments, both wind and stringed, are all combined, then the 
orchestra sends forth a noble volume of harmony! The praise 
of one Christian is accepted before God like a grain of incense, 
but the praise of many is like a censor full of frankincense 
smoking up before the Lord. Combined praise is an 
anticipation of heaven, for in that general assembly they all, 
together, with one heart and voice, praise the Lord — 

“Ten thousand thousand are their tongues, 

But all their joys are one!” 

Public praise is very agreeable to the Christian himself. 
How many burdens has it removed? I am sure when I hear the 
shout of praise in this house, it warms my heart. It is at times a 
little too slow for my taste, and I must urge you to quicken your 
pace, that the rolling waves of majestic praise may display their 
full force! Yet with all drawbacks, to my heart, there is no music 
like yours. My Dutch friends praise the Lord so very slowly that 
one might very well go to sleep, lulled by their lengthened 
strains. Even there, however, the many voices make a grand 
harmony of praise! I love to hear God’s people sing when they 
really do sing, not when it is a drawing out somewhere between 
harmony and discord. O for a sacred song, a shout of lofty 
praise in which every man’s soul beats the time, and every 
man’s tongue sounds the tune — and each singer feels a high 
ambition to excel his fellow in gratitude and love! There is 
something exceedingly delightful in the union of true hearts in 
the worship of God — and when these hearts are expressed in 
song — how sweet the charming sounds! I think we ought to 
have a praise meeting once a week. We have a prayer meeting 
every Monday, and a prayer meeting every Saturday, and a 
prayer meeting every morning, but why do we not have a praise 
meeting? Surely seasons should be set apart for services made up 


410 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


of praise from beginning to end. Let us try the plan at once. As 
I said about united prayer, that it should be offered especially 
for ministers, so should united praise often take the same aspect. The 
whole company should praise and bless God for the mercy 
rendered to the Church through its pastors. Hear how our 
aposde puts it again — “That for the gift bestowed upon us by 
the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many on 
our behalf.” brothers and sisters, we ought to praise God for 
good ministers that they live, for when they die, much of their 
work dies with them. It is astonishing how a reformation will 
press on while Luther and Calvin live, and how it will cease as 
soon as the reformers die! The spirits of good men are 
immortal only in a sense. The Churches of God in this age are 
like the Israelites in the times of the judges, when the judges 
died they went after graven images again. And it is so now. 
While God spares the man, the Church prospers, but when the 
man dies, the zeal which he blew to a flame smolders among 
the ashes in nine cases out of ten, if not in 99 out of every 
hundred! The prosperity of a Church rests on the minister’s life. 
God so ordains it to humble us. There should be gratitude, then, 
for spared life; but there should be great gratitude for preserved 
character, for oh, when a minister falls, what a disgrace it is! Why, 
when you read in the police reports the sad case of the Rev. 

Mr. , who chose to call himself a Baptist minister, 

everybody said, “What a shocking thing! What a bad set the 
Baptists must be!” Now, any fool in the world may call himself 
a Baptist minister! Our liberty is so complete that no law or 
order exists. Any man who can get a dozen to listen to him 
preach is a minister, at least to them; therefore, you cannot 
suppose but what there will be some hypocrites who will take 
the name in order to get some sort of reputation. If the true 
minister is kept, and made to hold fast his integrity, there 
should be constant gratitude to God on his behalf. If the 


411 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


minister is kept well supplied with goodly matter; if he is like a 
springing well; if God gives him to bring out of His treasury 
things both new and old to feed His people, there should be 
hearty thanks. And if he is kept sound, if he goes not aside to 
philosophy on the one hand, nor to a narrowness of doctrine 
on the other, there should be thanksgiving there. If God gives 
to the masses the will to hear him, and above all, if souls are 
converted and saints are edified, there should be never-ceasing 
honor and praise to God! Ah, I am talking now about what you 
all know, and you just nod your heads to it, and think there is 
not much in it, but if you were made to live in Holland for a 
litde time, you would soon appreciate these remarks. While 
traveling there, I stayed in houses with godly men — men of 
God with whom I could hold sweet communion — who cannot 
attend what was once their place of worship. Why not? “Sir,” 
they say, “can I go to a place of worship when the most of the 
ministers deny every Word of Scripture? Not those of the 
Reformed Church only, but of every sect in Holland! How can 
I listen to the traitors who swear to the Calvinistic or Lutheran 
articles, and then go into the pulpit and deny the reality of the 
resurrection, or assert that the ascension of Jesus is a mere 
spiritual parable?” 

I find that in the Netherlands, they are 50 years in advance 
of us in infidelity! We shall soon catch up with them if 
gentlemen of a certain school I know of are allowed to multiply. 
The Dutch divines have taken great strides in Neologism, till 
now the people love the truth of God, and there are multitudes 
who are willing to hear it, but these are compelled absolutely to 
refuse to go to church at all, lest by any means they should give 
countenance to the heretical and false doctrines which are 
preached to them every Sunday! Ah, if God were once to take 
away from England the ministers who preach the gospel boldly 


412 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


and plainly, you would cry to God to give you the candlestick 
back again! We may indeed say of England — 

“With all your faults I love you still.” 

We have a colonial bishop who avows his unbelief; we have 
a few men of all denominations who are quiedy sliding from 
the truth; but thank God they are nothing as of yet; they are 
but as a drop in a bucket compared to the Churches of Christ, 
and those among us who are not quite as Calvinistic as we 
might wish, I thank God, never dispute the Inspiration of 
Scripture, nor doubt the great truth of justification by faith. We 
have still preserved among us men who are faithful to God, and 
preach the whole truth as it is in Jesus! Be thankful for your 
ministers, I say again, for if you were placed where some 
believers are, you would cry out to your God — “Lord, send us 
back Your prophets; send us a famine of bread or a famine of 
water, but send us not a famine of the Word of God!” 

I ask for myself this morning, as your minister, your 
thanksgivings to be mingled with mine in praising God for the 
help which He has given to me in the very arduous work of the 
last fortnight. Praise be to God for the acceptance which He 
gave me in that country among all ranks of the people. I speak 
to His praise and not to mine, for this has been a vow with me, 
that if God will give me a harvest, I will not have an ear of corn 
of it, but He shall have it all! I found, in all the places where I 
went, great multitudes of people, crowds who could not 
understand the preacher, but who wanted to see his face, 
because God had blessed his translated sermons to their souls! 
Multitudes gave me the grip of brotherly kindness and, with 
tears in their eyes, invoked, in the Dutch language, every 
blessing upon my head. I hoped to preach to some fifties and 
hundreds, and instead of that, there were so many that the great 


413 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


cathedrals were not too large! This surprised me, and made me 
glad — and caused me to rejoice in God — and I ask you to 
rejoice with me. I thank God for the acceptance which He gave 
me among all ranks of the people. While the poor crowded to 
shake hands, till they almost pulled me in pieces, it pleased God 
to move the heart of the Queen of Holland to send for me, and 
for an hour and a quarter, I was privileged to talk with her 
concerning the things which make for our peace. I sought no 
interview with her, but it was her own wish; and then I lifted 
up my soul to God that I might talk of nothing but Christ, and 
might preach to her of nothing but Jesus; and so it pleased the 
Master to help me, and I left that very amiable lady, not having 
shunned to declare the whole counsel of God! Gratified was I, 
indeed, to find myself received cordially by all denominations, 
so that on the Saturday at Amsterdam, I preached in the 
Mennonite Church in the morning, and at the Old Dutch 
Reformed Church in the evening; the next Sunday morning in 
the English Presbyterian Church, and then again, in the evening, 
in the Dutch Free Church. Sometimes I was allowed to preach 
in the great cathedrals, as in the Dom Kirk at Utrecht, and in 
Peter’s Kirk, at Leyden, not having the poor only, but the 
nobility and the gentry of the land, who, of course, could 
understand English better than most of the poor, who have had 
no opportunity of learning it. I felt, while going from town to 
town, the Master helping me continually to preach. I never 
knew such elasticity of spirit, such bounding of heart in my life 
before, and I come back, not wearied and tired, though 
preaching twice every day, but fuller of strength and vigor than 
when I first set out! I give God the glory for the many souls I 
have heard of who have been converted through the reading of 
the printed sermons, and for the loving blessings of those who 
followed us to the water’s edge with many tears, saying to us — 
“Do your diligence to come again before winter,” and urging 


414 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


us once more to preach the Word in that land. There may be 
mingled with this some touch of egotism; the Lord knows 
whether it is so or not, but I am not conscious of it. I do praise 
and bless His name, that in a land where there is so much 
philosophy, He has helped me to preach His truth so simply, 
that I never uttered a word as a mere doctrinalist, but I 
preached Christ and nothing but Christ! Rejoice with me, my 
dear brothers and sisters! I must have you rejoice in it, or if you 
will not, I must rejoice alone, but my loaf of praise is too great 
for me to eat it all! 

III. And we come to a close. I have to urge THE JOYFUL 
CLAIMS which the aposde gives in the 12th verse, as a reason 
WHY THERE SHOULD BE PRAYER AND PRAISE. 

“For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, 
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, 
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the 
world, and more abundandy to you.” Ah, after all, a man’s 
comfort must come, next to the finished salvation of God, 
from the testimony of his own conscience! And to a minister, 
what a testimony it is that he has preached the gospel in 
simplicity, to which there are two senses — preached it not with 
double-mindedness — saying one thing and meaning another. 
And he has preached it, not as oarsmen row — looking one way 
and pulling another — but preached it meaning what he said, 
having a single heart, desiring God’s glory and the salvation of 
men! What a blessing to have preached it simply, that is to say, 
without hard words, without polished phrases, never studying 
elocutionary graces, never straining after oratorical 
embellishments! How accursed must be the life of a man who 
profanes the pulpit to the dignity of eloquence! How desperate 
will be his deathbed when he remembers that he made an 
exhibition of his powers of speech rather than of the solid 
things which make for the winning of souls! That conscience 


415 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


may well be easy that can speak of having dealt with God’s 
truth in simplicity. The aposde also says that he had preached 
it with sincerity, that is, he had preached it meaning it, feeling 
it — preached it so that none could accuse him of being false! 
The Greek word has something in it of sunlight, and he is the 
true minister of God who preaches what he would wish to have 
hung up in the sunlight, or who has the sunlight shining right 
through him. I am afraid we are none of us like white glass — 
most of us are colored a litde — but he is happy who seeks to 
get rid of the coloring matter as much as possible, so that the 
light of the gospel may shine right straight, clear as it comes 
from the Sun of Righteousness, through him! Paul had 
preached with simplicity and sincerity. And he adds, “Not with 
fleshly wisdom.” Oh, what stories have I heard of what fleshly 
wisdom will do! And 1 have learned a lesson during the last 
fortnight which 1 would that England would learn. There are 
three schools of theological error over yonder, and each one 
leaps over the back of its fellow. Some of them hold that all the 
facts of Scripture are only myths; others of them say that there 
are some good things in the Bible, though there are a great 
many mistakes; and others go still further, and fling the whole 
Bible away altogether as to its inspiration, though they still 
preach it, and still lean on it, saying that they do that merely for 
the edification of the vulgar — merely holding it up for the sake 
of the masses — though I ought to add merely to get their living 
as well. Sad! Sad! Sad that the Church has gone to such a length 
as that — the Old Dutch Reformed Church — the very mirror of 
Calvinism, standing fast and firm in its creeds to all the 
doctrines we love, and yet gone astray to latitudinarian and 
licentious liberty! Oh, how earnestly should we decry fleshly 
wisdom! I am afraid, dear friends, that sometimes some of you, 
when you hear a minister, you like him to put it pretty well, and 
you find fault unless he shows some degree of talent. I wonder 


416 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


507 The Power of Prayer and the 
Pleasure of Praise - II Cor. 1:11-12 


whether that is not a sin? I am half inclined to think it is. I 
sometimes think whether we ought not to look less every day 
to talent, and more and more to the matter of the gospel that 
is preached; whether if a man is blessed with elocutionary 
power we may, perhaps, be more profited by him — whether 
that is not a weakness, whether we had not better go back to 
the days of fishermen once again, and give men no sort of 
education whatever, but just send them to preach the truth of 
God simply, rather than go the length they are now going, 
giving men I know not what, of all sorts of learning that is of 
no earthly use to them, but which only helps them to pervert 
the simplicity of God. I love that word in my text — “Not with 
fleshly wisdom.” 

And now I lay my claim, as my conscience bears me 
witness — I lay my claim to this boasting of our aposde. I have 
preached God’s gospel in simplicity; I do not know how I can 
preach it more simply, nor can I more honesdy declare it. I have 
preached it sincerely — the Searcher of all hearts knows that — 
and I have not preached it with fleshly wisdom, and that for 
one excellent reason — that I have not any — and have been 
compelled to keep to the simple testimony of the Lord! But if 
I have done anything, it has been done by the grace of God. If 
any success has been achieved, it has been divine grace that has 
done it all. “And more especially to you,” for though our word 
has gone forth to many lands, and our testimony belts the globe, 
yet, “more especially to you.” You have we warned; you have 
we entreated; you have we exhorted; with you have we pleaded; 
over you have we wept; for you have we prayed; to some of 
you, we have been a spiritual parent in Christ; to many of you, 
as a nursing father; to many of you, as a teacher and an edifier 
in the gospel; and we hope to all of you, a sincere friend in Christ 
Jesus! Therefore, do I claim your prayers — -yours more than any 
other people’s; and though there will be not a few who will 


417 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


remember us in their supplications, I do implore you, inasmuch 
as it has been, “especially to you,” let me especially have your 
prayers! Some will say that it is unkind even for me to suppose 
that you do not pray. Well, I do not so suppose it out of 
unkindness, but there may be some who forget — some who 
forget to plead. Oh, do still pray for me! The whole 
congregation is not saved yet; there are some who hear us who 
are not yet converted. Plead with God for their sakes! There 
are some hard hearts unbroken; ask God to make the hammer 
strike; and while there are some still unmelted, pray God to 
make the Word like a fire! This great London needs to be 
stirred from end to end! Pray for all your ministers, that God 
may make them mighty! The Church needs still more of the 
loud voice of God to wake it from its sleep! Ask God to bless 
all His sent servants. Plead with Him with divine energy, that 
so His kingdom may come, and His will may be done on earth 
as it is in heaven! 

O that you all believed in Jesus! For until you do, you 
cannot pray nor praise! O that you all believed in Jesus! 
Remember, this is the only way of salvation. Trust Jesus, for he 
who believes on Him is not condemned, but he who believes 
not is condemned already, because he believes not on the Son 
of God. Trust Jesus and you shall be saved. May Christ accept 
you now, for His own love’s sake. Amen. 


418 



508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, May 10th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I 
said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek you Me in vain.” — Isaiah 
45:19 

We MIGHT GAIN much solace by considering what God 
has not said. What He has said is inexpressibly full of comfort 
and delight; what He has not said is scarcely less rich in 
consolation! It was one of these, “said nots, ” which preserved 
the kingdom of Israel in the days of Jeroboam, the son ofjoash. 
“The Lord said not that He would blot out the name of Israel 
from under heaven” (2 Kings 14:27). In our text we have an 
assurance that God will answer prayer, because He has “not said 
unto the seed of Israel, Seek you My face in vain.” You who 
write bitter things against yourselves, I would have you 
remember that, let your doubts and fears say what they will, if 
God has not cut you off from mercy, there is no room for 
despair — even the voice of conscience is of little weight if it is 
not seconded by the voice of God! What God has said tremble 
at! But allow not your own fears and suspicions to overwhelm 
you with despondency and sinful despair. Many timid persons 
have been vexed by the suspicion that there may be something 
in God’s decree which shuts them out from all hope — some 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


secret, written in the great roll of destiny, which renders it 
certain, that if they did pray and seek the Lord — He would not 
be found of them. Our text is a complete refutation to that 
troublesome fear! “I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place 
of the earth: I have not said,” even in the secret of My 
unsearchable decree, “Seek you My face in vain.” The decrees 
are “Spoken in secret” — the decrees are hidden as, “in a dark 
place of the earth,” but it is absolutely certain that the Lord has 
said nothing in any of them, or anywhere else, which can be 
interpreted to mean, “Seek you My face in vain.” Oh, no, 
brothers and sisters, that truth which God has so clearly 
revealed, that He will hear the prayer of those who call upon 
Him, cannot be contravened by anything which God may have 
spoken elsewhere! He has so firmly, so truthfully, so righteously 
spoken that there can be no equivocation. He does not, like the 
Sibyls, speak mysteriously with a double tongue; nor does He, 
like the Delphic oracle, reveal His mind in unintelligible words! 
No, our God speaks plainly and positively, “Ask and you shall 
receive.” O, that all of you would accept this sure truth of 
God — that prayer must and shall be heard, and that never, even 
in the secrets of eternity; never, even in the council chamber of 
the covenant — has the Lord said unto any living soul, “Seek 
you My face in vain.” 

The proposition I come to deal with this morning is this — 
that those who seek God, through Jesus Christ, in God’s own 
appointed way, cannot, by any possibility, seek Him in vain; 
that earnest, penitent, prayerful hearts, though they may be 
delayed for a time, can never be sent away with a final denial. 
“He who calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved; he 
who seeks, finds; he who asks, receives; unto him who knocks it 
shall be opened.” I shall prove this, first, by the negative, as our 
text has it — “I have not said, Seek you Me in vain.” and then, 
briefly, by the positive. Oh, may God give us His Holy Spirit, 


420 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


that while I am preaching, comfort may be given to many 
troubled hearts! 

I. First, then, BY THE NEGATIVE. It is not possible that a 
man should sincerely, in God’s own appointed way, seek for 
mercy and eternal life, and not find it. It is not possible that a 
man should earnestly, from his heart, pray unto God, and yet a 
gracious answer be finally refused. And that for several reasons. 

1. We will suppose the case — suppose that sincere prayer 
could be fruidess — then the question arises Why, then, are men 
exhorted to pray at all ? If prayer is not heard, if supplication may 
possibly end in a failure, why does God so constantly, so 
earnestly, so strenuously compel and command men to call 
upon Him? Would it not be a heartless cruelty on my part, if I 
saw a poor farmer who could not pay his way, if I exhorted him 
to plow upon a rock, and scatter the little seed he had upon soil 
where I knew it could never grow? Or if a king imposed upon 
his poor subject a law that he should plow the seashore, and till 
it, and exercise all the arts of farming upon it — when he was 
perfectly aware that not a single grain could ever bless the 
farmer’s toil? What would you think of any man who should 
advise a thirsty wretch to pump an empty well? Suppose some 
sovereign should enjoin it upon Iris subject, seeing he is ready 
to die of thirst, to let the bucket down where there is no water, 
and to continue to do it without ceasing — to be always letting 
down the bucket and always winding it up — with the absolute 
certainty that no good can come of it? And do you think that 
God, who commands men to pray and not to faint, would bid 
them do it, if no harvest could be reaped from it? Does He tell 
them to continue in prayer, to, “pray without ceasing” — to 
watch unto prayer, to arise in the night watches and cry unto 
Him — and yet, after all, has He settled it that He will be deaf 
to their entreaties, and despise their cries? Would it not be a 
piece of heartless tyranny if the Queen should wait upon a man 


421 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


in his condemned cell and encourage him to petition her favor, 
no, command him to do it, saying to him, “If I do not send you 
at once an answer, send another petition, and another; send to 
me seven times, yes, continue to do it, and never cease so long 
as you live; be persistent and you will prevail.” And what if the 
Queen should tell the man the story of the persistent widow, 
should describe to him the case of the man, who, by 
perseverance, obtained the three loaves for his weary friend? 
And then say to him, “Even so, if you ask you shall receive,” 
and yet all the while should intend never to pardon the man, 
but had determined in her heart that his death warrant should 
be signed and sealed, and that on the execution morning he 
should be launched into eternity? I ask you, brothers and sisters, 
whether this is consistent with royal bounty, whether this 
would be tit conduct for a gracious monarch? And can you for 
a moment suppose that God would bid you, as He does each 
one of you, to seek His face — would He bid you come to Him 
through Jesus Christ — and yet, secretly in His heart, intend 
never to be gracious at the voice of your cry? 

2. Further, for a second argument — if prayer could be 
offered continuously, and God could be sought earnestly — but 
no mercy found, then he who prays would be worse off than he who 
does not pray! And supplication would be an ingenious invention 
for increasing the ills of mankind, for a man who does not pray 
has fewer woes than a man who does pray, if God is not the 
answerer of prayer! The man who prays is made to hunger; shall 
he hunger, and not eat! Were it not, then, better never to hunger? 
How, then, can it be said, “Blessed are they who hunger and 
thirst after righteousness”? The man who prays, thirsts; as the 
hart pants after the water brooks, so he pants after his God; 
but if God will never give him the living water to drink, is not 
a thirsty soul much more wretched than one who never learned 
to thirst at all? He who has been taught to pray has great desires 


422 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


and needs; his heart is an aching void which the world can 
never fill; but he who never prays has no longings after God; 
he who never makes supplication feels no ungratified desires 
after eternal things; if, then, a man may have these vehement 
longings, and yet God will never grant them, then assuredly the 
man who prays is in a worse position than he who prays not! 
How can this be? Has God so constituted the world that virtue 
shall entail misery, and that vice shall engender happiness? Can 
it be, while God is the moral ruler of the universe, that He will 
reward the man who forgets Him, and will pour misery into the 
soul of the man who earnestly seeks His face? It is blasphemy 
to suppose it! The beasts in the field do not lament that they 
are not immortal, for they never had aspirations after 
immortality; a gracious God has limited their ambition to their 
attainments — but if the ox could groan after heaven, if the 
sheep could pray for a resurrection — it were a wretched 
creature, indeed, to be denied these things! So the ungodly man, 
like the beast of the field, has no longing after God’s favor; he 
has no yearnings after eternal life, no desire to be conformed 
to the image of Christ — and his ambitions are so far limited to 
what he gains — but shall it be that a soul shall pant to be like 
God, shall thirst to be reconciled to his Maker, shall hunger 
even to faintness, that he may find “peace with God through 
Jesus Christ,” and yet shall such desires as these be only given 
to make him wretched? I cannot suppose such a thing! The 
absurdity of imagining that the man who does pray, would be by 
God put in a worse position than the man who does not, seems 
to me to be at once convincing that the earnest, faithful prayer 
shall certainly, through the merit of Christ, prevail with God! 

3. But I go a step further. If God does not hear prayer, 
since it is clear that in that case the praying man would be more 
wretched than the careless sinner, then it would follow that God 
would be the author of unnecessary misery. Now we know that this is 


423 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


inconsistent with the character of our God! We look around 
the world, and we see punishment for sin, but no punishment 
for good desires. We discover that the fall has brought us loss 
and ruin; and we know that there is a dreadful hell where the 
Justice of God shall be executed to the uttemiost; but I see no 
chamber of arbitrary torture, where God, the Almighty, takes 
pleasure in the undeserved pangs and unmerited groans of His 
own creatures! I do not see a single invention made by God to 
give pain unnecessarily; I find not a joint of my body, no, not a 
sinew or a muscle, that is intended to cause me anguish; they 
may all be racked with aches and pains, since I am a fallen, 
sinful man, but the body was not organized with a view to pain, 
but for pleasure. And do you think that God would ingeniously 
put up a mercy seat to increase human misery by a mockery of 
divine grace, a mimicry of bounty? Do you dream that He 
would send out commands to men, obedience to which would 
entail upon them greater sorrow than disobedience could bring? 
Do you think that He would woo them with outstretched 
hands to be more wretched than they were before? Would He 
be so false and heardess as to bid them come, knowing that 
their coming would only make them ten-fold more unhappy 
than they were already, because He did not intend to accept 
them when they did come? He who can think thus of my God 
does not know Him! He who could dream that it is possible for 
Him to invite and incite in you the prayer He has promised to 
hear, and yet, after all, would reject it, must surely be comparing 
Jehovah to Juggernaut; he knows not what Jehovah is. Know 
you not that prayer, itself, is the work of God? Prayer is not the 
act of the creature, but the work of the Creator 1 Prayer is God in 
man coming back to God; prayer is the fruit of divine Life, and 
do you believe that God would Himself write upon the human 
heart prayers which He did not intend to hear? Do you think 
the Holy Spirit would dictate petitions which God, the Eternal 


424 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


Father, had determined to reject? No, no, no! We must, from 
this negative way of reasoning, be persuaded that our God will 
hear and answer prayer! 

4 . Should there still be some desponding ones who think 
that God would invite them to pray, and yet reject them; 1 
would put it on another ground. Would men do so? Would even 
you , full of sin though you are so treat your own fellow creature? 
I know that we should hold up to scorn any rich man who 
should say to beggars in the streets, “I live in such-and-such a 
place; it is six miles off; if you will all come tomorrow morning 
at eight o’clock, and knock at my door, repeating my son’s 
name, I will supply your needs.” And what if, when he had 
collected the poor beggars, he should let them stand and knock 
according to his bidding till they were weary and never grant 
them an answer? If he should let them know that there was 
bread within the house, but not a morsel for them, we would say, 
“Well, if men must make themselves merry with practical jokes, 
let them not be carried out upon the poor and needy; let them 
find some other victims, and let not the helpless beggars of the 
streets be the victims of such foolish mirth!” And shall it be 
possible for my God to be less generous than men? Do we not 
continually find, if there is a hospital opened to relieve the sick, 
or to heal the maimed, that when many injured persons make 
an application, they are received? I know not that there are any 
peculiar hearts of compassion in those who have the oversight 
of the hospital, but I do know this — there is so much of the 
milk of human kindness in their bosoms, that the moment a 
poor wretch is brought to the door almost dead — if it were a 
slighter case they might take some exception — the very 
desperateness of the case throws open the hospital door, and 
at once the patient is admitted! Man is in such a case, near to 
die, no, condemned and utterly ruined by his sin — and I do not 
believe that my God will shut His door in the face of misery; 


425 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


rather, I am persuaded that the very desperateness of the case 
will make an appeal to His heart, and He will fulfill His promise! 
It is a low ground to put it on, I will admit, for God is infinitely 
more loving than man — “As the heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are His ways higher than our ways, and His thoughts 
than our thoughts.” And if a man would not reject the 
supplication which he had himself invited — if a man’s heart 
would be moved to pity by the cry of misery — much more the 
heart of the all-bounteous God, whose very name is love, and 
whose nature it is to give liberally without upbraiding! I am 
persuaded, therefore, that He must, and will hear prayer. 

5 . Yet further — have you forgotten that this is God’s 
memorial, by which He is distinguished from the false gods? “They have 
ears, but they hear not;” hands have they, but they help not 
their worshippers; and feet have they, but they come not to the 
rescue of their followers. But our God made the heavens, and 
this is His memorial, “The God who hears prayer.” Has not 
David put it — “O, You who hears prayer, unto You shall all 
flesh come”? One of the standing proofs of the Deity of 
Jehovah is that He does, to this day, answer the supplications 
of His people. But suppose that any one among you could seek 
His face day after day, week after week, and month after month, 
and yet He should refuse you — where would His memorial be? 
O, if yonder poor sinner, with tears and plaintive cries were 
really to besiege the mercy seat in the name of Jesus — and God, 
the Almighty Father, should refuse him and drive him away — 
I say, where is the boasted name of God? I grant you, the 
answer may tarry, but only that it may be the more sweet when 
it comes! I know the ships of heaven may be long upon the 
voyage, but only that they may bring a richer cargo to you; but 
come they must! “If the vision tarries, wait for it; it shall come; 
it shall not tarry.” For otherwise, I say, where is the glory of 
God? How is He distinguished above Baal? How is He exalted 


426 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


above the gods of the heathen? Did not Elijah put it to the test? 
The priests of Baal cried — they cut themselves with knives; 
from morning to evening their shrieks went up to heaven, and 
the sarcastic prophet said, “Cry aloud, for he is a god! Perhaps 
he is on a journey, or he sleeps, and must be awakened.” All 
day long the lancers drew forth priesdy blood; but no voice 
came from Baal! Clear the stage, and let God’s servant come! 
He lifts his hands to heaven and cries — “Lord God of 
Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that You 
are God in Israel, and that I am Your servant, and that I have 
done all these things at Your word. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, 
that this people may know that You are the Lord God, and that 
You have turned their heart back again.” Down falls the tire of 
the Lord, consuming not only the bullock, but the stones of the 
altar, and the water in the trench, for our God does hear prayer! 
Now do you see, soul, that your despair, when you say He will 
not hear you, really takes away from God one of His grandest 
tides? You do Him a serious dishonor in supposing that He will 
refuse to hear you! You cast mud upon the shield of Deity, and 
think unworthily of the Most High when you imagine for an 
instant that He would teach you to pray, and come to Him 
through the blood of Christ — and yet refuse to hear the voice 
of your groaning! 

6. Surely these arguments might well suffice; but if unbelief 
has as many lives as a cat, as John Bunyan says, I will deal it the 
full nine blows and one over, to make assurance doubly sure! 

If God does not hear prayer — suppose such to be the case 
for a moment — then I need to know — what are the meanings 
of His promises? I ask, with all reverence, how He shall make 
His veracity to be proved, if He does not answer His people? 
Let me give you one or two of His own promises — “Call upon 
Me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver you, and you shall 
glorify Me.” “He shall call upon Me and I will answer him.” 


427 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


What does this mean, by the mouth of Isaiah — “He will be very 
gracious unto you at the voice of your cry; when He shall hear 
it, He mil answer you.” That is neither more nor less than a lie, 
if God does not hear prayer! What about this splendid 
passage — “And it shall come to pass, that before they call I will 
answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear”? And this 
by Zechariah — “They shall call on My name, and I will hear 
them; I will say, It is My people and they shall say, The Lord is 
my God”? Can there be words plainer than these, from the lips 
of the Savior — “Ask and it shall be given you; seek and you shall 
find; knock and it shall be opened to you; for everyone who asks 
receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it shall 
be opened”? Or these, “If you, then, being evil, know how to 
give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 
Father which is in heaven give good things to them who ask 
him?” And what is the meaning of this great promise — “And 
all things, whatever you shall ask in prayer, believing, you shall 
receive”? Are not these so many arrows shot at the very heart 
of unbelief? I begin at that ancient writing, the Book of Job. 
“He shall pray unto God, and He will be favorable unto him, 
and he shall see His face with joy.” The Psalms are crowded 
with such promises, and even the prophet Joel, who is full of 
thunder and lightning — even he says, “Whoever shall call upon 
the name of the Lord shall be delivered” — which the apostle Paul, 
in the episde to the Romans, varies a little, and puts it — “For 
whoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. ” 
Even James, who is all practical and very little comforting, 
cannot get through the episde without saying, “Draw near to 
God, and He will draw near to you.” Why, even under the old 
law, Deuteronomy had a promise like this — “If you shall seek 
the Lord your God, you shall find Him, if you seek Him with 
all your heart, and with all your soul.” Linder the rule of the 
Kings, we find it written, “If you seek Him, He will be found 


428 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


of you.” So might I go on quoting promises, until you were 
weary with hearing my voice! But, my dear friends, I ask you, if 
God does not hear prayer, after saying what I have repeated to 
you, where is His truthfulness? He must be true, if every man is 
a liar — God’s own Word must stand — though heaven and earth 
should pass away! Like flowers, you nations, you shall die; like 
a dream, you kingdoms, you shall melt; like a shadow, O you 
mountains, you shall dissolve; like a wreck, O earth, you shall 
be broken into pieces; like a worn out gesture, O you heavens, 
you shall be rolled up; but every word of God is sure and 
steadfast, “Yes, and amen in Christ Jesus.” “The voice said, Cry; 
and I said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass and all the 
goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field; the grass withers, 
and the flower thereof fades away; but the word of the Lord 
endures forever.” How can we find arguments stronger than 
this? 

7. Another stroke. If God has virtually said to us, “Pray, 
but I will never hear you; seek My face in vain,” then I ask, what 
is the meaning of all the provisions which He has already made 
for hearing prayer? I see a way to God; it is paved with stones 
inlaid in the fair crimson of the Savior’s blood. I see a door; it 
is the wounded side ofjesus. Why was that blood shed, if God 
hears not prayer? Why that side torn if, after all, the veil still 
shuts out from access to the mercy seat? Moreover, in heaven 
I see a Mediator between God and man; but why a Mediator, if 
God will not be at peace with man nor hear his prayer? 
Moreover, 1 see an Intercessor; I see the Son of God stretch 
His wounded hands, and point to His side, wearing the jeweled 
breastplate on His forefront; but why the breastplate, and why 
the high priest, if prayer is a futile thing, and God has said, 
“Seek you My face in vain”? Moreover, I see all the marvelous 
transactions of the covenant from first to last, and I ask, Why 
all this, if it is not meant for sinners who seek His face? 


429 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Moreover, I see the blessed Spirit; He, Himself, condescends 
to dwell in us, and make, “intercession for us with groaning 
which cannot be uttered.” And I ask of you, O melancholy and 
despair, why was this Spirit sent? Why this blood shed? Why 
this Savior ordained and exalted on high, “to give repentance 
and remission of sins,” if remission is never to be given, 
repentance never to be accepted, and intercession never to be 
heard? By every wound of Jesus I beg you, sinner, to believe 
that God will hear you! By every drop of that precious blood, 
by every cry of those dying lips, by every tear of those languid 
eyes, by every smart of that bruised back, by every jewel of that 
crown of glory, by every precious stone upon that priestly 
breastplate, by every honor which God the Father has 
bestowed upon our Lord Jesus — yes, by all the power of the 
blessed Spirit, by all the energy with which He raised Christ 
from the dead, by all the “power” with which He is 
acknowledged to be God — I do beg you to never doubt but 
that God will in due time be gracious to the voice of your cry! 

8. Still to pursue this dying foe, whom I think we might 
have slain outright by this time, I use the argument which the 
aposde uses upon the resurrection. If God does not hear prayer, 
what gospel have I to preach ? As the aposde said, concerning the 
resurrection, “Then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also 
vain; you are yet in your sins.” If God does not hear prayer, I 
say, our preaching is in vain. We are sent to tell men that, 
“Though their sins are as scarlet, they shall be as wool; though 
they are red like crimson, they shall be whiter than snow” — if 
they will turn from their evil ways, and seek the Lord! But if they 
can turn, and yet not be accepted, I, for my part, renounce my 
commission, for I have not a gospel that is worth the preaching; 
and surely you would say, “It is not a gospel worth our 
acceptance.” If prayer, offered in Jesus’ name, is not accepted, 
taking Paul’s line of argument, then Christ is not accepted! If 


430 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


the sinner’s plea, “for Jesus’ sake,” is not heard, then is Christ 
not heard? And if Christ is not heard and accepted, then our 
preaching is in vain, and your faith is in vain. Yes, and we are 
found false witnesses for God, because we have testified of 
God that He hears the intercession of Jesus, whom He hears 
not if He hear not those who plead His name! 

9. Further, my brothers and sisters — and here we strike the 
ninth blow — if this could be removed, where is the believer’s hope? 
Hang the heavens in sackcloth, let the sun be turned to 
darkness, let the moon become a clot of blood if the mercy seat 
can be proved to be a mockery! Oh, if God would let His 
people cry, and not be gracious, better for us that we had never 
been born! The happiest saint, in his best moment, would be as 
wretched as the damned in hell, if he were persuaded that God 
did not, and could not, hear prayer. What would we have to 
comfort us in our hours of trouble; what to strengthen us in 
our times of labor; what refuge from the storm; what cover 
from the heat? Where, where, my brothers and sisters, could 
we fly, if the throne of grace were a fiction? Heaven, surely, is 
shut, when the gate of prayer is shut; surely every blessing will 
pass away at once, when prayer ceases to avail. The ladder 
which Jacob saw would be drawn up into heaven, and from 
now on there would be no communion between God and man! 
Glory be to God, such a thing cannot be! Sinner, do you think 
that God would never hurt His saints, but that He would reject 
you? But see, if He refuses to hear you, the rule is broken, and 
the rule, being once broken — there being one exception — the 
whole stability of the saints’ comfort is removed at a blow! 

10. I close this negative view of the subject by asking, in 
the 10th place: What would they say in hell if a soul could really 
seek the Lord, and be refused? Oh, the unholy merriment of 
devils! “Here’s a soul,” says one, “that perished, though it 
prayed! Here’s a hand that touched the hem of Jesus’ garment, 


43i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


but that garment did not heal! Here are lips scorched with 
burning fire which once were warm with living prayer.” I think 
they would drag such a one in triumph through the streets of 
Tophet; they would crowd the thoroughfares to look on, and 
oh, what dread acclaim of scorn! What thundering laughter 
would go up! “Aha! Aha! Aha,” they would say, “Where is the 
boasted Savior now? He lied to men’s souls! He promised, but 
He did not give; He taught them to pray — and made them 
begin their hell on earth — and then threw them into hell 
forever!” Could it be? Oh, could it be? What would praying 
men do in hell? I remember that story of Mrs. Ryland, a good 
Christian woman, who, when she lay dying, was very, very sad, 
and her husband said to her, “You are dying, my dear?” ‘Yes,” 
she said. “And where are you going?” he asked. She replied, 
“Ah, John, I’m going to hell.” “And what will you do there?” 
he asked her. Well, that had not struck her, what she would do 
there. “Do you think,” he asked, “you will leave off praying, 
Betsy?” “No, John,” she said, “even if I were in hell, I would 
pray.” “Oh, but,” he said, “they’d say, ‘Here’s praying Betsy 
Ryland here — turn her out — this isn’t a fit place for her.’” And 
so I think if one of you could go there with a prayer upon your 
lips, pleading and crying, they would either rejoice over you, as 
a proof that God was not true, or else they would say, “Turn 
her out! We cannot bear prayers in hell; we could not bear to 
hear the voice of earnest supplication among the shrieks and 
curses of lost spirits.” 

I have been arguing against a thing which you know 
theoretically is not possible; but yet there are some who, when 
they are under conviction of sin, still cleave to this dark 
delusion — that God will not hear them! Therefore, I have tried 
by blow after blow, if possible, to smite this fear dead. When 
Jael did but take one nail and hammer, she was able to smite 
Sisera through his brain with it; since I have used 1 0 nails, and 


432 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


have given the 10 as lusty strokes with the hammer as I could 
give them, O may God make them strong enough to strike the 
Sisera of unbelief dead at your feet! 

II. Now, for a very little time, THE POSITIVE VIEW OF 
THE QUESTION. That the Lord does hear prayer, we think, 
may be positively substantiated by the following considerations. 

For the Lord to hear prayer is consistent with His nature. 
Whatever is consistent with God’s nature, in the view of a 
sound judgment, we believe is true. Now, we cannot perceive 
any attribute of God which would stand in the way of His 
hearing prayer. It might be supposed that His Justice would; 
but that has been so satisfied by the atonement of Christ, that 
it rather pleads the other way! Since Christ has “put away sin,” 
since He has purchased the blessing, it seems but just that God 
should accept those for whom Jesus died, and give the blessing 
which Christ has bought. All the attributes of God say to a 
sinner, “Come, come! Come to the throne of grace, and you 
shall have what you need.” Power puts out his strong arm and 
cries, “I will help you! Fear not.” Hove smiles through her bright 
eyes, and cries, “I have loved you with an everlasting love, 
therefore with the hands of kindness have I drawn you.” Truth 
speaks in her clear, plain language, saying, “He who seeks, finds; 
to him who knocks it shall be opened.” Immutability says, “I am 
God, I change not, therefore you are not consumed.” Every 
single attribute of the divine character — you can think of these 
as well as I can — pleads for the man who prays, and I do not 
know — I never dreamed of a single attribute of Deity which 
could enter an objection! Therefore, I think if the thing really 
will glorify God, and not dishonor Him, He will certainly do it. 

“Oh, but,” you say, “I am such a great sinner.” That gives 
me another argument. Would it not greatly extol the love and the grace 
of God for Him to give His grace to those who least deserve it? 
To give to a man what he deserves is no charity; to bestow a 


433 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


favor upon those who have a little offended, is no very great act 
of beneficence; but to choose out the biggest rebel in His 
dominions, and to say to that rebel, “I forgive you;” yes, to take 
that rebel, and to adopt him into His family, adorn him with 
jewels, and set a crown of gold upon his head — is this the 
manner of men, O Lord God? No, it is in such cases that we 
see the broad distinction between the leniency of human 
sovereigns, and the mighty sovereign grace which is in the King 
of kings! The worse you make your case out to be, the better is 
my argument; the worse the disease, the more credit to the 
physician who heals; the worse the sin, the more glory to the 
astounding mercy which puts it away; the greater the rebel, the 
more triumphant that divine grace which makes that rebel into 
a child of God! I say that the greatness of your sin may act as a 
foil to set forth the brightness of God’s love! And herein, 
because the hearing of your unworthy prayers and the listening 
to the cry that comes out of your polluted lips — because this 
would honor Him — I am persuaded He will do it! 

Further, though these two reasons would suffice, let me 
notice that it is harmonious with all His past actions. If you need a 
history of God’s dealings with men, turn to the 107th Psalm. 
There you find travelers lost, like you, in a desert. They wander 
in a wilderness in a solitary way; they find no city to dwell in; 
the water is spent in the bottle; the bread is exhausted from the 
camels’ backs; they find no well. They perceive no way — they 
follow this path, then that. At last, hungry and thirsty, their 
souls fainted within them, up from the desert’s parched sand 
there arose to the burning sky the voice of wailing, “O God, 
spare us, and let us live.” How is it written? “He delivered them 
out of their distresses; and He led them forth by the right way, 
that they might go to a city of habitation,” for it says, “He 
satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with 
goodness.” That is not told us as the exception, but as the rule! 


434 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


This is God’s way of dealing with men; when they are lost and 
turn to Him, He hears them! “Ah,” you say, “I am lost, but I 
am not like those travelers; I am lost by reason of my own sin.” 
The next case in this Psalm will suit you. Here we find rebels 
brought into prison; they have been rebelling against the Word 
of God, and they have condemned the counsel of the Most 
High. Therefore He brought them down by labor; they fell 
down, and there was none to help. Then they cried unto God 
in their trouble. Did He hear them? These were “rebels,” fitly 
and properly put in prison, jusdy and rightly fettered with iron. 
Do you wear the fetters of conscience and the chains of terror? 
Are you in the prison of the law? So long as you are not in the 
final prison of hell, if you call upon God in your trouble, you 
will find it with you as it was with them. “He brought them out 
of darkness and the shadow of death, and broke their bands in 
sunder.” “Oh, but,” says another, “I have got into trouble 
through my sin, but I do not know how to pray as I should, 1 
am such a stupid blockhead.” Then the next case is yours. 
“Fools because of their transgression, and because of their 
iniquities, are afflicted.” One of these “fools” had brought on 
disease by Inis sin, and he was so sorely sick that he lost all 
appetite; he abhorred all manner of meat, and drew near to the 
gates of death. This fool, what sort of prayer did he pray? Why, 
a fool’s prayer, certainly! But even a fool’s prayer God will hear, 
as it is written, “He sent His word and healed them, and 
delivered them from their destructions.” So, if you are ever so 
great a fool, and the suffering you now feel has been brought 
on you through your own folly, yet He will hear you! “Ah, but,” 
you say, “I have been such a bragging fellow, such a boaster; 
and I have done such terrible deeds in my day.” What is the 
next case? The case of the sailor! You know, we generally 
reckon that seafaring men do not care for much; they are 
daredevils, and rap out an oath without compunction; and in 


435 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the olden times, I dare say, they were worse than they are now, 
so that when they did get ashore, they were a very pattern of 
everything mischievous and bad! But here we have a crew of 
sailors in a storm. They had, no doubt, been cursing and 
swearing in the calm, but here comes a storm! They go up to 
heaven, and then they go down again into the depths — “They 
reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man,” for they 
cannot walk across the deck. The ship reels, “They are at their 
wits end,” and they think, “Surely she will go to the bottom.” 
Then they cry unto God! There was no chaplain on board; who 
prayed? Why, the boatswain, and the captain, and the crew — 
and I dare say they did not know how to put the words together; 
they were more used to swearing than to praying — but they 
went down on their knees on deck — clinging to mast and 
bulwark and tiller, and they cried, “O God! O God! Save us! 
The ocean swallows us up! God of the tempest deliver us!” And 
did He hear the sailor’s prayer? Did He hear the cries, the 
frantic cries, of sinking men? Read here, “He makes the storm 
calm, so that the waves thereof are still; then are they glad 
because they are quiet; so He brings them unto their desired 
haven.” Well now, you who have been accustomed to cursing 
and swearing, and say, “What is the use of my praying?” here is 
a case which just suits you! And this is the rule, I say again, not 
the exception; and I argue, therefore, from the past acts and 
ways of God, that He does hear prayer! 

Besides, here is another argument for you. What does He 
mean by His promises? As I said negatively, if He did not hear, 
where are His promises? So I say positively this time, because of 
His promises, He must hear! God is free, but His promises bind 
Him; God may do as He wills, but He always wills to do what 
He has said He will do! We have no claim upon God, but God 
makes a claim for us! When He gives a promise, we may 
confidendy plead it! I venture to say that promises made in 


436 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


508 Comfort to Seekers from What 
the Lord Has Not Said - Isa. 45:19 


Scripture are God’s engagements, and that as no honorable man 
ever runs back from his engagements, so a God of honor and 
a God of truth cannot, from the necessity of His nature allow 
one of His words to fall to the ground! In this little book, 
Clarke’s Promises, which one likes to have always near, you find 
two or three chapters containing collected promises of the 
Lord — that He will answer secret prayer, and listen to the voice 
of penitents. But I shall not occupy our time with promises 
which you can find in your Bibles at home! Only “Let God be 
true and every man a liar.” If God promises, He must and will 
perform, or else He would not be true! 

While we dare to say that God’s answering prayer is 
certified by abundance of facts in our own experience, we 
observe that the best proof is to try for yourself . It is said that 
there is no learning to ride except on a horse’s back; and I 
believe there is no learning any truth of God except by 
experiencing it. If you want to know the depravity of the 
human heart, you must find it out when you look at your daily 
imperfections; and if you would know that God hears prayer, 
you must test the fact, for you will never learn it through my 
saying, “He heard me ” — you will only know it through His 
having heard you! And I would, therefore, exhort you — all of 
you who are now within reach of this voice of mine — since it 
is not a perhaps, a chance, a maybe, a haphazard — but since it 
is a dead- — I must not use that word — since it is a living certainty, 
that, “He who asks receives, and he who seeks finds,” go to 
your houses, fall upon your knees and pray to God! Pray to 
Him even now in your pews, to save your souls. Ambition 
tempts you to disappointment; riches charm you to 
speculations which will lead to failure; your own passions drive 
you to pleasures which end in pain; the best the world can 
promise you is a perhaps. But my Master presents to you “the 
sure mercies of David” — certainties — infallible certainties. Will 


437 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you not have them? O may the Spirit of God lead you to accept 
them. In your pew you may pray! In that aisle the silent cry may 
go up to heaven! In your little narrow chamber, or in the saw 
pit, or in the garden, or the field, or in the street, or in the prison 
cell — -wherever you have a heart to pray, God has an ear to hear! 
No words are needed, except such as spring spontaneously to 
the lips! Tell Him you are a wretch undone without His 
sovereign grace; tell Him you have no hope in yourself; tell Him 
you have no merits; tell Him you cannot save yourself! Say, 
“Lord, save, or I perish!” It was Peter’s sinking prayer; but it 
preserved him from drowning! Say, “God be merciful to me, a 
sinner!” It was the publican’s prayer in the temple — it justified 
him! Bring a suffering Savior before a gracious God — point to 
the wounds of Jesus, and say, “O God, though my heart is hard 
as a millstone, Christ’s heart was broken; though my conscience 
is not tender, and is callous, yet the flesh of Christ was tender 
and it smarted sorely; though I can give no atonement, Christ 
gave it — though I bring no merits, yet I plead the merits of 
Jesus!” 

And let me say to you, pray as if you meant it, and continue 
as Elijah did, till you get the blessing! I would to God that some 
of you would never rise from your knees till God has heard you! 
Plead with Him as a man pleads for his life! Clutch the horns 
of the altar as the drowning man clutches the life buoy to which 
he clings. Lay hold on God, as Jacob grasped the angel — and 
do not let Him go until He blesses you, for “Thus says the Lord, 
I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth; I said 
NOT unto the seed of Jacob, seek you My face in vain”! 


438 



509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, May 17th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.” — 
Matthew 6:13 

CERTAIN Psalms are entitled “Songs of Degrees.” 
Certainly the prayer before us might be called a Prayer of 
Degrees. It begins where all true prayer must commence, with 
the spirit of adoption, “Our Father.” There is no acceptable 
prayer until we can say with the prodigal — “I will arise and go 
unto my Father.” This child-like spirit soon perceives the 
grandeur of the Father “in heaven,” and ascends to devout 
adoration, “Hallowed be Your name.” The child who lisps, 
“Abba Father,” grows into the cherub, crying, “Holy, holy, 
holy.” Then, there is but a step from rapturous worship to the 
glowing missionary spirit, which is a sure outgrowth of filial 
love and reverent adoration — “Your kingdom come, Your will 
be done on earth as it is in heaven.” We do not commence our 
spiritual career with this mission spirit; we begin with “Our 
Father,” we go on to feel His glory, and then, the next natural 
desire is that others may behold His greatness, too, till we are 
ready to cry with the Psalmist, “Let the whole earth be filled 
with His glory.” In the process of education, which this prayer 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


so well describes, we find the man very early conscious of his 
dependence upon God, for as a dependent creature he cries, 
“Give us this day our daily bread.” Being further illuminated by 
the Spirit, he discovers that he is not only dependent, but sinful, 
therefore, he entreats for mercy — “Forgive us our debts as we 
forgive our debtors,” and being pardoned, having the 
righteousness of Christ imputed, and knowing his acceptance 
with God, he humbly supplicates for holy perseverance, “Lead 
us not into temptation.” The man who is really forgiven is 
anxious not to offend again; the possession of justification 
leads to an anxious desire for sanctification. “Forgive us our 
debts,” that is justification; “Lead us not into temptation, but 
deliver us from evil,” that is sanctification in its negative and 
positive forms. Now, it would not be the course of nature to 
begin a life of prayer with the supplication of this morning. This 
is a petition for men already pardoned, for those who know 
their adoption, for those who love the Lord, and desire to see 
His kingdom come. Taught of the Spirit to know their pardon, 
adoption, and union to Jesus, they can cry, and they, alone — 
“Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.” 

I shall this morning, first of all, anticipate an objection. Then, 
I shall venture upon an exposition; and conclude with an exhortation. 

I. First, let us ANTICIPATE AN OBJECTION. 

A great many persons have been troubled by that passage 
in James, where it is expressly said, “Let no man say, when he 
is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted 
with evil, neither tempts He any man.” It has been found very 
difficult to reconcile that express declaration of the apostle with 
this prayer of our Savior; and some good, but very ignorant 
men, have gone the length of altering our Lord’s words! I have 
heard of one who’s custom was to always say, “Leave us not in 
temptation” — a most unwarrantable and unjustifiable 
alteration of Holy Scripture. Because sometimes a learned 


440 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


minister ventures, in all honesty and discretion, to give a more 
correct translation of the original — can this justify a foolish 
unlettered man in altering the original, itself, and perverting the 
sense of a passage? There is an end to Scripture altogether, if 
license is given to alter its teachings according to our will! To 
teach perfect wisdom how to speak is too great a task to be 
ventured upon by any but the presumptuous and foolish. When 
our version is incorrect, then it is a duty to present the proper 
rendering, if one is able to find it out; but to give translations 
out of our whimsical heads, without having been taught in the 
original tongue is impertinence, indeed! There can be no better 
translation of the Greek than that which we have before us. 
The Greek does not say, “Leave us not in temptation,” nor 
anything like it; it says, as nearly as English language can convey 
the meaning of the original, “Lead us not into temptation,” and 
no sort of pinching, twisting, or wresting can make this prayer 
convey any other sense than that which our version conveys in 
so many words! Let us always be afraid of attempting 
improvements on God’s perfect Word, and when our theories 
will not stand with divinely revealed truth, let us alter our 
theories, but let us never attempt for one single moment to put 
one word of God out of its place! 

Neither can we get out of the difficulty by supposing that 
the word “temptation” does not mean “temptation,” but must 
be restricted to the sense of “trial.” Now, we grant at once that 
the use of the word “temptation” in our translation of Scripture 
is somewhat liable to mislead. The word temptation has two 
meanings — to try, and to entice. When we read that God 
tempted Abraham, we are by no means to understand that He 
enticed Abraham to anything that was evil; the meaning of the 
word in that place, doubtless, is simply and only that God tried 
him; but permit me to say that this interpretation will not stand 
with this particular text now before us. The word here used for 


441 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“temptation,” is not the word constandy written when trial is 
meant. It is the very word which one would employ if temptation 
to sin were intended, and I cannot believe that any other 
translation can meet the case. Doddridge’s paraphrase is a 
happy one — “Do not bring us into circumstances of pressing 
temptation lest our virtue should be vanquished, and our souls 
endangered by them; but if we must be thus tried, do You 
graciously rescue us from the power of the evil one.” I grant 
you that the word includes trial, as all temptation does, for all 
temptation, even if it is temptation from Satan, is in fact a trial 
from God. Still, there is more than trial in the text, and you 
must look at it just as it stands. As Alford, says, “The leading 
into temptation must be understood in its plain literal sense.” 
Take the text just as you find it. It means literally and truly, 
without any variance, “Lead us not into temptation, but deliver 
us from evil.” 

“Well,” asks one, “if God does not tempt men, how can it 
be proper to pray, ‘Lead us not into temptation’”? Dear 
brothers and sisters do but notice the text does not say, “Tempt 
us not.” If it did, then there would be a difficulty! It does not 
say, “Lord, tempt us not,” but it says, “Lead us not into 
temptation.” I think I shall very rapidly be able to show you 
that there is a vast difference between leading into temptation, 
and actually tempting! God tempts no man. For God to tempt, 
in the sense of enticing to sin, would be inconsistent with His 
nature, and altogether contrary to His known character! But for 
God to lead us into those conflicts with evil which we call 
temptations is not only possible, but usual. Full often the Great 
Captain of Salvation leads us by His providence to battlefields 
where we must face the full array of evil — and conquer through 
the blood of the Lamb; and this leading into temptation is, by 
divine grace, overruled for our good, since, by being tempted, 
we grow strong in grace and patience. Our God and Father 


442 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


may — for wise ends, which shall ultimately serve His own glory, 
and our profit — lead us into positions where Satan, the world, 
and the flesh may tempt us, and so the prayer is to be 
understood in that sense of a humble self-distrust which 
shrinks from the conflict. There is courage here, for the 
suppliant calmly looks the temptation in the face, and dreads 
only the evil which it may work in him, but there is also a holy 
fear, a sacred self-suspicion, a dread of contact with sin in any 
degree. The sentiment is not inconsistent with, “all joy,” when 
the many different temptations do come, it is akin to the 
Savior’s, “If it is possible, let this cup pass from Me,” which did 
not for a moment prevent His drinking the cup, even to its 
dregs. 

Let me observe that God, in no sense, so leads men into 
temptation as to have any share in the blame of their sin if they 
fall into it! God cannot possibly, by any act of His, become 
partner with man in his crime. As good old Trapp well observes, 
“God tempts men for PROBATION, but never for 
PERDITION.” The devil tempts men that he may ruin 
them — God tries men, and puts them where Satan may try 
them — but He leads them into temptation for probation, that 
the chaff may be sifted from the wheat, that the dross may be 
separated from the fine gold. By these trials, hypocrites fall, 
being discovered in the hour of temptation, just as the rough 
March wind sweeps through the forest, and finding out the 
rotten branches, snaps them from the tree — the fault being not 
in the wind — but in the decayed branch! James alludes to the 
actual solicitation to evil in which the most holy God can have 
no part, but our text deals with the providential bringing about 
of the temptation which, I think you can clearly see, may be the 
Lord’s work without His holiness in any degree being stained. 
When the Lord leads us into temptation, it is always with a 
design for our good. He leads us to battle, not that we may be 


443 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


wounded and defeated, but that we may win glorious victories 
which shall crown the head of our gracious Leader with many 
crowns, and prepare us for future deeds of valor! temptations 
overcome are inestimable blessings, because they make us lie 
the more humbly at His feet, bind us more firmly to our Lord, 
and train us to help others. Tempted men can lift up the hands 
that hang down, and confirm the feeble knees; they have been 
tempted in the same manner, and can, therefore, succor their 
brothers and sisters. Yet, while the benefit which God brings 
out of our being led into temptation is very great, still, 
temptation in itself is a thing so dangerous, trials and distress, 
in themselves, are so perilous, that it is right for the Christian 
to pray, “Lead us not into temptation.” Though, as Martin 
Luther says, “temptation is the best school into which the 
Christian can enter; yet, in itself, apart from the grace of God, 
it is so doubly hazardous, that this prayer should be offered 
every day, ‘Lead us not into temptation,’ or if we must enter 
into it, ‘Lord, deliver us from evil.’” 

I do not know whether I have met the objection. Perhaps, 
in the exposition that is to follow I may be able to make it a 
little more clear. I wish to say that, although God does not 
tempt men — that is affirmed in Scripture and reason — and by 
God’s own character — though all prove it to be fact, yet, He 
may, and certainly does, lead us into positions in His 
providence where it is absolutely certain that we shall be 
tempted! And therefore, our consciousness of weakness should 
compel us to plead for escape from the terrible contest — and 
deliverance out of it — if come, it must. 

II. Let us now expound the text. 

Possibly we may get at the meaning of the text better by 
supposing that we have just risen from our beds this morning. 
We are about to engage in prayer. Before we do so, we 
endeavor to prepare our hearts for that hallowed exercise. We 


444 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


look back upon yesterday. We remember all our follies, our 
mistakes and sins. We feel deeply grieved. We are conscious 
that we are, this morning, just as weak as we were yesterday! 
We feel that if temptation assails us we shall as surely fall into 
sin as we did on the past day. We have gathered some 
experience, but we find we are still as weak as water; that while 
the will to be holy is present with us, how to perform that which 
is good, we find not. At the same time, we have an intense 
abhorrence of sin — we feel in our own hearts that we would 
sooner die than offend our God — we can contemplate sorrow 
with pleasure, but sin only with horror. We feel afraid to 
venture downstairs. We fear that temptations may await us in 
the family, and in business; we feel, therefore, compelled to 
pray. We know that there is the temptation of the theater and 
the music hall, but divine grace has made us resolute not to go 
there, for we feel we could not honestly ask God to preserve 
us from that temptation if we ran into it ourselves! There are 
our besetting sins, but being aware of them, we cry to God for 
help against them. But the black thought comes across our 
mind — “You do not know what is to happen today. You 
cannot tell what loss you may have to suffer; you do not know 
what trouble you may meet with, what rough word may be 
spoken to you; your ship is on the sea, but you know not what 
rough waves will beat against it; there are sunken rocks and 
hidden quicksand — what if you should be wrecked on these?” 
You feel that you are about to follow the course of divine 
providence, that whatever happens to you will be according to 
your Father’s will, and you put up this prayer, “Lord, You are 
to lead me this day; I would follow close to Your footsteps as 
a sheep follows its shepherd; but since I know not what is to 
happen to me, allow me to ask one thing of You; I do not pray 
that You lead me away from sorrow or trouble — do as You will 
about that, O my Lord — but do not, I beseech You, lead me in 


445 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Your providence where I shall be tempted, for I am so feeble 
that, perhaps, the temptation may be too strong for me, 
therefore, this day make a straight path for my feet, and do not 
allow me to be assailed by the tempter. Or if it must be, if it is 
better for me to be tempted, and if You intend this day that I 
should tight with old Apollyon himself, then deliver me from 
evil. Oh, save me from the mischief of the temptation; let me 
have the temptation, if so it must be, but oh, let it do me no 
harm; let me not stain my garments; let me not slip nor slide, 
but may I stand fast at the end of the day! May this temptation, 
though it is not joyous but grievous, have so worked out in me 
the comfortable fruits of righteousness, that it may be a part of 
that grand method by which You shall ultimately deliver me 
from all evil, and make me perfectly like Yourself in glory 
everlasting.” That, I believe, is the meaning of the prayer. 

Possibly we should bring it out more clearly by taking 
several cases in which the Lord providentially leads men into 
temptation. There is poverty. No one will deny that poverty is, 
in many cases, an infliction directly from God. There are some, 
who by their indolence and debauchery, bring themselves low, 
but who pities them? But there are others who by the loss of 
parents are left orphans; others who can never rise from the 
helpless penury of their first estate. God alone knows the mass 
of poverty in this city. We talk about the distress in Lancashire, 
and to some degree, I fear, Christian generosity has been 
diverted from London, but to my knowledge there is much 
distress in many of the streets of this huge city. Some of you 
ride through our fine wide streets, which are a sort of 
ornamental fringe upon the skirts of poverty, and you know 
nothing about those narrow back streets — those blind alleys 
and those courts inside of courts — where poverty is huddled 
together and where too often sin, lust, and disease become its 
natural consequences! When a gracious man is brought very 


446 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


low in circumstances, it is God’s act; an act of God which leads 
that man into temptation; for poverty necessarily has its 
temptations which you cannot possibly dissociate from it. Look 
at you poor needle girl — Stitch! Stitch! Stitch! — till the fingers 
are worn to the bone, till her eyes are red, and her heart weary; 
all that she can earn is hardly enough to keep body and soul 
together, while her clothes hang in rags about her. Do you 
know how stern is that temptation when a fallen sister whispers 
to her that there is money to be had so easily, and paints the 
gainful sin in flashing colors? What arguments can the tempter 
find in that bare room, and empty cupboard, and thin slice of 
dry bread — and, perhaps, in a starving mother dying on a few 
rags in the corner! If throughout life we have been preserved 
from the contamination of vice, and feel at all inclined to exalt 
ourselves in our virtue, let us remember what we might have 
been had we been exposed to the same fierce solicitations; and 
let us pray for ourselves, and for all our brothers and sisters, 
“Lead us not into that temptation.” Circumstances alter cases. 
Oh, my dear young friends, I pray that no terrible 
circumstances may ever be able to alter you, but may the Lord 
who tries you, deliver you from evil! Sometimes the 
temptations of poverty appear in another form. A man finds 
that his trade does not pay him; he works hard, but he gets 
poorer and poorer. What few goods he had in the shop are 
decreasing; the stock gets lower; the children are crying for 
bread — his wife, perhaps, is an ungodly woman, and she tells 
him there is trade to be had on the Sunday, and if he will but 
open his shop, he will prosper. She says everybody else in the 
street does it, and all the neighbors call him a fool for putting 
the shutters up. Oh, I admire that nobleheartedness which I 
have seen in some of you! It has made me look upon you with 
greater pride than ever prince did on his jewels, when you have 
said — “I can starve, but I cannot sin against my God.” But 


447 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


when, to my grief, some professors yield to the suggestion, I 
cannot, and do not marvel — 1 can only pray for the steadfast, 
and pray for myself — “Lord, lead me not into this temptation,” 
for if a starving wife, wailing children, and a sickly infant are 
crying in our ears, who knows how soon we might take 
ourselves to any means so as to satisfy their needs? Happy are 
they who have come through this temptation, and have been 
delivered from the evil of it! But happier far are they who have 
never been led into it. “Give me neither poverty nor riches,” 
was the good prayer of Agur; and you who have never known 
poverty, and have never understood what shortness of bread 
means, pray this prayer this morning for yourselves and for all 
your brothers and sisters in this church, “Lead us not into 
temptation.” 

The Lord frequently leads His people into temptation from 
wicked men in the form of persecution. It often happens that in the 
course of providence, for the wisest possible ends, a good man 
is put to work where he finds no godly associates, but where 
his name is the theme of laughter. God is sometimes pleased to 
convert the woman while her husband remains unconverted, 
and perhaps he is opposed to her religion, and will insist upon 
it that his wife shall not carry out her convictions. Now, in cases 
like this, God has manifesdy put His people in a position where 
they are constandy tempted with the fear of men. This 
temptation is inevitably connected with persecution — a 
temptation to be ashamed of Christ, to hide one’s face, to hold 
one’s tongue when one should speak, to run down one’s colors 
when they ought to be waved to the breeze — and like Peter, to 
deny our Lord! When some young man has been, to use a 
common expression, chaffed day after day, day after day, these 
cruel ridiculings are a great deal harder to bear than a lash upon 
the back. Oh, it is a grand thing if a man can go through this, 
can endure the slow roasting alive year after year, and yet is 


448 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


delivered from evil! But, dear brothers and sisters, I think you 
and I may well pray, “Lead us not into temptation,” for I fear 
there are some of you who are like the nautilus which, when 
the Mediterranean is all calm and quiet, floats in a gallant fleet 
upon the surface, but as soon as ever the rough waves come, 
and the Euroclydon begins to blow, every nautilus draws in its 
tiny sail, and drops to quiet obscurity in the bottom of the sea! 
There are many such professors, who, while everything goes 
smooth, float gloriously with us — but if rough times should 
come, they would be all unknown and unheard of. Many there 
are, I fear, who walk with religion in her silver slippers, who 
might desert her if she had to go barefoot and ragged through 
the street, having no place to rest — her only destiny being the 
prison and the flames. We may pray, as we read the stories of 
martyrdom, or as we look upon some brothers and sisters in 
church fellowship with us who have to be laughed at day by 
day, “Lord, lead us not into temptation, or if You do, be pleased 
to deliver us from evil.” 

I have merely commenced the catalog. Have patience with 
me while I mention the daily adversities to which we are heirs. Some 
of us fret and think that the Lord deals harshly with us. Let us 
mend our tune. What a world of mercy God gives to us 
compared with what others receive! I hear sometimes of a 
believer who has lost a ship, or a horse, or has sustained a very 
serious loss with a dishonored bill, or a bad debt — or another 
of you is out of work for a week, or else your little ones are ill. 
Well, I pity you all for these trials, but after all, what little trials 
these are compared with what some endure! Take the case of 
Job — house and children, land and servants, and catde — all 
swept away at a stroke — and his own body covered with boils! 
Did not the Lord lead him into temptation, and was it not a 
marvel, indeed, that Job did not go even further than cursing 
the day of his birth? Was it not a wonder that he did not yield 


449 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


to his wife’s suggestion, and curse God and die? Surely, 
brothers and sisters, when we see the way in which some saints 
have met bereavement after bereavement — the holy courage 
with which others have sustained loss after loss — when we 
have marked the heroic resignation with which some have 
borne all the “ills which flesh is heir to,” and suffered in head 
and hand, and passed through painful surgical operations, 
which have well near brought them to the jaws of the grave, we 
may well wonder how it is that they have been delivered from 
the evil of so much adversity, and we may with holy trembling, 
exclaim, “Lead us not into temptation!” How impatient you 
and I might have been if we had been sorely sick, or bedridden 
for years. What hard things we might have thought of our God 
if He had swept all our estate away. How bitterly we might have 
spoken of His goodness if our husband were sick with 
consumption, or if our wife were in the tomb. Our little ones 
are round about us, and we hear their happy and cheerful voices, 
but oh, what a temptation to distrust God it would have been, 
if He had taken them away! Lord, do not so try us! Send not 
such adversities upon us as to lead us into temptation; but if 
You do this, be pleased to hold us up in the rough road, lest we 
fall into evil! 

To change the line of thought a moment. There are not 
only the temptations arising from poverty, from shame, and 
from trouble, but you know, beloved, that, by far, more 
dangerous temptations come from prosperity. You sometimes 
envy the very rich; you think of them as having more money 
than they can count, and broad acres, and parks, and lands so 
extensive that they hardly know their own boundaries! If you 
understood the temptations which beset their life; if you knew 
how hard it is to serve God and be rich — how difficult, 
especially, to be a courtier, and at the same time a servant of 
the living God — you would not aspire to so lofty a station, but 


450 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


you would say, “Lead us not into temptation.” temptation must 
be incessant to the man who only has to wish and can enjoy 
what he wills. Many men are kept from sin by being poor; their 
poverty is a clog to them. But when a man has strong appetites, 
and has no person to rebuke him — and has, moreover, all the 
means in his own hand of running into sin — we may well cry, 
“Lord, do not try me in that way!” Perhaps you are very anxious 
to attain a prominent position in the church. You may think, 
for instance, that to be a preacher, well-known and listened to 
by hundreds, is a very enviable position. It is about as enviable 
as the position of Blondin upon his high rope a 150 feet from 
the ground! If you knew the temptations which beset a man 
who lives in popularity, and has constantly to preach the word 
to thronging multitudes, you would say, “Lead me not into 
temptation, and if it is Your will that I must rise to that position, 
then deliver me from evil.” Let me assure you, that high places 
and high grace do seldom meet together; and that even in the 
church any position of eminence is counterbalanced in the 
pleasure which it brings by the extreme danger to which it 
exposes its occupant. Long not to be too prosperous! Thank 
God for bad winds; bless God for a little blight and mildew — 
yes, and be content to bless Him even if the fig tree should not 
blossom, and the flocks should be cut off from the field, and 
the herds from the stall, for any trial in the world is better than 
unbroken prosperity, concerning which you may well pray, 
“Lead us not into that temptation.” 

Now you may see that the list is endless, for if prosperity, 
honor, and esteem may breed in us worldliness, self-conceit, 
forgetfulness of God, reliance upon our own strength, and a 
departure from simple confidence in Him who made us what 
we are, then there must be trials everywhere! But I think I ought 
to add that, frequently, God leads men into temptation in the 
service which He requires of them. “Stop,” you say, “how can that 


45i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


be? When God prescribes a duty, how can that lead man into 
temptation?” I reply that to know duty is often in itself to be 
tempted not to do it; and that when that duty is high and stern, 
and demands of us severe self-denial and earnest perseverance, 
we may be tempted to shun the engagement! Take the instance 
of Jonah; he is sent to Nineveh; his prophetic soul forewarns 
him that the mission will not be to his honor. He refuses to go, 
and attempts to flee to Tarshish to escape the mission of his 
God. Now, such a temptation is not as rare as some suppose. 
You think — “I can never face that multitude again.” You have 
to deal, perhaps, with cruel tongues in a church meeting, and 
you think, “I can never fight that battle through.” You have 
been preaching in the street, and the whisper comes — “Never 
do that again; never expose yourself to the insults of the 
passerby.” You have been teaching in a Sunday school, and you 
may be led into this temptation — “Give it up; it is of no use; 
the children will never be blessed.” You may have been a tract 
distributor, You may have attempted to go from house to 
house to speak for God, and the temptation may have been hot 
upon you — “Cease from it; there’s no need for you to do it.” 
Your very duty has led you into temptation! Brethren, pray to 
God against it. Ask Him that the duty required of you may 
always be such as your strength shall enable you to perform — 
that you may go to His throne daily, and get such help that your 
arms may be sufficient for you; if not, even in the highest form 
of spiritual service, you may be led into temptation! 

What if I add to this that God may demand sacrifices of us 
which lead us into temptation? Look at Abraham. “Take you 
your son, your only son Isaac, and offer him up upon the place 
that I will show you.” I overheard a mother say, “I love my son 
so much, and he is such a comfort to me that I could not give 
him up.” One observed to her that she should not talk so, for 
the Christian ought to stand to the surrender every hour, and 


452 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


be willing to give up child, or husband or friend at Christ’s 
bidding. But her answer was, and it was a true one, “I could not 
do it! It is of no use my pretending that I could; I could not do 
it, and I am persuaded that if God should command me to give 
him up — He might take him away, and I would submit to it — 
but if I had to give him up voluntarily, I could not do it. It is 
no use in my saying I could.” Then, I suggested that, therefore, 
she ought always to pray that God would not try her that way, 
but that He would be pleased to spare her the sacrifice which 
she could not make — that, in fact, He would not lead her into 
temptation, or if He did, would give her so much divine grace 
that she would not be tempted to rebel, but might give up her 
son, though he were to her as her own soul. 

Oh, dear friends, there are many trials we talk about, and 
think we could bear, but if they were once to assail us, we might 
find it very difficult to do so! It is easy to be a sailor on shore, 
and to laugh at the winds when you are snug in your beds. It is 
all very well to sing of the waves and shout for — 

“The flag that braved a thousand years 
The batde and the breeze,” 

but the battle and the breeze are very different things from 
what the song would make them out to be, and we had better, 
I think, while we are free from the trial, unanimously pray this 
prayer — “Lead us not into temptation.” 

I want you to notice that word “us, ” for selfishness will 
dictate you to pray this prayer for yourselves, but we are more 
than 2,000 strong, a great army for God united in church 
fellowship, and you know there are many young added to the 
church, though a large proportion of the aged also come — 
more, perhaps, than in any other congregation. Remember our 
young members, our young men and women, who are very 


453 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


greatly exposed. I charge you, elders of the Church; I charge 
you, seniors in the faith; I charge you, mothers in Israel, that 
you offer this prayer today and every day — “Lord, lead us not 
into temptation, but deliver us from evil; Lord, temper the wind 
to the shorn lamb; put not the little boat upon the rough billows; 
send not Your little ones to stern batdes; and, Lord, since we 
are all weak, old as well as young — since the gray locks cover 
no more wisdom than the child’s curls, except as You give 
wisdom — so keep all the church, and lead neither pastor, nor 
officers, nor members into temptation, but if we must be led 
there, we take up the latter sentence, and pray it still more 
passionately, ‘Deliver us from evil.’” I have heard of a poor 
miner, who after being converted to God, had a great dread of 
falling into sin, and one morning after having endured much 
scorn, mockery, blasphemy, swearing, and ill-treatment from 
his fellow miners, before he went down into the pit, knelt down 
and prayed that God would sooner let him die than fall into sin. 
He cried, “Lord, let me die sooner than fall into sin,” and he 
did die then and there — happy thus to be taken up where he 
should no more know the annoyance of trial from without, or 
temptation from within! 

III. We close our discourse with A BRIEF EXHORTATION. 
I exhort you to pray this prayer very earnestly, dear friends, and 
I bid you do it for several reasons. 

First, remember jour own heart. A man, who carries 
gunpowder about with him, may well ask that he may not be 
led where the sparks are flying. If I have a heart like a bombshell, 
ready to explode at any moment, I may well pray God that 1 
may be kept from the fire, lest my heart destroys me. Perhaps 
you have angry tempers, constitutionally so; some men still 
remain hot and quick — some of our Welsh friends, always so; 
such should pray every day that they may not be tempted by 
any jeering words, that they may be kept calm and quiet, and 


454 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


not be led into irritation. We have each besetting sins of some 
sort or another, and I do not know that the temptation to be 
hot and quick in temper is anything as bad as that to be dull 
and lumpy and stupid. Generally speaking, a man, who has not 
some temper in him, is not worth much; and those who, as we 
sometimes say, are as easy as an old shoe, are not often worth 
more than that worn out article! We may have temptations, 
however, of another kind, and just there we should put up our 
prayer with great earnestness and intense passion, exclaiming, 
“Lord, lead me not into that temptation.” There is a weak point 
in each of us; and remember, the strength of a rope is to be 
measured, not according to its strength in its strongest, but its 
weakest part. Every engineer will tell you that the strength of a 
ship should always be estimated, not according to her strongest, 
but her weakest part — for if the strain shall come on her 
weakest part, and that is broken, no matter how strong the rest 
may be, the whole ship goes down! Now, I say, there is a weak 
point in every man; indeed, where is there a point where we are 
not weak? Show me where our strength lies. It lies, surely, 
nowhere here, but only there in Him who makes us strong to do 
exploits in His name! Therefore, because of weakness and 
inclination to sin, let each man and woman pray, and pray 
constantly, “Lead us not into temptation.” 

To use another argument, how many have fallen who were led 
into temptation! Think of them, not to congratulate yourselves, 
nor yet to blame them, but to take warning. When cases of 
discipline come before the Church, I have thought how gently 
we ought to deal, for, had we been put where these brothers 
and sisters have been, our fall might have been even more 
desperate than theirs. I have often grieved when a brother has 
lost his temper, and then I have thought, “Well, I cannot accuse, 
but I must not judge uncharitably, for if I had been teased one 
half as much as he has been, I might have been worse than he.” 


455 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


When I see another man shipwrecked, I should mind that I 
carefully navigate my own boat. When I see another who has 
caught a contagious disease, I should be careful not to go into 
those quarters where that disease is the most vimlent, lest I 
catch it, too, and if I know that there is a great disinfectant, a 
heavenly remedy by which contagion may be stopped; how 
ought I to use it. That remedy is PRAYER, and the precise 
prayer is in the text — “Lead me not into temptation, but deliver 
me from evil, lest I fall as others have done and become weak 
and vile as they.” 

Remember to pray this prayer, because should we fall under 
temptation, how great will be our misery. A certain high Antinomian 
said, one day, that if a Christian fell into sin, he lost nothing by 
it except — what do you think he said? Except his comfort, and 
his communion with God! I suppose he thought the Christian’s 
comfort and his communion with God would be a drop in a 
bucket, but he who has once lost Iris comfort and his 
communion with God will tell you quite another tale! Oh, to 
lose your comfort, to have to groan out with David, “Make the 
bones which You have broken to rejoice; hide Your face from 
my sins, and blot out mine iniquities!” Pray that Penitential 
Psalm over, and you will soon discover that sin is the father of 
sorrow, and that a saint cannot slip without much damage to 
himself. I have marked, and marked carefully, those brothers 
and sisters who have backslidden and fallen into sin, and have 
afterwards been restored, and though I have rejoiced in their 
restoration, yet I never can help noticing how different they are 
from what they used to be. So quiet now — so sad in appearance, 
too, and though, perhaps, better than they ever were, yet the 
joy of God is gone; the spring has gone out of their souls! They 
cannot dance with David before the ark now! You never find 
David dancing after his sin with Bathsheba. Not he. There was 
no dance in him after that! He limped to the day of his death. 


456 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


509 “Lead Us Not into Temptation” - 
Matt. 6:13 


Take care — if you would not make for yourself a garment of 
sorrows, if you would not stuff the pillow of your bed with 
thorns, and be perpetually wearing chains — take care that you 
pray to God to lead you not into temptation! 

Worse remains! Recollect what mischief a Christian’s fall will do. 
A thousand believers live in holiness, and nobody says anything 
about them, but if one of them shall fall into sin, the whole 
world rings with it! I know not why it should be, but if they can 
but find one bad fish in our net, they hawk it all round the town 
in 24 hours. “See here,” they say, “here is one of the people 
who go to hear Spurgeon! Here is one of your professors! Here 
is one of your Baptists! Here is one of your Methodists!” or 
something of that kind. Why do they not look at the 999 who 
stood fast? Why do they not talk of those who serve their Lord 
well, and are found faithful even to the end? But that, indeed, 
would not answer their purpose! Brothers and sisters, would 
you fill the mouths of the daughters of Philistia? Would you 
make the children of Gath and Askelon rejoice? Would you see 
the banner of hell floating proudly in the breeze, and the shield 
of our glorious Christ trailing in the mire? Would you grieve 
the Spirit? Would you open the wounds of Christ afresh? 
Would you put Him and His fair spouse, the Church, to an 
open shame? If you would, then be slack in your prayers; but if 
you would not, if you would adorn the doctrine of God your 
Savior in all things; if you would win jewels for Christ’s crown; 
if you would make men wonder at Him, and at you, because 
you have been with Him, then pray this prayer — “Lead us not 
into temptation, but deliver us from evil.” 

I cannot tell why it is that this text should come on this 
particular Sunday, but it is very likely that your life this week 
will let you into the secret of it. Thus says the Lord unto some 
of you, “This week I will sift you and try you.” Pray that you 
enter not into temptation. Christ pleads for you, for Satan has 


457 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


desired to have some of you, that he may sift you as wheat. Join 
your prayers with Christ’s supplications that your faith fails not. 
I cannot tell, I am no prophet, but I feel a call to warn you to 
watchfulness. There may happen something that may make us 
bless God for this warning note. We are forearmed because we 
are forewarned. We are able to put our helmet on in time, to 
gird on our breastplate and our shoes of brass, and to put our 
hand upon our sword, for the battle is coming, and the Lord 
has sounded the trumpet and bids us cry — “Lead us not into 
temptation.” 

This prayer will not suit some of you. You need not be led 
into temptation, for you live in it already. A man might pray to 
be kept out of the water, but a fish cannot, for it lives in it; even 
so, you whose native element is sin, cannot pray, “Lead us not 
into temptation.” There is another prayer for you to pray 
before you get to this, and that is, “Forgive us our trespasses.” 
Pray that today, and then you shall pray this tomorrow. Your 
sins are accusing you before God today. Your trespasses are 
clamoring at the mercy seat. I hear their cry. They are crying, 
“Justice! Justice! Justice! Lord, smite that man! Lord, smite that 
woman!” With hoarse voices they cry aloud, “Let him be lost! 
Let him be cast away!” While your sin clamors against you, will 
you not pray for mercy? Mercy is ready to hear you; the throne 
of grace is easily accessed. Come before God and say, “O Lord, 
I know that Jesus died and took upon Himself the sins of all 
those who trust Him; I trust Him; for His sake, Lord, forgive 
my trespasses, and let my debt be blotted out by His blood.” 
He will hear you, sinner, and before you go out of yonder doors, 
your sins may be forgiven, and you may be white in Christ’s 
righteousness, and spotless as the newly fallen snow! After that, 
then, use my text and pray to Him who is able to keep you from 
falling, “Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.” 


458 



510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, May 17th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Therefore, being justified by faith, we have peace with God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ.” — Romans 5:1 

A MOMENT’S CONTEMPLATION would suffice to awaken 
any man to the terror of the position involved in being at war 
with God. For a subject to be in a state of sedition against a 
powerful monarch is to commit treason and to incur the 
forfeiture of his life. But for a creature to be in arms against its 
Creator; for a thing that depends for its existence upon the will 
of God — to be at enmity with the God in whose hand its breath 
is; for a soul to know that God, who is terrible in His power, 
and Almighty to protect or to destroy, is his foe; that He whose 
anger endures forever, and His wrath burns even unto the 
lowest hell, is his chief and grand enemy — this is an appalling 
thing, indeed! Could any man but understand and realize this, 
smitten through with terrors as great as those which surprised 
Belshazzar when he saw the handwriting on the wall, he would 
cry out in anguish, and he would make a thrilling appeal for 
mercy. God is against you, O sinful man! God is against you, 
O you who have never submitted yourself unto His word! God 
is against you! And woe unto you when He shall tear you in 
pieces, for none can deliver you out of His hands! Happy! 
Happy beyond all description is the man who can say with our 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Apostle, “We have peace with God.” But wretched! Wretched, 
again, beyond all description! Wretched must that man be who 
is at war with his own Maker, and sees heaven itself in arms 
against him! 

Chiefly, now, we shall endeavor to talk of the peace which the 
believer enjoys; and then I shall have a few words of counsel, warning, 
and encouragement for those who have not this peace with God, or who 
may have had it, but for a time have lost the enjoyment of it. 

I. In speaking of THE PEACE OF GOD WHICH THE 
CHRISTIAN ENJOYS, we will commence with some remarks 
upon its basis. 

There is the widest possible difference between a man 
being just in his own eyes, and his being justified in the sight of 
God. Yet, perhaps no fallacy is more common than to mistake 
the one for the other. Then, as a natural consequence of 
building on a weak foundation, the structure, however fair to 
look upon, is insecure. The peace in which multitudes of 
professors delight themselves is merely peace with their own 
conscience, and not in any sense peace with God. I know of no 
greater contrast than there is between that peace which is a 
mere stagnation of thought, a lull of anxiety, or blindness to 
danger, and that soul-satisfying peace which passes all 
understanding! The true peace of God flows like a river in 
unceasing activity; it preserves a tranquil frame amidst storm, 
tempest, and tribulation — by all of which it is frequently 
assaulted. It is a part of the armor of God with which a 
Christian is clothed, to withstand principalities, and powers, 
and spiritual wickedness in the evil day. Or, to change the figure, 
Christ gave His disciples this peace as a charm, when, as He 
was about Himself to depart, and go to the Father, He sent 
them forth to be buffeted about in the world. Just so in the text, 
if you pursue the subject in the next few verses, you will find 
that this peace with God is first given, and afterwards comes 


460 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


experience of tribulations everywhere else. We ourselves, 
brothers and sisters, have proved it. There is a natural 
disposition of sin to defile, but the blood of Christ speaks peace 
in the conscience; there is a constant tendency of the world to 
destroy our hope, but the peaceful word of Jesus comforts us; 
“Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world” — there is a 
painful proneness of human strength to fail, but the promise 
supports us — “This man shall be the peace when the Assyrian 
comes into our land.” And this true peace gives to the believer 
an inward sense of God’s acceptance. As Moses never lost sight 
of the goodwill of the Dweller in the bush, so, too, there is a 
more blessed assurance of goodwill in the faith that always 
realizes, “God in Christ reconciling the world to Himself.” 

And now, as to the experimental basis of that peace which 
the believer has with his God — it must have some solid rational 
ground; it must have some basis which judgment may estimate. 

1 know some who have an apprehension of peace with God 
that has no foundation whatever. Let me describe the person. 
“Are you living in peace with God, my friend?” “Yes,” he says, 
“thank God, I have enjoyed a sense of peace for 20 years.” 
“How did you get it?” “Well, as I was walking one day, in great 
distress of mind, on such-and-such a road, a feeling of comfort 
came over me, and it has remained with me ever since.” “Yes, 
but, friend, what is the reason of your hope? What is the ground 
of your confidence that you have peace with God?” “Well, you 
see, I felt comfortable, and I believe that I have felt comfortable 
ever since.” “No, no. That’s not the matter at which I aim. 
What is the ground ? What is the doctrinal proof? What is the 
matter of fact that gives you comfort?” “Well, do not press me,” 
he says, “for I do not know. Only this I know — I did feel happy, 
and I have felt happy ever since, and I have not had any doubt.” 
That man, mark you, if I am not mistaken, is under a delusion! 
If I err not, it is very possible that that man has received a 


461 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


draught of the opium of hell! Satan has said to him, “Peace, 
peace,” where there is no peace, and he is going undisturbed, 
and quiet, down to the place where he shall lift up his eyes and 
discover too late his error! The peace of a Christian is not such 
a lull of stupefaction as that. It has a reason; it has some 
groundwork; and when you come to pull it to pieces, it is as 
completely a logical inference from certain facts as any 
deduction that could be drawn by mathematical precision! Let 
me, however, bring up a few more who think they have peace 
but build their supposition on wrong grounds. Here is a man 
who very flippantly and joyously says, “Peace with God, sir? 
Yes, peace with God — I enjoy the unbroken satisfaction that I 
have made my peace with Him.” “Well, how?” “Why, you see, 
some years ago I never went to a place of worship on Sunday 
at all, and I felt one day that I was doing wrong. Here was I 
going to the theater most nights, and I was doing my trade in a 
very bad way, and now and then I took too much drink. I was 
doing a great many things that were wrong, and I thought it 
was time for me to turn over a new leaf, and I have done so. 
Now I generally go to a place of worship twice on the Sunday. 
I may now and then indulge myself — -well, who is there who 
never does anything wrong? But still there is very great 
amendment in me; if you ask my wife, she sees a wonderful 
change; and if you ask my employees, they will say I am a 
different man from what I used to be! Now, I think I am not 
like the man you brought up just now, with no ground for his 
peace. I think I have a very good ground for mine, for I am 
very well deserving of my Maker now. I feel now, if I go to a 
place of amusement where I ought not, I cannot pray that night; 
but the next night I try over again, and manage to get through 
my form of prayer, and on the whole I am doing so well that I 
think I may say I have a good bottom and ground for saying 
that I am at peace with God.” Now, let this man be reminded 


462 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


that it is written, “By the works of the law there shall no flesh 
be justified in His sight.” All these moral things of which he 
has spoken are good enough in themselves. They will be very 
excellent in the temple of Christianity if they are placed at the 
top; but, if they are used as foundations, a builder might as well 
use tiles and slates and chimney-pots for foundations and 
cornerstones as use these reformatory actions as a ground of 
dependence! 

Man! Do you not perceive that your foundation is not an 
even and secure one? What about the past? What is to become 
of the sins already committed? How are you to get rid of these? 
Do you suppose that the payment of future debts will discharge 
old liabilities? Go to your tradesman, and tell him that you owe 
him a very great sum of money, and you cannot pay him a 
farthing of it. Do you expect he will not sue you in court 
because you never intend to get into his debt again? I think he 
will tell you that is not a method of business he understands! 
Certainly this is not the way in which God will deal with you! 
Your old sins! Your old sins! Your OLD sins! What about those? 
Those unpaid debts? Those crimes as yet unburied? Let your 
conscience give them a resurrection in your memory tonight. 
What about these? Surely you can have no peace with God 
while these remain unforgiven! Besides, you have an inward 
conviction that you have not peace with God, but only peace 
with yourself. You do feel a litde better sometimes, but it is a 
very poor sort of confidence that you have, for a litde sickness 
shakes it. How would you like to die now? Would you wrap 
yourself up in these miserable rags of yours and say, “Lord, You 
know I have sinned, but then I have done my best to make up 
for it.” You know and feel that this bed is shorter than a man 
can stretch himself on, and this blanket too narrow for a man 
to wrap himself in. Renounce this confidence, for it is one that 
will never stand before God! To give an instance of yet another 


463 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


case — one in which I tread on more delicate ground. Beloved, 
there are some who have peace which they explain to you in 
such a way that while I trust they have a peace with God, I fear 
they misunderstand the ground of it. Some true Christians will 
talk to you in this way — “I hope I am at peace with God now, 
for my faith is in active exercise; my love is fervent; I have 
delightful seasons in prayer; the eyes of my hope are no longer 
dim, and my patience can endure many things for Christ! My 
courage did not fail me yesterday in the midst of Christ’s 
enemies; my graces are vigorous; the Spirit of God has been 
blowing across my soul as over a garden; and all the graces, like 
flowers, have yielded their best perfume, and therefore I feel 
that I have peace with God.” Oh, believer, believer! Are you so 
foolish as having begun in the Spirit by faith, to be made perfect 
in the flesh by your own doing? Remember, if you have peace, 
if you put your peace here upon your graces, then there will 
come another day — perhaps it may come tomorrow — when 
all those graces will droop like withered flowers, yielding no 
perfume! Instead of beauty there shall be baldness; instead of 
ornament there shall be decay; a day when you shall see yourself 
in your true natural colors, and discover yourself, like Job, and 
cry out as he did, “Lord, I am vile!” What will you do, then, 
with your peace? Why, if you have begun to look to your graces 
in any way for peace, then you are looking to a fickle source! 
You are going to the cistern, instead of living by the fountain! 
You are using Hagar’s botde, instead of sitting like Isaac at the 
well to drink from never-ceasing streams. Yet this is an evil into 
which we are so apt to fall after having done well for the Master, 
and being helped to serve Him. It is true we do not trust in 
these things. I hope God has delivered us from self- 
righteousness; yet there is just that, “Now I must be a child of 
God — now I must truly be an heir of heaven — for look how I 
have been sanctified! Mark how I have been edified and built 


464 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


up in the faith.” Ah, brothers and sisters, there is the cloven 
foot there! Be on your guard, it is an unclean thing; it will bring 
you into pain and bondage; it will make you sick, and put your 
feet in the stocks, and thrust you into the inner dungeon before 
long. Flee from it as you would from a serpent. Stand always 
under the dear cross of Christ, looking up to His wounds, 
rejoicing in His all-sufficiency, and building your peace there 
and there alone! 

I fear, too, that there are not a few who, I trust, have 
genuine peace, but who, nevertheless, are tempted to found 
their confidence upon their enjoyments. We have our 
enjoyments — God be thanked for this. Oh, there are times 
when our communion is with the Father, and with His Son 
Jesus Christ! We have not been into heaven, but we have heard 
some of the songs of the angels on the other side the pearly 
gates, or, if not the songs, we have heard the echo of them in 
our hearts. There are times when we have been in prayer, and 
our soul has been like the chariots of Aminadab, swift and 
strong. We have had our seasons, as it were, of witnessing the 
transfiguration! We can remember Tabor’s mount — -well can 
we remember the hill Mizar, and the Hermonites — for there 
He spoke with us; we have had our experience of Jacob’s dream, 
as well as our fellowship with Jacob’s wrestling; we have seen 
the Lord, and by faith have put our finger into the print of the 
nails, and thrust our hand into His side; He has kissed us with 
the kisses of His love, and His love is better than wine. But the 
tendency is to say, “Now I have peace with God; now I must be 
reconciled to Him; now I will press out the wine of comfort 
from these grapes.” If we do this, let us remember that perhaps 
tomorrow we may be in Gethsemane! We may have our times 
of agonizing and fruitless prayer; we may be in the valley of 
despondency, or in the blacker valley of the shadow of death — 
no present joys, no promises applied with power, no whispers 


465 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of Christ’s love, no sweets of His covenant, no delighting 
ourselves in the Lord — all may be dark and dreary — well, what 
then? Ah, my brothers and sisters, we shall find ourselves weak, 
because we have taken our comforts to be the basis of our peace, 
instead of continuing to look solely and only to Christ l Let me 
warn you, beloved, though this may not seem a case as 
dangerous as some others, yet let me warn you that it is essential 
to our comfort that we should stand to this and to this only — 
being justified by faith we have peace with God! Our peace is 
solely the result of a justification achieved through faith, and 
not the result of enjoyments, or of graces, much less of good 
works, or of any foolish irrational impression which we may 
think we have been favored with! 

Where, then, does the Christian’s conviction of his peace 
lie with God? Well it lies in this — that he is justified by faith. 
The process is plain. It is as clear, 1 say, as a proposition in 
Euclid. Christ stood in my place before God. I was a sinner 
doomed to die; Christ took my place; He died for me. Well, 
then, how can I perish? How can I be punished for offenses 
which have been punished already in the person of my 
substitute? God demands of me to keep His law perfecdy; I 
cannot do it. Christ has done it for me — kept the law — 
magnified it, made it honorable. What more can God demand 
of me? I, a sinner, am washed in Jesus’ blood! I, guilty, am 
clothed in Jesus’ righteousness. You ask, “How? I cannot see it 
is so.” True, it is so by faith! God says that he who believes in 
Christ shall be saved — I believe in Christ — therefore I am 
saved. He says, “He who believes on Him is not condemned.” 
I believe on Him; therefore I am not condemned — this is clear 
reasoning! Very well, then, the man who has believed in Christ 
has his sins forgiven, and the righteousness of Christ imputed 
to him, and therefore he is at peace with God. Now this is 
reasoning which no logic can deny! There is a rebel — first he is 


466 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


pardoned, next merit is imputed to him — and he is at peace 
with his king and a rebel no longer. There is a child; he has 
offended; his father takes him, accepts him for his elder 
brother’s sake, and he is at peace with his father. The thing is 
clear enough! Here is a reason for the hope that is within us, 
which we may give with meekness and fear! It is true, never 
with diffidence and timidity! We may venture to give it in the 
presence of the old dragon, and defy him to break its force. We 
might give it, even, in the midst of a congregation of assembled 
demons and defy them, if they can, to break its power. We may 
give it in the presence of the Eternal God, for He will never 
deny the word on which He has caused us to hope. “Who is he 
who condemns? It is Christ who died, yes, rather, that is risen 
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes 
intercession for us.” It stands forever. Stand here and you stand 
so fast that no howling tempest of temptation can sweep you 
down! Stand to this, that Christ has finished your salvation for 
you, that He has done everything that omnipotent justice can 
ask; He has endured all the penalty, drained the cup of wrath, 
obeyed the law completely, given to divine equity all it can 
demand — and therefore, believing in His name, standing in His 
righteousness, accented in His suretyship — you must have 
peace with God! This is the basis of the Christian’s peace — one 
on which he may sleep or wake, live or die — and live eternally, 
without condemnation or separation from the love of God 
which is in Christ Jesus the Lord! 

Continuing our remarks on this subject, we shall now turn 
your attention to the channel of this peace. “Therefore being 
justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ .” 

Take it for a certain fact, then, that we are justified as the 
result of what Christ has done for us, seeing that He “was 
delivered for our offenses and raised again for our justification.” 


467 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


And the experience, insofar as we have assurance of our being 
personally justified, is the result of our trusting Christ. What 
then? How are we to enjoy the comfort of it? There are times 
when we begin to doubt whether we are justified. Brothers and 
sisters, we must not come to our faith to get comfort, but to the 
primary cause of our justification; the channel through which 
the comfort comes is Jesus Christ. So then, though justification 
by faith, is, in itself, a well of comfort, even from that well we 
cannot get it, except we use Christ — who dug the well — to be 
the bucket to draw the water up from its depths. It must come 
through Christ! I will suppose, then, that I am in doubt and fear 
tonight, and need to get my peace restored — how shall I seek 
it? Through Jesus Christ, the surety and substitute Himself! 
How? First, by believing in Christ all over again, just as I did at 
the first. Christ tells me that He came to save sinners, I am a 
sinner, therefore He came to save me. He says He can save me. 
This looks reasonable. He is very God; He is perfect man; He 
has suffered and offered a complete atonement. He tells me He 
is willing to save me. This also appears reasonable, for why else 
should He die, if He did not wish to save? Then He tells me if 
I will trust Him, He will save me. I trust Him, and I have not 
the shadow of a doubt that He will be as good as His word. If 
He is faithful and just — of which who dares to breathe a 
suspicion? — this soul of mine, in heaven, must be! It is 
committed to the Redeemer’s charge with every pledge that 
God can give, with more security than we could ever ask; in 
Him I trust — in Jesus, and in Jesus, only! Brothers and sisters, 
this is how you must get your peace with God tonight — 
through Jesus Christ — by going to Him, by a simple faith, just 
as you went at the first. Some silly people who have got high 
doctrine in their heads, so high that it smells offensive in the 
nostrils of those who read the Scriptures — they say we teach 
that man is saved by mere believing. We do — by mere believing! 


468 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


There is a poor, starving man over there. I give him bread — his 
life is spared. Why do not these people say this man was saved 
by mere eating — by mere eating! And here is another person 
whose tongue cleaves to the roof of his mouth by thirst, and is 
ready to die. I give him water, and he drinks, and his eyes 
sparkle — and the man is saved by mere drinking. And look at 
ourselves — -why do we not drop down dead in our pews? Just 
stop your breath a litde while and see. Surely we all live by mere 
breathing! All these operations of nature that touch the vital 
mysteries may be sneered at as merely this, or merely that; and 
in like manner to speak with disparagement of “mere believing” 
is stupid nonsense! And yet, let me say it in my sense of the 
term — we are saved, we are reconciled to God through Jesus 
Christ by mere believing — by the simple act of trusting in the 
Lord Jesus Christ! And if I would get my peace made more full 
and perfect, having come to Christ by faith, I must continue to 
get peace from Him by meditation upon Him, for the more I 
go to Christ believingly, the deeper will my peace be! If I believe 
in Christ, and do not know much of Him, my faith will 
necessarily be somewhat slender, but if I continue “to 
comprehend with all saints what are the heights, and depths, 
and lengths, and breadths, and to know the love of Christ 
which passes knowledge,” then my little faith will become 
strong faith; the bruised reed shall become a cedar, and the 
smoking flax shall become a beacon flaming to the very skies! 

I must take care, above all, that I cultivate communion with 
Christ, for though that can never be the basis of my peace — 
mark that — yet it will be the channel of it! If 1 live near to Christ, 
I shall not know fear. What sheep is afraid of the wolf when it 
is close to the shepherd’s hands? What child fears when it hangs 
upon its mother’s breast? Who should know fear when he is 
covered with the eternal wings, and underneath him are the 
everlasting arms? “While His left hand is under my head, and 


469 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


His right hand does embrace me,” I cannot but be at peace, 
and that peace, if my communion is continued, will be like a 
river — deep and broad — my righteousness being like the waves 
of the sea! It is Christ, the substance of my salvation! Christ, 
the sum of all my hope! Christ who performs all things for me 
and Christ made of God all things to me! As Christ was the 
first means of giving us peace, so He must still be the golden 
conduit through which all peace with God must flow to our 
believing hearts, and all this through the act of merely believing, 
or merely trusting in Him! By looking to Him I drew all the 
faith which inspired me with confidence in His grace. And the 
word that first drew my soul — “Look unto Me” — still rings its 
clarion note in my ears. There I once found conversion, and 
there I shall often find refreshing and renewal! 

Having thus glanced at the basis of our peace, and the 
channel through which it flows, let us pass on to notice its 
certainty. I like to read these rolling sentences of Paul, without 
an “if’ or a “but” in them — “Therefore, being justified, we 
have peace with God.” He talks as logically as if he was a 
mathematician, and as positively as though he could see the 
thing written before his eyes! Oh, how different is this from the 
way in which some talk — “I hope,” “I trust,” “I sometimes 
hope my poor soul may have peace with God.” Now where 
this language is genuine, it deserves sympathy — but I believe in 
many cases it is insincere. There is a certain class of professors 
who think strong faith is pride, and doubts and fears are 
humility; therefore they look upon these base-born thorns as 
though they were choice flowers, and they will cull them 
together like a bouquet of netdes and noxious weeds — a fool’s 
bouquet of flowers! Have you ever seen it in the magazines? I 
have observed it very frequently, or they will dig up a nasty ugly 
thorn, put it in a flower pot, place it in an ornamental situation, 
display it outside the window, and call you all to admire it, as 


470 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


being a special, a wonderful piece of Christian experience! Well, 
one likes to see a thorn when it is developed to the highest 
degree, but as soon as seen, one likes to see it burned — and so 
with these doubts and fears — it is very well for us to know how 
far doubting and fearing may go, but we think we would like to 
have them plucked up by the roots and destroyed as soon as 
possible. Let those who are the subjects of these doubts be 
sympathized and cheered, but let their doubts and fears be 
utterly rooted out! O Christian brothers and sisters, it is not 
impudence, it is not presumption to believe what God tells you! 
If he says “You are justified,” do not say “I hope I am.” If I 
should say to some poor man — one terribly poor — “I will pay 
your rent for you tomorrow,” and he should say, “Well, well, I 
hope you will,” I would not be pleased with him. If you should 
say to your child tomorrow morning, “Well, William, I shall buy 
you a new suit of clothes today,” and he should say, “Well, 
Father, I sometimes hope you will, I humbly trust, I hope I may 
say, though I sometimes doubt and fear, yet I hope I may say I 
believe you,” you would not encourage such a child as that in 
his uncomely suspicions! Why should we talk thus to our dear 
Father who is in heaven? He says to us, “I give unto you eternal 
life, and you shall never perish, neither shall any pluck you out 
of My hand.” Is it humility for us to reply, “Father, I do not 
believe You, I do not think it is possible”? Oh, no! That is true 
humility which sits at the feet of the Promiser because he is 
humble — looks up into the face of the Promiser because He is 
trustful — and dotes on the word of the promise, because it is 
sincere! He will perform it! Away with you, you fiends that make 
me doubt! His honor is engaged to the carrying out of His 
covenant; He will perform it! He says by faith in Christ I am 
justified, therefore I say, I am justified, and have peace with 
God, nor shall anyone stop me of this glory — I have peace with 
God through Jesus Christ! I would like to hear you all talking 


47i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


in this way, and getting rid of that old Babylonian jargon of “ifs” 
and “huts” and doubts and fears! Be fully persuaded that what 
He has promised, He will fulfill, as those who do believe what 
God has said, just because He has said it. Here is the certainty 
of justification by faith! 

And now, as to the effect produced. When a man can say 
he has peace with God — what then? Why, the first effect is 
JOY. Who can be at peace with God, and have Him for a 
Father, and yet be miserable? I think I told you one night that, 
years ago, I was waited upon by a woman who wished to 
convert me to a novel sect that had come up with a false 
prophet at its head. She talked much and talked long, and talked 
all to no purpose. At last I told her I thought it best that she 
should tell me her way in which she wished to be saved, on 
condition that she would let me tell her mine. I need not tell 
you what she said, but I said, “This is how I hope to be saved — 
it is said in God’s Word, ‘This is a faithful saying and worthy of 
all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners.’ And it is also written, ‘He who believes on Him shall 
be saved.’ Now, I do trust in Him, and I believe that, therefore, 

I shall be saved; no, more, I am saved and my sins are all 
forgiven! A perfect righteousness, namely, that of Christ, is cast 
about me, and I am so saved today that nothing by any 
possibility shall ever destroy me; I am saved forever.” The 
woman said, “If I believed that that were true, I would very 
gladly give up my faith for anything so bright as that. But you,” 
she said, “you ought to be the happiest man in the world.” And 
I said, “I thank you for that word and so will I be, God helping 
me, for I ought to be; I have the utmost cause.” And so should 
every believer feel he ought to be, because this great salvation, 
this solid hope, this rocky foundation for our everlasting peace 
should give us quiet, and calm, and security, till our joy should 
overflow and become anticipation and a foretaste of the joy of 


472 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


heaven! This peace should give the believer, beyond, and in 
addition to his joy, a calm resignation, no, a delightful 
acquiescence in his Father’s will. Now smite me if You will, my 
Father, for I am Your friend, and You are mine; now send the 
flames, for it shall only chasten, but cannot kill; now take away 
my goods, for You are my All, and I cannot lose You; now let 
the floods of trouble come, for You are my ark, and though the 
floods come around me higher and higher, still I shall abide in 
You, secure from reach of harm, while You shut me in! Thus 
with calm composure the believer walks along over life’s hills 
and dales; and when he comes to the valley of the shadow of 
death, he fears no evil, for his God is with him, His rod and 
His staff do comfort him. What fear is there to the man that is 
at peace with God? Life? — God provides for it. Death? — 
Christ has destroyed it. The grave? — Christ has rolled away the 
stone and broken the seal. Affliction, tribulation, famine, peril, 
or the sword? “No, in all these things we are more than 
conquerors through Him who has loved us.” To have peace 
with God, beloved, I cannot tell you what innumerable streams 
of good shall flow to you from this ocean of pleasure, and these 
rivers of delight! I have but skimmed over one of these placid 
streams. There are hundreds of blessed practical results that are 
sure to follow from a certain conviction of our peace with God 
through Jesus Christ. 

II. In drawing to a close, I want to address myself to 
THREE CHARACTERS THAT I HAVE NO DOUBT ARE 
REPRESENTED HERE IN THIS LARGE CONGREGATION. 

There is a man here tonight — I know he is here, though 1 
do not know his name — a man who many years ago was a 
professor of religion. He has never been easy in his conscience 
since he forsook the ways of God. There has been some 
trembling hope sometimes in him that there was a little life, not 
quite extinct, and since he has come in here, he feels quite like 


473 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a stranger in the house of prayer, where once faces were so 
familiar, and there is, perhaps, a groaning in his spirit as he says, 
“O, that I knew the way of peace, and the sense of peace for 
which in happier days I once inquired; 1 have lost my roll, if I 
ever had it; 1 have lost my character, and with my character, my 
faith — and with my faith my hope! Can I ever be at peace with 
God?” Backslider, if you have ever been called by divine grace, 
let me ask you this question. Do you remember the time when 
you had a hope? Say, did not memory revive before you that 
time, when on your knees in agony, you did cry unto Him who 
hears prayer, and the mercy came, and your spirit rejoiced in 
pardon bought with blood? Man, do you remember it? The 
tears are on your cheeks now. You were not a hypocrite — let 
us hope that it was not all hypocrisy — not all a lie and a delusion. 
You did feel, then, that Christ could save, and you did trust 
yourself with Him. Now then, man, do the same tonight — and 
the dew of your youth will be restored unto you! Your leprosy 
is white upon your brow, but wash in Jordan seven times, and 
your flesh shall come again unto you, even as a litde child! 
Jehovah seeks you; He cries unto you tonight, and by the lips 
of His ambassador says, “Return, O backsliding children, 
return unto Me, for I am married unto you, says the Lord. You 
have wearied Me with your sins, you have made Me to serve 
with your iniquities, but I, even I, am He who blots out your 
transgressions for My name’s sake, and will not remember your 
sins.” — 


“To your Father’s bosom pressed, 
Once again a child confessed! 

From His house no more to roam. 
Come, and welcome, sinner come!” 


474 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


“Oh, but I have forsaken Him.” Lay aside your “huts” and 
“ifs.” He bids you come. Away with you, you doubts and fears, 
and black despairing thoughts! The sinner comes, and Jesus 
meets him; there is the kiss of His love. “Take off his rags, 
clothe him, put shoes upon his feet, bring forth the fatted calf 
and kill it, and let us eat and be merry, for this, My son, which 
was dead, is alive again, he was lost and is found.” O, I wish I 
could persuade you — though you are growing old now — I wish 
I could persuade you to fling yourself at the foot of His dear 
cross again! His hands are still nailed — He has not moved them 
yet; His feet are still fast — He has not stirred from the place 
where He waits for you — His arms still open wide. O, believe 
Him! He is still love, and the blood is still mighty, and the plea 
in heaven is still all-prevailing. “Believe in the Lord Jesus and 
you shall be saved.” Then I wanted to have said a word to some 
here who are not exacdy backsliders, but they have lost their 
peace for a little time. Many young Christians are subject to 
these little fits in which their evidence gets dark, and they lose 
their peace. I have no need to say more to you, brothers and 
sisters, while you are walking in darkness and see no light. “Let 
him trust,” is a prophedc admonition — it shall be mine tonight. 
When you cannot see a single reason why you should be saved 
except that God says you shall, let that be enough for you! 
When you have nothing here, or there, or anywhere to look to; 
when there is no hope for you except in that Man whose 
wounds are bleeding, always think that is enough — because it 
is — and come to Christ just as you came at first. I find it very 
convenient to come every day to Christ as a sinner — as I came 
at first. “You are no saint,” says the devil. Well, if I am not, I 
am a sinner — and Jesus Christ came into the world to save 
sinners. Sink or swim, there I go — I have no other hope — 


475 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“And when your eyes of faith are dim, 

Still trust in Jesus, sink or swim! 

And at His footstool bow your knee, 

For Israel’s God your peace shall be.” 

On Christ with all my weight I lean; and as I throw myself 
upon my bed to sleep, so on Christ will I stretch myself full 
length to rest — for He is able and He is willing; and if He can 
fail, then He fails me and fails all His Church; but if He cannot, 
then I shall see His face in glory everlasting! 

By your leave, I must have two or three words with those 
who never had peace. I shall be brief. I have no doubt I address 
many here who never had faith, and you want it. I ask you, first 
of all, not to seek peace at all as the first object, for if you want 
peace before you get divine grace, you want the flower before 
you get the root — and you will be apt to be like little children 
who, when they have a piece of garden given them, will go and 
pluck up the flowers out of their father’s bed, and put the 
flowers into their own ground, and then say, “What a nice 
garden I have!” But to their dismay, on the morrow all is 
withered. Better put the roots in, and wait a week or two till 
they sprout — and then the flowers will be living ones, not 
borrowed ones! Do not seek after peace first. Seek after 
CHRIST first! Peace will come next. Still, I pray you, do not 
think that peace is a qualification for divine grace. If you fancy 
this, you will be in error, indeed; you are to come to Christ as 
Nicodemus did, by night, that is, in the night of your ignorance, 
in the night of your fear and trouble. You must come just as 
you are, bringing nothing to Christ, but coming empty- 
handed — no money, no price, no fee, “nothing to pay” — He 
asks of you nothing but that you would take all gratis from His 
liberal hand. And will you please remember that if you put your 
eyes on anything but Christ, or anything with Christ — so as to 


476 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


510 Peace By Believing - Rom. 5:1 


disturb your whole thought and attention from being directed 
exclusively to Him — then peace will be an impossibility to you! 
If your eye is single, your whole body shall be full of the light 
of God, but if you mix another trust, and so your eye is evil, 
your whole body will be full of darkness! Do not trust your 
repentance! Do not trust your faith! Do not rely upon your feelings! 
Do not depend upon your knowledge — above all do not depend 
upon your sense of need! Do not come to Christ as a sensible 
sinner — do not come trusting Christ, feeling that you are a man 
who has a right to come — that you answer to a certain character 
that may come, but come because you are a sinner; because you 
have nothing to recommend you; because if God should search 
you through and through, He could not find a point in you, a 
spot in you large enough to put the point of a pin upon that 
which was good! Come because you are vile, to be pardoned. 
Come because you are black in sin, to be washed. Come 
because you are penniless, to be made rich. Look for nothing 
else except Christ. Write this for your motto — “None but 
Jesus.” Oh, men and women, and brothers and sisters, if those 
Israelites of old, who were inside their houses that night, had 
gone outside to the lintel of their doorpost and said, “Now here 
is this lintel made of very common wood, we will paint and 
grain it.” And if they had then gone inside and trusted to the 
painting and graining of the lintel, the destroying angel would 
have found them out and destroyed them! If, again, they had 
said, “We will write up our name over the door — it is a 
respectable name — we will record the list of our charities and 
good works over the door,” the plague-angel would have 
smitten through the whole, and there would have been a 
wailing through the house as through the houses of the 
Egyptians. But what did they do? They took the blood. They 
marked the lintel and the two side posts and smeared them with 
a crimsoned stain. Then in they went, and sat contentedly 


477 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


down — or stood at last in peace — and ate the passover with joy. 
And, while the shrieks of Egypt went up in the cold midnight 
air, the sons of Israel went up also into heaven, for the angel of 
death, when He spread His wings on the blast, had seen the 
blood and by that mark He knew that He must pass by that 
habitation and smite none that were there. The word of the 
Lord was not, “When I see your faith” but, “When I see the 
blood, I will pass over you.” 

Oh, soul, if you trust Christ, the blood is on your brow 
tonight, and before the eyes of God no condemnation! Why, 
then, need you fear? You are safe, for the blood secures every 
soul that once is sheltered thereby. Believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and you shall be saved; but if you believe not, trust 
where you may, you shall be damned! God help you to believe 
in Christ for His name’s sake. Amen. 


478 



5ii Pentecost - Acts 2 . 1-4 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, May 24th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“When the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all 
with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound 
from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the 
house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them 
cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And 
they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak with 
other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.” — Acts 2:1-4 

HOW ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY is the presence and power 
of the Holy Spirit! It is not possible for us to promote the glory 
of God, or to bless the souls of men, unless the Holy Spirit 
shall be in us and with us. Those who were assembled on that 
memorable day of Pentecost were all men of prayer and faith; 
but even these precious gifts are only available when the 
celestial fire sets them on a blaze. They were all men of 
experience — most of them had been preachers of the Word, 
and workers of miracles; they had endured trials and troubles 
in company with their Lord, and had been with Him in His 
temptation. Yet, even experienced Christians, without the 
Spirit of God, are weak as water! Among them were the 
aposdes and the 70 evangelists, and with them were those 
honored women in whose houses the Lord had often been 
entertained, and who had ministered to Him of their substance. 
Yet, even these favored and honored saints can do nothing 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


without the breath of God, the Holy Spirit. Aposdes and 
evangelists dare not even attempt anything alone; they must 
tarry at Jerusalem till power is given them from on high. It was 
not a lack of education; they had been for three years in the 
college of Christ, with perfect wisdom as their tutor, matchless 
eloquence as their instructor, and immaculate perfection as 
their example; yet, they must not venture to open their mouths 
to testify of the mystery of Jesus until the anointing Spirit has 
come with blessed unction from above! Surely, my brothers, if 
it was so with them, much more must it be the case with us. 
Let us beware of trusting to our well-adjusted machineries of 
committees and schemes; let us be jealous of all reliance upon 
our own mental faculties or religious vigor; let us be careful that 
we do not look too much to our leading preachers and 
evangelists, for if we put any of these in the place of the Divine 
Spirit, we shall err most fatally! Let us thank God for all gifts, 
and for all offices, but oh, let us always be reminded that gifts 
and offices are but as sounding brass and tinkling cymbals, 
unless the quickening influence is present! 

It has been said by certain modern theologians, that we 
make this doctrine of dependence upon the Holy Spirit far too 
prominent, and that our constant teaching of this truth of God 
has a tendency to numb all human effort, and foster 
indifference and sloth. Surely it is not so, my brothers and 
sisters! Let us refute this slander by our own earnestness, and 
let it be seen that those of us who confess that without their 
Lord they can do nothing, are able with His aid to do everything! 
O may we be so inflamed by the eternal fire that our life may 
be all zeal and love, self-sacrifice and labor, so shall we teach 
the gainsayer that the worshippers of the gracious Spirit are not 
loiterers in the vineyard of the Lord! I am persuaded that so far 
from speaking too frequent upon this matter, we do not often 
enough extol the Blessed Spirit, and certain ministries almost 


480 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


ignore His existence. You might attend some chapels and not 
even know that there was a Holy Spirit at all except for the 
benediction! And were it not for the liturgy, and the, “glory be 
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,” there are 
many of our national edifices where you might never know that 
a Comforter had been sent to us! 

Now, I earnestly pray that this morning I may stir up your 
minds by way of remembrance, by a simple exposition of the 
descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. We are not observers 
of days and months, but it happens to be the season of the year 
in which the Early Church was accustomed to celebrate the 
outpouring of the Spirit at Pentecost. We commonly talk of 
Whitsuntide, or White Sunday — which name is not without its 
lesson. In the earlier centuries, on this particular day, in 
commemoration of the great baptism of the 3,000 converted 
under the preaching of Peter, it was the custom of the Church 
to hold a great baptism, and the candidates for immersion being, 
as with us, robed in white — (therefore, the name “Candidates,” 
or “White ones”) — and so that Sunday was called White 
Sunday. It was not ill that the outpouring of Pentecost should 
be celebrated by the baptism of converts, for the cause is always 
best remembered by the effect. May our Lord help us to enjoy 
a Pentecost all the year round, and may the baptism pool be 
stirred every week! 

I shall call your attention to the season when the Spirit was 
poured out; to the manner in which it was manifested; to the matter 
itself; and, lastly, to the results which followed. 

I. There is much holy teaching in THE SEASON when the 
Spirit of God was given. 

“When the day of Pentecost was fully come.” We may 
observe, first, that the Spirit of God was given in God’s chosen 
and appointed time. There is a set time to favor Zion. The Spirit 
is not at all times alike active in His manifest workings. Both to 


481 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


try our faith, and to prove His own Sovereignty, the right hand 
of the Lord is sometimes thrust into His bosom, and He will 
only make bare His arm at such times and seasons as He, 
Himself, has appointed. “The wind blows where it will,” is a 
truth of God well calculated to hide pride from man. brethren, 
if every drop of rain has its appointed birthday, every gleam of 
light its predestinated pathway, and every spark of fire its 
setded hour of flying upward, certainly the will, foreknowledge, 
and decree of God must have arranged and settled the period 
of every revival and place of every gracious visitation! Times of 
refreshing, in a Church or a commonwealth, come not except 
as the Creator-Spirit has determined; the day of salvation to 
each individual is an appointed time; the second birth is not left 
to chance; yes, more — every breath of that Divine Spirit which 
sweeps across the mind of the believer, every drop of sacred oil 
which anoints him, or of the holy dew which quickens him — 
comes to him according to that irresistible will which loosens 
the bands of Orion, or binds up the sweet influences of the 
Pleiades! In God’s accepted and appointed time, therefore, the 
light of heaven shall go forth, and although this is not to 
withhold or restrain us from asking for the Spirit every day, it 
is to encourage us if He does not at once begin to work, for if 
the vision tarries, we are to wait for it, it shall come in due 
time — it will not tarry! 

There was a further mystery in the season, for it was after the 
ascension of our Lord. The Spirit of God was not given till after 
Jesus had been glorified. The various blessings which we 
receive are ascribable to different parts of Christ’s work. His 
life is our imputed righteousness; His death brings us pardon; 
His resurrection confers upon us justification; His ascension 
yields to us the Holy Spirit, and those spiritual gifts which edify 
the body. “Therefore He says, when He ascended up on high, 
He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. And He gave 


482 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and 
some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for 
the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.” 
As when Roman heroes returned from blood-red fields, and 
the senate awarded them a triumph, they rode in their chariot 
drawn by milk-white steeds through the thronging streets of 
the capitol, so did Jesus Christ, when He led captivity captive, 
receive a triumph at His Father’s hands. The triumphal chariot 
bore Him through the streets of glory, while all the inhabitants, 
with loud acclaim, saluted Him as Conqueror — 

“Crown Him! Crown Him! 

Crowns become the Victor’s brow!” 

It was the custom of the Roman conqueror, as he rode 
along, to distribute large quantities of money which were 
scattered among the admiring crowd. So our glorified Lord 
scattered gifts among men, yes, to the rebellious, also. He gave 
those gifts that the Lord God might dwell among them; in this 
manner, then, to grace the triumph of Jesus, the Spirit of God 
was liberally poured out upon the Church below! Perhaps, you 
remind me that our Lord had ascended 10 days before. I know 
He had, but the delay might teach them patience. Not always 
does the flower bloom from the root in one hour. Christ has 
ascended, and heaven is ringing with His praise; they have kept 
10 days of joyous holiday before the eternal throne, and now, 
when Pentecost is fully come, the rushing mighty wind is heard. 
Do you think, my brothers and sisters that we plead Christ’s 
ascension enough as a reason why the Church should be 
blessed with the Spirit? I know we often reach as far as, “By 
Your agony and bloody sweat, by Your cross and passion, by 
Your precious death and burial, by Your glorious 
resurrection” — but do we proceed to, “By Your ascension, we 


483 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


beseech You, to hear us?” I am afraid we fail to perceive that 
the ascension of Christ is to be used as an argument in prayer, 
when we would have the Church revived by the holy breath of 
God, or have gifts bestowed upon her ministers and Church 
officers. 

Moreover, there is yet more teaching in the season. It was 
at Pentecost. Many of the early writers say that Pentecost was the 
time when the law was proclaimed upon Mount Sinai. Others 
think it doubtful; if it is so, it was very significant that on the 
day when the law was issued amid thunders and lightning, the 
gospel — God’s new and better law — should be proclaimed 
with mighty wind and tongues of fire! We are clear, however, 
that Pentecost was a harvest festival. On that day, the sheaf was 
waved before the Lord, and the harvest consecrated. The 
passover was to our Savior the time of His sowing, but 
Pentecost was the day of His reaping, and the fields, which 
were ripe to the harvest when He sat on the well, are reaped 
now that He sits upon the throne! 

But certainly the Spirit of God was given at Pentecost 
because there was then the most need of Him. On that occasion, vast 
crowds were gathered from all regions. The God of wisdom 
always knows how to time His gifts. What would have been the 
use of granting the many tongues when no strangers were ready 
to hear? If there had been no Parthians and Medes, and 
Elamites, and dwellers of Mesopotamia collected in Jerusalem, 
there would have been no need for the cloven tongues; but 
inasmuch as the city was full, and the high festival was being 
kept by unusual multitudes, it was most fit and right that now 
the Lord should say — “Thrust in your sickle, for the harvest of 
the earth is ripe.” Dear friends, I think that whenever we see 
unusual gatherings of men, whenever the Spirit of hearing is 
poured out upon the people, we ought to pray for and expect 
an unusual visitation of the Spirit of God! And when I look 


484 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


upon these crowds assembled in this house every Sunday year 
after year, I can but entreat you to cry mightily to Him with 
whom is the residue of the Spirit, that He would give us a 
Pentecost, for though neither Parthians, nor Medes, nor 
Elamites are here, yet, there scarcely ever passes a Sunday 
without there being representatives of almost all nations under 
heaven who hear the wonderful works of God, not in their own 
tongue, it is true, but yet in a language which they understand. 
Oh, pray that the Spirit of God may fall upon the unparalleled 
hosts assembled here! 

Still, dear friends, we have not dwelt upon a leading reason 
why the Holy Spirit descended at this special season. ‘They were 
all with one accord in one place. ”We have been expecting to see the 
days of heaven upon earth. Our soul has longed to hear the 
voice of God thundering out of heaven. We have hoped for 
days such as our fathers have told us comforted them in the 
old times. We looked to see thousands born in a day — alas, the 
vision comes not. But look at our country! We have had spasms 
of revival — that is as much as I can say. Even the Irish revival, 
for which we can never sufficiendy bless God, was but as a 
passing cloud; it was not an abiding, resting shower, and so with 
all the shakings we have had in these later times. We have had 
but glbnpses, where we needed sights l We have had but twilight, 
where we needed the sacred, everlasting noon! What is the 
reason for this? Perhaps it is to be found in our lack of union. 
“They were all with one accord in one place.” Christians cannot 
all be in one place. We have no room that would be large 
enough to hold them, blessed be God! But if they cannot all be 
in one place, yet they can all be of one accord. Oh, when there are 
no cold hearts, when there are no prejudices to divide us, no 
bigotries to separate us, no apathy to hold us down, no false 
doctrine to separate the flocks from one another — and no 
schism to rend the one sacred garment of Christ — then may we 


485 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


expect to see the Spirit of God resting upon us! And in any 
Church where there is no strife as to who shall be the greatest, 
no division about peculiarities, no fighting for 
respectabilities — but when the Church is of one accord — then 
may we expect to hear the sound of abundance of heaven’s rain! 

Note, dear friends, what they were doing. They were not 
merely unanimous, but they were earnest about one grand 
objective. They had all been praying! Read the first chapter and you 
will perceive that they had been much in prayer. The whole of 
the time, since the ascent of our Lord, they had been occupied 
in constant supplication, and so, pleading both day and night, 
it was no great wonder that the granaries of heaven should be 
unlocked! We have had weeks of prayer at the beginning of the 
last few years, and it was well, but if we had continued in prayer 
all the weeks of the year, if we had always been with one accord 
still crying unto heaven, still wresding with the angel, still 
interceding — surely the little cloud, like a man’s hand, which 
the eye of faith has seen — would, by this time, have covered all 
the heavens, and have discharged a plenteous shower upon all 
nations of men! There must be unity, but that unity must not 
be the frozen union of death, but the glorious welding of a 
glowing furnace! 

They had been much in prayer, and now, I see them sitting 
still. Why do they sit so quiedy? It is the quietude of expectation! 
When God’s Church adds expectation to supplication, then a 
blessing tarries no longer. We ask, but we do not expect to 
receive! We pray, but probably nothing would so alarm us as 
the answer to our prayers! If, after having pleaded with God to 
send His Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit did come, there are many 
who would not believe it! There are others who would think it 
a mere excitement, and there are multitudes who would shut 
their eyes to it altogether! Oh, Spirit of God! Work in the hearts 
of Your children perfect harmony, intense anxiety, and 


486 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


confident expectation — and then will You come to do Your 
mighty deeds once more! 

These remarks concerning the season may lead to many 
practical questions; I will but put them rapidly, and leave them. 
Do I help to hinder the coming of the Spirit by any bitterness 
of my temper? Do I, by any lack of love, tend to divide the 
Church? Are my prayers such as are likely to prevail? And when 
I pray, do I expect the blessing of God? If not, how mournful 
that I should be the means of restraining and limiting the Holy 
One of Israel; that I should be a Church robber and commit 
sacrilege against the Church of God — not by stealing its gold 
and silver — but by closing the treasury of God! Let us, as a 
Church, humble ourselves under the hand of God, and then, 
girding up the loins of our mind, wait upon Him with patience 
and earnestness until the Spirit is poured out from on high! 

II. I come now, dear friends, in the second place, to notice 
THE MANNER IN WHICH THE SPIRIT WAS GIVEN. 

Each word here is suggestive. “Suddenly.” No herald 
sounded his trumpet, but as they were expecting, in a moment, 
the celestial tempest came! If the Lord is about to do any great 
work in the world, we must not be astonished if we hear of its 
coming like a thunderclap. Man sits down and plans, and 
arranges and works, and everybody knows what he is aiming at. 
God also plans, and arranges, and forestalls Himself, but He 
does not tell man what His purpose is. It is the glory of God to 
conceal a thing, and so, though the Spirit may have been 
secredy preparing men’s hearts, yet, the real work of revival is 
done suddenly, to the surprise of all observers! You will have 
noticed it was so in the great revival in New England, when 
Jonathan Edwards stood up and read his manuscript sermon, 
holding the manuscript close to his eyes, because he was 
nearsighted — a method of preaching which I should think 
would be the very least likely to ever cause an excitement in the 


487 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


audience — and yet, while he preached from that text — “Their 
feet shall slide in due time,” the Spirit of God suddenly came 
down, the people began to tremble and even cry out under the 
terrors of conviction, and the awakening spread throughout all 
that region and many thousands were added to the Church of 
Christ! Was it not so with Livingstone at the Kirk of Shotts? 
The presbytery had been holding long services, and preaching 
sermons without any great results and just at the close 
Livingstone was asked to preach. Standing on a gravestone, in 
the midst of a driving shower, he addressed the assembled 
crowd, and down came the Holy Spirit — more mightily than 
the shower which fell from heaven — and hundreds were born 
in one day to Christ! It was the same under George Whitefield, 
in the notable revivals of which he was the agent; the Spirit 
came like lightning from the skies! Do not be suspicious when 
you hear of these things suddenly appearing. You remember, 
yourselves, an instance which awakens all your hearts to 
gratitude. You remember a chapel with but a handful of people 
in it who could scarcely see from one to another. Did the 
crowds come by slow degrees? Was it a life-work to build up a 
Church? No, but the trumpet sounded; the prepared ears heard 
it; the house was thronged; the Church grew and multiplied — 
and now, we who are members of it bless God for His mercies 
every day! When God says, “Let there be light” there is light! 

Then, there was a sound. Although the Spirit of God 
Himself is silent in His operations, yet, the operations are not 
silent in their results! The sound would teach them that the Spirit 
of God was not come to be concealed in their hearts as a silent 
guest, but to be heard throughout the world as the voice of 
God; for now faith was come by hearing, and hearing by the 
Word of God; and a sound as of a mighty rushing wind, was a 
type to them of the sound of their own testimony which was to 
go forth throughout all the world even unto the ends thereof! 


488 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


To their ears, the speaking hurricane would say, “Even so, we, 
a handful of converted men, are to sweep around the globe like 
a mighty wind, and men are to be compelled to hear the sound 
of mercy.” 

Then, it was a sound, notice, as of wind. It is remarkable that 
both in the Greek and in the Hebrew tongues, the word used 
for wind and for Spirit is the same. Hence, when the Savior said 
to Nicodemus, “The wind blows where it wishes and you hear 
the sound thereof,” the type might have been suggested to him 
by the fact of the Hebrew word used having the double 
signification of the wind and of the Spirit. The wind is 
doubtless chosen as a significant emblem because of its 
mysteriousness — “You cannot tell from where it comes, nor 
where it goes,” because of its freeness. “It blows where it 
wishes,” because of diversity of its operations, for the wind 
blows a gende zephyr at one moment, and later it mounts to a 
howling blast. The Holy Spirit at one time comes to comfort, 
and at other times to alarm — at one season, sofdy with the 
promise — and at another time, terribly with the threat. 

Observe, it was rushing. This portrayed the rapidity with 
which the Spirit’s influences spread — rushing like a torrent. 
Within 50 years from that date of Pentecost, the gospel had 
been preached in every country of the known world! Paul and 
his brothers, the aposdes, had journeyed east, west, north, and 
south. Iron gates had been opened, and bars of brass had been 
snapped, and the glorious life-giving Word of God had been 
preached to every creature under heaven for a witness against 
them. God’s Spirit does not creep and crawl, as too often our 
unspiritual agencies do, but when He comes, it is a rush — and 
half the world is lit with divine light before we dream that the 
match has been struck! 

Nor is this all, for it was mighty, a wind against which 
nothing could stand; the house itself might be shaken. They 


489 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


may have been greatly alarmed for fear the house would fall 
about their heads. The wind was irresistible, and so is the Spirit 
of God — where He comes, nothing can stand against Him! O 
Spirit of God, if You would but now come as a rough north 
wind, the crescent of Mohammed would be prostrate in the 
dust, and the gods of the heathen would fall upon their faces 
like Dagon before the ark! You have but to proceed in Your 
sevenfold operations, and the harlot of Rome would lose her 
enchanting power! You can dash in pieces the hoary systems 
which have resisted all human attack. Mightier than the tooth 
of time, Your finger, O sacred Spirit, could destroy what man 
reckons to be his everlasting workmanship! Glory be to God, 
wherever the Spirit comes He proves Himself to be divine by 
the omnipotence which He displays. They heard, then, a sound 
as of a rushing mighty wind. Although we never expect to hear 
a sound like this, yet we do expect, dear Christian friends, to 
have the reality; we hope yet to see the Spirit of God 
mysteriously at work, and we hope to hear the sound thereof, 
the glad tidings cheering our hearts. We love to see nations 
born in a day! We do yet believe that before our eyes are closed 
in death, we shall see God’s arm stretched out, and the 
irresistible might of His Spirit felt by His enemies! 

Consider the next sentence. “Which filled all the place where 
they were sitting The sound was not merely heard by the 
disciples, but it appeared to penetrate the other chambers 
besides that large upper room where they were probably 
gathered together. Ah, and when the Spirit of God comes, He 
never confines Himself to the Church. The influence may not 
be saving to those without, but it is felt by them. A revival in a 
village penetrates even the tavern. The Spirit of God at work in 
the Church is soon felt in the farmyard, known in the 
workroom, and perceived in the factory! It is not possible for 
the Spirit to be confined when once He comes. Oh, if He 


490 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


should but visit this place, Walworth, and Camberwell, and 
Southwark must all know it! The very streets should be made 
to wear a different aspect! And whereas we now have to walk 
down long rooms of shops still open on the Sunday, we should 
doubtless see them closed, for the Spirit of God would fill the 
entire place where His Church was located. May such glad 
times come when from one end of England to another; the 
Spirit of God shall fill all men in all places, because He dwells 
specially with His chosen people! 

But this was not all. I must now mention what I think was 
the appearance seen. It was a bright luminous cloud, probably, 
not unlike that which once rested in the wilderness over the 
tribes by night. A fiery pillar was seen hovering in the upper 
part of the room! The cloud is mentioned as “it,” so that it 
seems to have been one, and yet it is called, “tongues,” so that 
it must have been many! In the Greek, there is a unique 
commingling of singular and plural in the verbs, which can 
hardly be accounted for, unless there really did exist a 
singularity, and a plurality at the same time. There floated in the 
room, I think, one mass of flame, a great cloud of fire. This 
suddenly divided, or was cleft — and separate tongues of fire 
rested upon the head of each of the disciples. They would 
understand that thus a divine power was given to them, for 
such a figure was by no means unusual or far-fetched! Heathens 
have been accustomed to represent in their statues, beams of 
light, or flames of fire proceeding from their false deities, and 
to this day the cloudy radiance with which Roman Catholic 
painters always adorn the heads of saints is a relic of the same 
idea. It was said by the ancients of Hesiod, the first of all the 
poets, that whereas he was once nothing but a simple cow 
herder, yet, suddenly, a divine flame fell upon him, and he 
became from then on one of the noblest of men. We feel 
assured that so natural a metaphor would be at once 


491 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


understood by the apostles. A tongue of fire resting upon them 
would be a token of a special inspiration from God. Notice first, 
it was a tongue, for God has been pleased to make the tongue 
do mightier deeds than either sword or pen; and though the 
pen shall speak to ages yet to come, yet never with that living 
force which trembles from the tongue, for what we read in a 
book is but dead, but that which we Aar with the ears comes as 
a living word to the soul. It pleases God, by the foolishness of 
preaching, to save them who believe. Then it was a tongue of 
fire, to show that God’s ministers speak, not coldly, as though 
they had tongues of ice, nor learnedly as with tongues of gold, 
nor arrogantly as with tongues of brass, nor plaintively as with 
tongues of willow, nor sternly as with tongues of iron — but 
earnestly and in a mystery — not as with tongues of flesh, but 
with the tongue of flame! Their words consume sin, scorch lies, 
enlighten the darkness, and comfort the poor. Notice, 
moreover, that “It SAT upon them.” It did not flicker or go 
away; it remained there! So the Spirit of God is an abiding 
influence, and the saints shall persevere! It sat upon each of them, 
so that while there was but one fire, yet each believer received 
Iris portion of the one Spirit. There are diversities of operations, 
but it is the same Lord! 

I will not tarry longer with the description of how the Spirit 
came except to observe that I would to God that He would 
manifest Himself in the same manner this day. We want our 
young men to have tongues of fire! And you, fathers, we long 
to see you also kindled by the live coal which touched the lips 
of Isaiah. Even you, my sisters — for doubtless that tongue of 
fire rested upon the Virgin Mary and upon the other women — 
we would like to see it rest on you, that in your families, in your 
Sunday school classes, or in your visitations, and nursing of the 
sick, you may have the Holy Fire abiding in you! Oh, may God 
be pleased to send forth the Comforter to each of us! May none 


492 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


of us be without His power, for the set time to favor Zion shall 
have come when both men and women of every rank and 
degree shall have received the Spirit of the blessed God! I am 
afraid this does not interest you; you think it happened a long 
while ago, and is not likely ever to occur again. And I am afraid 
it is not while we remain so indifferent to it, but, oh, if we had 
the anxiety to desire it, and the faith to expect it, we might see 
greater things than these! Without the outward sign, which was 
but for the babyhood of the Church, we might receive the 
inward and spiritual grace fit for the full-grown man of the 
advanced believers of our time. 

III. Consider now THE MATTER ITSELF, the benefit 
which now was given. 

Of the matter itself, we react very briefly that, “They were 
all filled with the Holy Spirit.” The sound was not the Holy 
Spirit, nor was the tongue of fire the Holy Spirit — these were 
but the symbols of His work; the real work was done when all 
present were filled with the Holy Spirit. What is this? What is 
this strange mystery? The skeptic sneers and says, “There is no 
such thing!” The formal religionist says, “I have never felt it.” 
And most Christians think it something to be devoutly believed 
in, but by no means to be experienced! Is there a Holy Spirit? 
My hearer, you dare not ask that question, unless you are 
prepared to involve a doubt of your own conversion, for, 
“Except a man is born of the Spirit, he cannot see the kingdom 
of God.” And if, therefore, the Holy Spirit does not dwell in 
you, and has not made you a new creature by His miraculous 
operations, you are still in the gall of bitterness, and in the 
bonds of iniquity. Only the true Christian knows what it is to 
receive the Spirit — but there are only a few Christians who 
know what it is to be filled with Him — to be filled with Him to 
the brim. There are times when the preacher has known it, 
when he had no need to ask himself what he should say, nor in 


493 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


what language he should couch his thoughts — for the thoughts 
were born all dressed, and armed — and they sprung not from 
him but through him, of the Holy Spirit! There are times when 
the soul is full of calm, for the dove is there; full of passion for 
the fire is there; full of life, for the wind is there; full of growth, 
for the dew is there; full of divine priesthood and the power to 
bless, for the oil is there; full of knowledge, for the light of God 
is there; and purged and cleansed, because the fountain of living 
water flows within. There are, it is true, seasons when the man 
has to complain that he cannot discover any of these signs; but 
oh, there are glad and high days when God’s anointed servants 
feel borne upon the mystic wind aloft in sublime thoughts! 
Then, they are no longer weak men, but men inspired to break 
hard hearts, to stir emotions, to quicken the dead, to open blind 
eyes, and to preach the gospel to the poor — and all by the 
power from on high! You who have felt the sublime sensation 
of being filled with the Spirit may read of Ezekiel’s being lifted 
by a lock of his hair between earth and heaven — but you know 
that to be filled with the Spirit is a greater wonder still, for that 
lifts a man up from worldly cares, enables him to lay hold upon 
God in prayer, bathes him in the joy of heaven — and then 
sends him down with shining face to bless his fellow men! The 
flesh trembles in the dust because the Great Spirit has come to 
our spirit’s help, and flesh must lose all dominion, but our spirit 
rejoices with great joy. 

Observe the difference between Peter with the Spirit, and 
Peter without the Spirit! There he is, cursing and swearing like 
a sailor; he never knew Christ, he says. There he is, sinking in 
the sea; he does not believe that he can walk upon the waters, 
and he cries, “Lord, save, or I perish.” Peter, the braggart, the 
rash man, and yet, the coward! Look at him now — the Spirit of 
God has come upon him; how different is Peter! Fearless of all 
the jeers and taunts which the vulgar crew might cast at him, 


494 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


he stands up to preach! Why has this man eloquence? He 
speaks mightily, and not as the scribes. Lo, the people are 
moved under him as the green corn is moved by the wind, or 
as the waves of the sea are swept by the gale, and when he has 
finished preaching, he goes up to the temple and commands a 
lame man to leap, and the miracle is worked! He is brought 
before the rulers and commanded to hold his peace, and he 
answers like a hero, “Whether it is right to obey man rather 
than God, you judge.” Peter is found traveling over every 
country, preaching the Word in every tongue, and at last, he 
who was once a coward cheerfully stretches out his aged arms 
to be nailed to a cross, but head downwards, as though he felt 
he was not worthy to die like his Master! He expires upon the 
tree, glorifying Christ in his death! There is no comparison to 
be drawn; it is a case of clear contrast between Peter the 
unspiritual, and Peter full of the Holy Spirit! No man or woman 
among you knows what he might be if he were filled with the 
Spirit. What is that rough Luther? He is only fit to have been a 
killer of bulls, or a feller of oaks in the forest; but fill Luther 
with the Holy Spirit and what is he? He takes the bull of Rome 
by the horns, slays wild beasts of error in the great arena of the 
gospel, and is more than a conqueror through the might which 
dwells in him! Take John Calvin — fit naturally to be a cunning 
lawyer, cutting and dividing nice points, judging this precedent, 
and that, frittering away his time over immaterial niceties, but 
fill him with the Holy Spirit, and John Calvin becomes the 
mighty master of divine grace, the reflection of the wisdom of 
all past ages, and a great light to shed a brilliant ray even till the 
Millennium shall dawn! Chief, and prince, and king of all 
uninspired teachers, the mighty seer of Geneva, filled with the 
Spirit of God is no more John Calvin, but a God-sent angel of 
the Churches! Who knows what yonder young man may be? I 
know today he is but as other men — fill him with the Spirit, let 


495 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


it move him in the camp of Dan — and woe to the Philistines! 
Who knows what that young woman may be? She may sit under 
the oak quiedy with Deborah now, but the day may come when 
she shall stir up Barak, and put a song into his mouth, saying, 
“Awake, awake, O Barak, lead your captivity captive, you son 
of Abinoam!” Only let us be filled with the Spirit, and we know 
not what we can be! We shall “Laugh at impossibility and say, 
‘It shall be done.’” We shall attempt what we never dreamed of 
before, and accomplish that which we always thought to be far 
beyond our grasp! 

IV. Our last point is — THE RESULT OF IT ALL. 

Well, well, you will think it a very commonplace sort of 
thing. After all this rushing mighty wind, this fire and so on, 
what are you expecting? Kings trembling in the dust; or riding 
in their chariots to do homage to the apostles? Shall the wind 
blow down dynasties — shall the fire consume dominions? 
Nothing of the kind, my brothers and sisters! Nothing of the 
kind! Spiritual and not carnal, is the kingdom of God. The 
result lies in three things — a sermon, a number of inquirers, and a 
great baptism!T\v&t is all! Yes, but though it is all, it is the grandest 
thing in all the world — for in the judgment of the angels and of 
those whom God has made wise unto salvation — these are 
three most precious matters! 

There was a sermon. The Spirit of God was given to help 
Peter to preach a sermon. You turn with interest to know what 
sort of a sermon a man would preach who was full to the brim 
with the Holy Spirit. You expect him to be more eloquent than 
Robert Hall, or Chalmers, of course; more learned than the 
Puritans, certainly; as for illustrations, of course you will have 
the loftiest flights of poetic genius! You may expect, now, to 
have all the orations of Cicero and Demosthenes put entirely 
in the shade; we shall have something glorious now! No such 
thing! No such thing! Never was there a sermon more 


496 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


commonplace than that of Peter’s, and let me tell you that it is 
one of the blessed effects of the Holy Spirit to make ministers 
preach simply! You do not want the Holy Spirit to make them 
ride the high horse and mount up on the wings of the spread 
eagle to the stars; what is needed is to keep them down, dealing 
with solemn subjects in an intelligible manner. What was the 
theme of this sermon? Was it something so intellectual that 
nobody could comprehend it, or so grand that few could grasp 
it? No, Peter just rises up and delivers himself somewhat like 
this — “Jesus Christ of Nazareth lived among you; He was the 
Messiah promised of old; you crucified Him, but in His name, 
there is salvadon, and whoever among you will repent and be 
baptized shall find mercy.” That is all! I am sure Mr. Charles 
Simeon in his, “Skeleton Sermons,” would not have inserted it 
as a model, and I do not suppose that any college professor 
alive would ever say to his students — “If you want to preach, 
preach like Peter.” Why, I do not perceive it firsdy, secondly, 
thirdly or fourthly, to which some of us feel compelled to bind 
ourselves. It is, in fact, a commonplace talking about sublime 
things — sublime things which in this age are thought to be 
foolishness and a stumbling block! Well then, may the Spirit of 
God be poured out to teach our ministers to preach plainly, to 
set our young men talking about Jesus Christ — for this is 
absolutely necessary! When the Spirit of God goes away from 
a Church, it is a fine thing for oratory, because then it is much 
more assiduously cultivated. When the Spirit of God is gone, 
then all the ministers become exceedingly learned, for not 
having the Spirit they need to supply the emptiness His absence 
has made, and then the old-fashioned Bible is not quite good 
enough! They must touch it up a bit, and improve upon it, and 
the old doctrines which used to rejoice their grandmothers at 
the fireside, are too stale for them — they must have an 
improved and a new theology, and young gentlemen nowadays 


497 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


show their profound knowledge by denying everything which 
is the prop and pillar of our hope, and start some new will-o’- 
the-wisp which they set their people staring at! Ah, well, we 
want the Spirit of God to sweep all that away! Oh that my dear 
sister who conducts the female class, and all who are in the 
Sunday school may be helped just to talk to you about Christ. 
When you get the Spirit of God to come upon you like fire, and 
like a rushing mighty wind, it will not be to make you doctors 
of divinity, and scholars, and great elocutionists — it will only 
be just for this — to make you preach Christ, and preach Him 
more simply than you ever did before. 

The next result was that the people were pricked in the 
heart, and began to cry, “ Men and brothers and sisters, what shall we 
do?” What a disorderly thing to do at a sermon! Usher, see that 
man out of the Church! We cannot allow people to be calling 
out, “What must I do to be saved?” Blessed disorder, blessed 
disorder, which the Spirit of God gives! This will be the result 
of all sermons in which there is the presence of God! Men will 
feel that they have heard something which has gone right into 
their inmost nature — that they have received a wound which 
they can by no means heal — and at the next inquiry meeting, 
there will be many saying, “How can I find peace? How can I 
get my sins forgiven?” 

What next? Why, where the Spirit of God is, there will be 
faith, and there will be an outward confession of it in baptism. “Well, 
well,” says one, “I did not think we were to see all this rushing 
mighty wind, and tongues of fire just to get a few commonplace 
sermons, and conversions, and baptisms.” But 1 tell you again, 
it is the conversions and baptisms which make the arches of 
heaven ring! I do not believe there was one extra note in heaven 
on the day when the Princess of Wales rode through London; 
we all went and gazed and admired, but I do not believe that 
one angel ever opened one eye to look at it. He saw nothing 


498 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5ii Pentecost - Acts 2:1-4 


there which struck him. But wherever there is a groaning, and 
a sobbing, and a sighing after the Savior, a longing after 
reconciliation — and above all, where there is a renewed heart 
dedicating itself openly to Jesus — where there is a soul that says, 
“I will be buried with my Master; I will be obedient to His 
command, and despite every opposition, I will go down with 
Him into the liquid grave! I will be numbered with the ridiculed 
men and women who acknowledge that they are dead to the 
world and only alive to Christ” — I say, it is in such a case that 
angels rejoice, and this it is for which we need the Spirit of God! 

I have done when I have sown this thought. See, dear 
friends, see the absolute importance of repentance, and of faith, 
and of baptism. I pray you, if the Spirit of God comes all the 
way from heaven to work these, be not satisfied till you receive 
them! See, again, the importance of preaching, for the Spirit of 
God descends only to help the preacher; and then see, last of 
all, the all-importance of the Holy Spirit! Without Him we 
cannot preach, and we cannot hear so as to believe and be 
saved! May I beg you, as you go your way, to entreat the Lord 
to be with us according to His own promise — “If you, being 
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, much 
more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them 
who ask Him.” 


499 



512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 49:16 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, May 31 st, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Behold, I have inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” 

- Isaiah 49:16 

GOD’S PROMISES are not exhausted by one fulfillment. 
They are manifold mercies, so that after you have opened one 
fold, and found out one signification, you may unfurl them still 
more, and find another which shall be equally true, and then 
another, and another, and another, almost without end! Like 
the cherubim, God’s promises have a face for every quarter of 
the earth, and like the wheels, they are full of eyes for every trial 
of the chosen people. The Lord knows how to speak many- 
handed promises; His words, like the trees of the New 
Jerusalem, bear 12 kinds of fruits, and yield their fruit every 
month. No doubt the text and the preceding promises all refer 
to the seed of Abraham; God will not cast them away; He does 
no more forget them than does a woman forget her sucking 
child. They shall return to their own land, and accept Messiah, 
the Prince whom they have so long despised. But the seed of 
Abraham is the grand type of the Church; and therefore we 
believe that every word here, in its widest and most extensive 
sense, belongs to the elect of God — those who are written in 
the Lamb’s Book of Life, and for whom Jesus shed His blood. 
We feel persuaded that the favor which is shelved to the whole 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


body is given to each member, and therefore any true believer 
who is, through faith, one of the spiritual seed of Abraham, 
may take the promises to himself and say, “Thus says the Lord 
unto my soul; thus and thus speaks He comfortably concerning 
me.” I believe, 1 say, that the text before us belongs primarily 
to the seed of Israel; next, to the whole Church as a body; and 
then to every individual member. LTnderstand it so, and may 
each one of you, even though you are numbered among the 
little in Israel, have divine grace to draw forth marrow and 
fatness out of the inexpressibly rich text which today the Spirit 
of God presents to us! 

I intend, first of all, to consider our text verbally, pulling it to 
pieces word by word; then next, to consider it as a whole; and then, 
to incite you by it as a whole, to consider what is the conduct demanded of 
you by a truth of God so sweet. 

I. First of all, then, my text is one of those remarkable 
sentences in which EVERY SINGLE WORD DESERVES TO BE 
EMPHASIZED. 

We will begin with the first word, “Behold. ” “Behold, I have 
inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” “Behold,” is a word 
of wonder. It is intended to excite admiration. Wherever you see 
it hung out in Scripture, it is like an ancient signboard, 
signifying that there are rich wares within, or like the hands 
which solid readers have observed in the margin of the older 
Puritan books, drawing attention to something particularly 
worthy of observation. Here, indeed, we have a theme for 
marveling! Heaven and earth may well be astonished that God 
should ever inscribe upon His hands the names of sinners; that 
rebels should attain so great a nearness to His heart as to be 
written upon the palms of His hands! Well might the angels 
wonder, and those bright spirits be lost in amazement, for unto 
which of the angels said He at any time, “I have inscribed you 
upon the palms of My hands”? What cherub ever attained this 


501 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


dignity, or to what seraph was this honor awarded? But to man, 
who is but a worm; to the son of man who is but dust and ashes; 
to man who has rebelled, who has lost all claim upon God’s 
favor, and deserves His hottest wrath — to man is this 
consolation given, “I have inscribed you upon the palms of My 
hands.” Speak of the seven wonders of the world, why this is a 
wonder in the seventh heavens! No doubt a part of the wonder 
which is concentrated in the word “Behold,” is excited by the 
unbelieving lamentation of the preceding sentence. Zion said, 
“The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me.” 
How amazed the divine mind seems to be at this wicked 
unbelief of man! What can be more astounding than the 
unfounded doubts and fears of God’s favored people? He 
seems to say, “How can I have forgotten you, when I have 
inscribed you upon the palms of My hands? How can it be? 
How dare you doubt My constant remembrance, when the 
memorial is set upon My very flesh?” O unbelief, how strange 
a marvel you are! I know not which most to wonder at, the 
faithfulness of God, or the unbelief of His people! He keeps 
His promise a thousand times, and yet the next trial makes us 
doubt Him! He never fails; He is never a dry well; He is never 
as a setting sun, a passing meteor, or a melting vapor — and yet 
we are as continually vexed with anxieties, molested with 
suspicions, and disturbed with fears — as if our God were fickle 
and untrue! Here follows the great marvel — that God should 
be faithful to such a faithless people, and that when He is 
provoked with their doubts, He nevertheless abides true. 
Behold! Behold! I say, and am ashamed and confounded for all 
your cruel doubts of your indulgent Lord. 

I remarked that the “Behold” in our text is intended to 
attract particular attention. There is something here worthy of 
being studied. If you should spend a month over such a text as 
this, you should only begin to understand it. It is a gold mine; 


502 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


there are nuggets upon the surface, but there is richer gold for 
the man who can dig deep. I can only indicate the veins of 
gold — it is for you afterwards in your meditations to follow 
them out. I pray you, be very careful with the text — lose not a 
drop of the wine of consolation contained in its precious 
crystal — be prayerful and anxious to grind forth from this 
wheat every atom of its fine flour; leave no meal to grow stale 
in this barrel; drain all the oil from this cruse, for where God 
sets a “Behold,” depend upon it, there is a something that is 
not to be trifled with, nor to be passed over in indifference! 

We pass on now to the next word, “Behold, I have 
inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” The Divine Artist, 
who has been pleased to engrave His people for a memorial, is 
none other than God Himself Here we learn the lesson which 
Christ afterwards taught His disciples — “You have not chosen 
Me, but I have chosen you.” No one can write upon the hands 
of God, but God Himself. Neither our merits, prayers, 
repentance, nor faith can write our names there, for these in 
their goodness extend not unto God so as to write upon His 
hands. Nor did blind chance or mere necessity of fate inscribe 
our names; but the living hand of a living Father, unprompted 
by anything except the spontaneous and omnipotent love of 
His own heart, wrote the names of His people upon His own 
hands. How dependent are we upon God! If my name is in the 
Lamb’s Book of Life, how ought I to adore the sovereignty of 
the divine grace which placed it there! Had it not been there, I 
could not have inscribed it. Had it not been found in the list, 
no archangel could, by any possibility, have inserted it — 

“What if my name should be left out 
When You for them shall call?” 


5°3 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


It is a black thought to any of us, but when I know that it 
is not left out, but is written there among the bright spirits 
chosen of God, and precious, how this should make me leap 
for joy! “I have inscribed you.” Then, again, if the Lord has 
done it, there is no mistake about it. If some human hand had cut 
the memorial, the hieroglyphs might be at fault; but since 
perfect Wisdom has combined with perfect love to make a 
memorial of the saints, no error by any possibility can have 
occurred. There can be no erasures, no crossing out of what 
God has written, no blotting out of what the Eternal has 
decreed. Fixed, and fixed forever must be the inscription which 
is of divine authorship! The powers of darkness cannot erase 
those everlasting lines. “I have inscribed you upon the palms 
of My hands.” Soul, this is enough to overwhelm you with 
humble adoration that God should so much as take notice of 
you! When you receive the daily tokens of Divine care, ought 
you not to exclaim with David — “When I consider Your 
heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars 
which You have ordained, what is man that You are mindful of 
him, and the son of man that You visit him?” But how is it, 
Lord, that You can go farther than this, and You Yourself write 
the names of these insignificant mortals upon Your own hands? 
“I have inscribed you.” It is wonderful to see how God comes 
into immediate contact with His saints, and appears in person 
in all His acts of grace towards them. In other works it is His 
far-reaching voice, but in the wonders of His grace it is His 
present hand. In the making of worlds, He stands at a distance 
and speaks His will; but when He creates saints, and redeems 
His people, He comes out of His chambers — He rends the 
heavens and comes down — He reveals Himself as a God near 
at hand; He stands over His work as the potter over the clay 
upon the wheel. It is written that when He made the heavens 
and the earth, “the morning stars sang together, and all the sons 


504 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


of God shouted for joy.” But I never hear that God sang; there 
is nothing in the merely material universe to stir the Infinite 
heart; the work is not dear enough to Him, nor so full of 
satisfaction as the grand work of redeeming love. But when He 
saved His people — when He created Israel for Himself, I hear 
it said — “He shall rest in His love; He shall rejoice over you 
with singing.” Oh, matchless verse, in which the Eternal Trinity 
burst forth into sacred song! Do you not catch the strain even 
now? “I have done it; I have come forth Myself out of the 
secret of My tabernacle wherein I have concealed Myself from 
the gaze of men, and ‘I have inscribed you upon the palms of 
My hands.’” 

Take the next word. We have many wells here out of which 
we may draw water. “Behold, I have inscribed you.” Not, “I will,” 
you see. Nor yet, “I am doing it.” It is a thing of the past, and 
how far back in the past! Oh, the antiquity of this inscription! 
They take us to the British Museum, and show us most revered 
writings which are the memorials of those hoary ages — which 
were the first born of the years beyond the flood, but here is 
an inscription older than them all! Compared with it, Assyrian 
antiquities, and Egyptian records are things of yesterday. 
Before the young earth had burst her swaddling bands of mist, 
yes, before the globe had been begotten, or yonder sun had 
darted his infant arrows, or yonder stars had opened their eyes, 
the Eternal had fixed His eyes of love upon His favorites! 

Fly back as far as you will, until this present world and all 
the worlds within the universe sleep in the mind of God, like 
unborn forests in an acorn cup, and even then you have not 
reached the time, before all time when it was first said — “I have 
inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” “From everlasting 
to everlasting You are God;” from everlasting to everlasting 
You are the same, and Your people’s names are written on 
Your hands! Yet, I think there may be a prophetic reference 


505 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


here to a later writing of the names, when Jesus Christ 
submitted His outstretched palms to those cruel engraving 
tools, the nails. Then was it surely, when the executioner with 
the hammer smote the tender hands of the loving Jesus, that 
He engraved our names upon the palms of His hands, and 
today when He points to those wounds, when by faith He 
permits us to put our fingers into the prints of the nails, He 
may still say to us — 

“Deep on the palms of both My hands 
I have engraved Your name.” 

Well, Christian, do not these deep things comfort you? 
Have you no consolation in the ancient things of the everlasting 
mountains? Does not eternal love delight you? God is no 
stranger to you; He has known you long before you knew 
yourself — yes, long before you were curiously worked in the 
lowest parts of the earth — in His book all your members were 
written, which in continuance were fashioned when as yet there 
was none of them! Known unto God from the foundation of 
the earth were you; He was always thinking of you; there was 
never a period when you were not in His mind and on His heart. 
“I have inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” 

But the next word is “inscribed. ” My dear friend, The Rev. 
John Anderson, of Helensburgh, whom I am glad to welcome 
here today, told me this morning that while traveling in the East, 
he has frequendy seen persons with portraits of their friends 
upon their hands, so that wherever they went, as one in this 
country would carry the portrait of a friend in a brooch or a 
watch, they carry these likenesses printed on their palms. I said 
to him, “Surely they would wash out.” They might by degrees, 
he said, but they frequently had them pricked in with strong 
indelible ink, so that there, while the palm lasts, there lasts the 


506 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


memorial of the friend. Surely this is what the text refers to. I 
have inscribed you in; I have not merely printed you, stamped 
you on the surface, but I have permanendy cut you into my 
hand with marks which never can be removed! That word 
“inscribed” sets forth the perpetuity of the inscription. Not on 
the hand of man, but on the hand of God is it engraved. Oh, 
mysterious thought! On that hand immortal and eternal is it 
dug, engraved in! Our engravers press upon their tools; they tell 
us how stem the labor when they cut the hard metal to mark 
each line, and God has thus engraved — with the whole strength 
of omnipotence He has leaned upon the tool to cut our names 
into His flesh! Was there not such an engraving at Calvary? Is 
it not written, “It pleased the Father to bruise Him; He has put 
Him to grief’? It is as if eternal strength, I say, leaned upon that 
engraving tool to write the memorial of His chosen people in 
the hands of Jesus! “I have inscribed you upon the palms of My 
hands.” We need not indulge the dark foreboding that we shall 
be lost, but we may sing with Hammond — 

“If Jesus is ours we have a true friend, 

Whose goodness endures the same to the end. 

Our comforts may vary, our frames may decline, 

We cannot miscarry; our aid is divine. 

The hills may depart and mountains remove, 

But faithful You are O fountain of love! 

The Father has inscribed our names on His hands, 

Our record, in Heaven, eternally stands.” 

Shall we stop to take that next word? Scarcely may I preach 
from it, but you should meditate upon it constantly. “I have 
inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” My Lord, do You 
mean me? Yes, even me, if I, by faith, cling to Your cross. “I am 
not shut out from Your heart of love, if by faith I have entered 


507 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


into Your happy family. I know that You remember me or You 
would never have helped me to remember You. Glory be to 
You, O my gracious Lord.” But I want you, my beloved 
brothers and sisters, to notice that the word runs, “I have 
inscribed you. ” It does not say, “Your name.” The name is there, 
but that is not all — “I have inscribed you. ” See the fullness of 
this! I have inscribed your person, your image, your case, your 
circumstances, your sins, your temptations, your weaknesses, 
your needs, your works; I have inscribed you — everything about 
you — all that concerns you; 1 have put you altogether there! It 
is not an outline sketch, you see; it is a full picture, as though 
the man himself were there. What? Do you dare dream that 
God forgets you? Will you ever say again that your God has 
forsaken you when He has engraved you — not your name, I say, 
but everything that concerns you — upon His own palms? “Oh,” 
says one, “but I am in such a plight this morning.” Well, He 
has inscribed that there. “Ah,” says another, “I am so weak and 
so feeble!” That, too, is engraved there. “I have inscribed you. ” 
The Omniscient God knows you better than you know 
yourself — and whereas you are conscious of some sin, and some 
imperfection — He knows that you have an infinitude of sin, 
and a vastness of infirmity! He has put it all there — “I have 
engraved you. ” I say, again, this is a thing too great to be talked 
of, but more fit to be read, marked, learned, and digested in the 
silence of your closet. You have never inscribed yourselves so 
well upon the tablets of your own knowledge as God has 
inscribed you upon those blessed tablets — the palms of His 
hands! Yes, I dare to say it — our indulgent God as much thinks 
of one saint as if there were no other saint — and no other 
created thing in the entire world. Our covenant God so 
recollects and cares for His child, that if the whole universe 
were dissolved, and had departed like a shadow, and our Lord 
had but one man to fix all His divine grace upon, He would not 


508 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


watch him more, nor more carefully and lovingly see after his 
best interests, than He now cares for each one of His people! “I 
have inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” 

We have up to now taken every word, but we must now 
take the next two or three. Remember we are inscribed, where? 
Upon His hands, not upon the works of His hands. They shall 
perish — yes, they shall all wax old as does a garment, but His 
hands shall endure forever and ever. We are not inscribed upon 
a ring, for a ring might be slipped from the finger and laid aside, 
but the hand itself can never be separated from the living God. 
It is not inscribed or engraved on a huge rock, for a convulsion 
of nature might rend the rock by an earthquake, or the fretting 
tooth of time might eat the inscription out. Our record is on 
His hands, where it must last, and world without end! Not upon 
the back of His hands where it might be supposed that in days 
of strife and warfare the inscription might suffer damage, but 
there upon the palms of His hands where it shall be well 
protected, so that even — 

“When God’s right arm is bared for war, 

And thunder clouds His stormy cry,” 

even then, when He smites with His fist, His people shall 
be well protected within the palms of His hands. The most 
tender part shall be made the place of the inscription, that to 
which He is most likely to look, that which His fingers of 
Wisdom enclose, that by which He works His mighty wonders, 
shall be the unceasing remembrance, pledging Him never to 
forget His chosen. Do notice, it does not say, “I have inscribed 
you upon the palm of one hand,” but, “I have inscribed you 
upon the palms op' My hands. ” There are two memorials. His 
saints shall never be forgotten, for the inscription is put there 
upon the palm of this hand, the right hand of blessing, and 


509 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


upon the palm of that hand, the left hand of justice. I see Him 
with His right hand beckon me — “Come you blessed,” and He 
sees me in His hand. And on that side He says, “Depart you 
cursed,” but not to me, for He sees me in His hand, and cannot 
curse me. Oh, my soul, how charming this is, to know that His 
left hand is under your head, while His right hand does embrace 
you! Both hands are marked with the memorial — this left hand, 
which is the hand of cursing, cannot curse me, for it is under 
my head; it cannot smite, for it has become my strength and 
my stay, my pillow and my rest, while His right hand does 
embrace me, to keep me safe from death, and hell — and to 
preserve me, and bring me to His eternal kingdom in glory! 

Now I am conscious that I cannot work out the beauty of 
this passage. I am equally conscious that you cannot either, 
unless you have much longer time for meditation than such a 
short service as this can afford you. Take it home and look at 
it again and again, especially laying an emphasis on the word 
“you,” and oh, if you can render it — “He has inscribed me, me, 
me, upon the palms of His hands.” If your soul can know that 
God has you daily in remembrance, and neither can, nor will, 
forget you, then you will dance before the ark of the Lord! And 
if Michal mocks, you may answer her as David did — “The God 
who chose me, made me to dance.” Eternal Election and 
Indissoluble LTnion, are truths of God which make believers 
rejoice with unspeakable joy and full of glory. “Be glad in the 
Lord and rejoice, you righteous, and shout for joy all you who 
are upright in heart.” 

II. Now let us proceed to the second part of the subject, 
which is to CONSIDER THE TEXT AS A WHOLE. 

“I have inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” This 
seems to show us, first of all, that God’s remembrance of His people 
is constant. The hands, of course, are constantly in union with 
the body. In Solomon’s Song we read, “Set me as a seal upon 


510 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


Your hands.” Now this is a very close form of remembrance, 
for the seal is very seldom laid aside by the Eastern, who not 
being possessed with skill in the art of writing his name, 
requires his seal in order to affix his signature to a document; 
therefore the seal is almost always worn, and in some cases is 
never laid aside. A seal, however, might be laid aside, but the 
hands never could be. It has been a custom, in the olden days 
especially, when men wished to remember a thing, to tie a cord 
about the hand, or a thread around the finger by which memory 
would be assisted. But then the cord might be snapped or taken 
away, and so the matter forgotten; but the hand and that which 
is engraved into it must be constant and perpetual. O Christian, 
remember that by night, and by day God is always thinking of 
you. From the beginning of the year even to the end of the year, 
the Lord’s eyes are upon you, according to His precious 
Word — “I, the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, 
lest any hurt it; I will keep it night and day.” Your remembrance 
of God is intermittent; you thought of Him this morning when 
you rose from your beds; you are trying to think of Him now, 
and this evening, again, your thoughts will go up to Him. These 
are only times and seasons of remembrance, but God never 
ceases to recollect you! The finite mind of man cannot 
constantly be occupied, if it is to engage in other pursuits, with 
any one thought; but the gigantic mind of God can think of a 
million trains of thought at once. He is not confined to thinking 
of one thing, or working out one problem at a time. He is the 
great many-handed, many-eyed God; He does all things, and 
meditates upon all things, and works all things at the same 
time — therefore He never is called away by any urgent business 
so that He can forget you! No second person ever comes in to 
become a rival in His affection towards you. You are fast united 
to your great Husband, Christ, and no other lover can steal His 
heart; and Jesus, having chosen you, never allows a rival to 


511 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


come. You are His beloved, His spouse, the darling of His heart, 
and He has Himself said, “My eyes and my heart are toward 
you continually.” Every moment of every day, every day of 
every month, and every month of every year, is the Lord 
continually thinking upon you, if you are one of His! 

Still further, the text as a whole seems to show us that this 
recollection on God’s part is practical. We are engraved upon 
His heart — this is to show His love; we are put upon His 
shoulders — this is to show that His strength is engaged for us; 
and also upon His hands, to show that the activity of our Lord 
will not be separated from us; He will work and show Himself 
strong for His people; He brings His omnipotent hands to 
effect our redemption! What would be the use of having a 
friend who would think of us, and then let his love end in 
thought? The faithfulness we need is that of one who will act in 
our defense; we need one who so cares for us that against every 
arrow of the adversary, He will lift up the shield; and for every 
need will find a supply. We need an active sympathy from God. 
Surely this is the intention of the text. “I have inscribed you 
upon the palms of My hands.” He has done all He has done as 
if everything that He touched left a memorial of His people on 
it — as if every work He did, He did it with the same hands that 
carved the remembrance of His people. Do you see the drift of 
it? If He molds a world between His palms, and then sends it 
wheeling in its orbit — it is between those palms which are 
stamped with the likeness of His sons and daughters — and so 
that new work shall minister to their good! If He divides a 
nation, it is always with the hand that bears the remembrance 
of Zion. Scripture itself tells us this, “When He divided the 
nations, He set the bounds of the people according to the 
number of the children of Israel.” The great wheel of 
providence, when God makes it revolve, works for the good of 
the people whom He has called according to His purpose! 


512 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


There are many strings, but they are all in one hand, and they 
all pull one way — to draw a weight of glory to the chosen; there 
are many wheels and innumerable cogs, and as you and I look 
about us, we cannot understand the machinery; we cry, “O 
wheels, what do you work?” but the end, the end, if you stood 
there and saw the end of everything, you would see that God 
has stamped all the wheels with the memory of His children, 
so that the result is always good, and only good to those whom 
He has inscribed on the palms of His hands! It is, then, a 
practical as well as a constant sympathy. 

Next, dear friends, and to the children of God this will be 
a delightful thought, this is an eternal remembrance. You cannot 
suppose it possible that any person can erase what is written on 
God’s hands. The Scriptures tell us that we are in the hands of 
Christ, and that none shall pluck us out. Some Arminians say 
we can slip out, but how can we slip out if we are engraved 
there? We may well defy all the devils in hell, with all their craft, 
even to forge a plan by which they can get at the palms of God’s 
hands! I cannot think of a thing that should seem more 
impossible, more tremendously impossible, than that any 
creature — whether it be life or death, things present or things 
to come — should ever be able to reach the palms of God’s 
hands, so as to erase our names! Our hymn is not wrong when 
it says — 

“Once in Christ, in Christ forever, 

Nothing from His love can sever.” 

And Toplady made no mistake when he said — 

“My name from the palms of His hands 
Eternity will not erase! 

Impressed on His heart it remains 


513 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


In marks of indelible grace — 

Yes, I to the end shall endure, 

As sure as the earnest is given. 

More happy, but not more secure, 

The glorified spirits in heaven!” 

“I have engraved you upon the palms of My hands.” 

Still I have not drained my text dry. Let the treader of the 
winepress tread the grapes once more, and more holy wine shall 
flow there from this memorial — how tender ! How tender, I say, 
because it is inscribed on the hands. We have heard of one, an 
eastern queen, who so loved her husband that she thought even 
to build a mausoleum to his memory was not enough. She had 
a strange way of proving her affection, for when her husband’s 
bones were burned, she took the ashes and drank them day by 
day, that, as she said, her body might be her husband’s living 
sepulcher! It was a strange way of showing love, and there was 
a marvelous degree of strange, fanatical fondness in it, but what 
shall I say of this divine, celestial, unobjectionable, sympathetic 
mode of showing remembrance by cutting it into the palms? 
Words fail to express our intense content with this most 
admirable sign of tenderness and fond affection! It appears to 
me as though the King had said, “Shall I carve my people upon 
precious stones? Shall I choose the ruby, the emerald, the topaz? 
No, for these all must melt in the last general inferno. What 
then? Shall I write on tablets of gold or silver? No, for all these 
may canker and corrupt, and thieves may break through and 
steal. “Shall I cut the memorial deep on brass? No, for time 
would fret it, and the letters would not long be legible. I will 
write on Myself, on My own hands, and then My people will 
know how tender I am, that I would sooner cut into My own 
flesh than forget them; I will have My Son branded in the hands 
with the names of His people, that they may be sure He cannot 


5H 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


forsake them; hard by the memorial of His wounds shall be the 
memorial of His love to them, for, indeed, His wounds are an 
everlasting remembrance.” How loving, then, how full of 
superlative, super-excellent affection is God toward you, and 
toward me in so recording our names! 

Weary not when I yet further remark, that this memorial is 
most surprising. Scripture, which is full of wonders, yet allows a 
“Behold” to be put before this verse — “Behold!” If the things 
I have been saying are enough to make you wonder — the deep 
sea of the text, without bottom and without shore — would 
much more cause you to hold up your hands in astonishment. 
Child of God, let your cheerful eyes, and your joyful heart 
testify how great a wonder it is that you, once so vile, so hard 
of heart, so far estranged from God, are this day written on the 
palms of His hands! And then I close this point by saying it is 
also most consolatoiy. When God would meet Zion’s great 
doubt — “God has forgotten me,” He cheers her with this — “I 
have inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” Where are 
you this morning, mourner — where are you? Ah, you may well 
hide your head for shame! You said yesterday, when trial after 
trial came — 

“My God has quite forgotten me; 

My Lord will be gracious no more.” 

Here is God’s answer to you this morning — “It cannot be; 
I cannot forget you, for I have inscribed you upon the palms 
of My hands.” — 

“Forget you, I will not, I cannot, your name 
Engraved on My heart does forever remain; 

The palms of My hands while I look on, 

I see The wounds I received when suffering for thee.” 


515 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


There is no sorrow to which our text is not an antidote. If 
you are a child of God, though your troubles have been as 
innumerable as the waves of the sea, this text, like the channels 
of the ocean, can contain them all! I care not this morning 
though you have lost everything, though you came here a 
penniless bankrupt beggar — so long as you have this text you 
are rich beyond a miser’s dream! You may have forgotten your 
own mercy; your own experience may seem a dream to you; the 
devil may tell you that you never knew the Lord; your own sins 
may bear evidence in the same way — but if you have believed 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, the covenant made with David’s Lord 
must not, and cannot, be broken! “I have inscribed you upon 
the palms of My hands.” Come, drooping saint, lift up your 
head! You dreary, downcast brother, be of good cheer! If Christ 
remembers you, what more can you need? The dying thief s 
extremity could not suggest a prayer larger than, “Lord, 
remember me!” — and your greatest sorrow cannot ask for a 
more complete comfort than this — “Lord, show me that You 
have inscribed me upon the palms of Your hands.” 

III. And now we come to the last point, upon which only 
a hint. I said the last point would be to EXCITE YOU TO THE 
DUTY WHICH SUCH A TEXT SUGGESTS. 

Beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ, if you are partakers of 
this inestimably precious text, let me say, first of all, is it not your 
duty to leave your cares behind you today ? We do not want any 
valuables left behind in the chapel, but these cares can be swept 
out tomorrow morning when the women clear away the 
rubbish — and I am sure the dustbin never contained viler stuff. 
Leave them here today. What are you fretting about? Is not a 
Christian inconsistent when he is full of burdensome care? 
Should not the fact that God always graciously and tenderly 
remembers you, compel you once and for all to leave your 
burden with Him who cares for you? — 


516 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


512 A Precious Drop of Honey - Isa. 

49:16 


“The Lord our leader goes before, 

Sufficient He and none besides! 

And were the dangers many more, 

We need not fear with such a guide! 

Through snares, through dangers, and through foes 
He leads, whose arm almighty is — 

What, then, if earth and hell oppose? 

We need not fear if we are His!” 

Then, if you must not have cares, I think you should not have 
those deep sorrows and despairs. Lift up your head! Jehovah 
remembers you, man! The billows cannot drown him whom 
the Lord of Hosts ordains to bring to shore. Be glad in your 
God, and His perfect love. Do you not think that joy becomes 
a man to whom such a text as this belongs? Wipe your brow. It 
is true, the sweat stands on it, but your greatest labor is done — 
Christ has finished it for you! There need, at least, be no sweat 
of trepidation and alarm upon your face; He cannot forget you; 
you have what angels envy; you have what poor mourning souls 
would give their eyes to win — what troubled consciences 
would give their blood to buy! Be glad! Why should the children 
of such a King go mourning any one of their days? Now lift up 
your heads, and bathe them in the sunlight of God; take the oil 
of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of 
heaviness. I am certain that the man who wears such a gold 
chain about his neck need not bear the rags of poverty; the man 
who wears such a diamond coronet as this upon his brow ought 
not to behave like a poor beggar in the streets. Go not clothed 
in rags of mourning, but put on the scarlet and fine linen of 
thanksgiving — since God gives you this consolation — “I have 
inscribed you upon the palms of My hands.” 


517 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


One thing more and that is, if this text is not jours, how jour 
mouths ought to water after it l It is wrong to covet, but not to covet 
such a thing as this! “Covet earnesdy the best gifts.” Is there a 
soul here who says, “O, that I had a part and lot in this matter! 
Would God that I were saved, that I were written in the palms 
of Jesus’ hands”? Poor soul, if you desire Christ, He desires you! 
If you have a spark of love to Him, His soul is like a fiery 
furnace of love toward you — and you may have His pardoning 
love shed abroad this morning! “How?” you ask. “Whoever 
believes on Him shall never perish.” To believe is to trust, and 
if you trust confidently, simply — just as a child trusts to its 
mother’s arms — you shall find that He will never fail your trust 
nor prove untrue to your confidence. May God bring you to 
know yourself, and to know the sweetness of this blessed, 
blessed text, which overwhelms and destroys all power of 
speech in me, and makes me feel the poverty of my thoughts 
and language! 


518 



513 The Young Man’s Prayer -Ps. 90:14 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, June 7 th, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“O satisfy us early with Your mercy, that we may rejoice and 
be glad all our days.” - Psalm 90:14 

ISRAEL HAD SUFFERED a long night of affliction. Dense 
was the darkness while they abode in Egypt, and cheerless was 
the glimmering twilight of that wilderness which was covered 
with their graves. Amidst a thousand miracles of His mercy, 
what must have been the sorrows of a camp in which every 
stop was marked with many burials — until the whole trail was 
a long cemetery? I suppose that the deaths in the camp of Israel 
were never less than 50 each day — if not three times that 
number — so that they learned experientially that verse of the 
Psalm, “For we are consumed by Your anger, and by Your 
wrath are we troubled.” Theirs was the weary march of men 
who wander about in search of tombs; they traveled towards a 
land which they could never reach, weary with a work the result 
of which only their children would receive. You may easily 
understand how these troubled ones longed for the time when 
the true day of Israel should dawn, when the black midnight of 
Egypt, and the dark twilight of the wilderness, both should give 
way to the rising sun of the setded rest in Canaan! Most fitly 
was the prayer offered by Moses — the representative man of 
all that host — “O satisfy us early with Your mercy.” Hasten the 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


time when we shall come to our promised rest. Bring on 
speedily the season when we shall sit under own vine and our 
own fig tree, “and shall rejoice and be glad all our days.” 

This prayer falls from the lips of yonder brother, whose 
rough pathway for many a mile has descended into the Valley 
of Death-shade. Loss after loss has he experienced, till, as in 
Job’s case, the messengers of evil have trod upon one another’s 
heels! His griefs are new every morning, and his trials fresh 
every evening. Friends forsake him, and prove to be deceitful 
brooks; God breaks him with a tempest; he finds no pause in 
the ceaseless shower of his troubles. Nevertheless, his hope is 
not extinguished, and his constant faith lays hold upon the 
promise, that “Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes 
in the morning.” He understands that God will not always 
chide, neither does He keep His anger forever; therefore, he 
watches for deliverance even as they who watch for the 
morning, and his most appropriate cry is, “O satisfy us early 
with Your mercy; lift up the light of Your countenance upon 
us, show Your marvelous loving-kindness in this present hour 
of need. O my God, make haste to help me, be a very present 
help in time of trouble; fly to my relief lest I perish from the 
land; awake, for my rescue, that I may rejoice and be glad all 
my days.” 

See yonder sick bed! Tread lighdy, lest perchance you 
disturb the brief slumbers of that daughter of affliction. She has 
tossed to and fro days and nights without number, counting 
her minutes by her pains, and numbering her hours with the 
attacks of her agony. From that couch of suffering, where many 
diseases have conspired to torment the frail body of this child 
of woe, where the soul itself has grown weary of life, and longs 
for the wings of a dove, I think this prayer may well arise, “O 
satisfy us early with Your mercy.” “When will the eternal day 
break upon my long night? When will the shadows flee away? 


520 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


Sweet Sun of glory! When will You rise with healing beneath 
Your wings? I shall be satisfied when I wake up in Your likeness, 
O Lord; hasten that joyful hour! Give me a speedy deliverance 
from my bed of weakness that I may rejoice and be glad 
throughout eternal days.” 

I think the prayer would be equally appropriate from many 
a distressed conscience, where conviction of sin has rolled 
heavily over the soul till the bones are sorely vexed, and the 
spirit is overwhelmed. That poor heart indulges the hope that 
Jesus Christ will one day comfort it, and become its salvation — 
it has a humble hope that these wounds will not last forever but 
shall all be healed by mercy’s hand; that He who looses the 
bands of Orion will one day deliver the prisoner out of his 
captivity! Oh, conscience-stricken sinner, you may, on your 
knees, now cry out — “O satisfy me early with Your mercy! 
Keep me not always in this house of bondage; let me not 
plunge forever in this slough of despair; set my feet upon a rock, 
wash me from my iniquities; clothe me with garments of 
salvation, and put the new song into my mouth, that I may 
rejoice and be glad all my days!” 

Still it appears to me that, without straining so much as one 
word even in the slightest degree, I may take my text this 
morning as the prayer of a young heart, expressing its desire for 
present salvation. To you, young men and maidens, shall I 
address myself, and may the good Spirit cause you in the days 
of your youth to remember your Creator, while the evil days 
come not, nor the years draw near when you shall say, we have 
no pleasure in them. 1 hope the angel of the Lord has said unto 
me, “Run, speak to that young man,” and that, like the good 
housewife in the Proverbs, I shall have a portion also for the 
maidens! 


521 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I shall use the text in two ways; first, as the ground of my 
address to the young and then, secondly, as a model for your address 
to God. 

I. We will m ake our text the ground work of a 

SOLEMN PLEADING WITH YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN TO 
GIVE THEIR HEARTS TO CHRIST THIS DAY. 

The voice of wisdom reminds you in this, our text, that you 
are not pure in God’s sight, but NEED HIS MERCY. Early as 
it is with you, you must come before God on the same footing 
as those who seek Him at the 11th hour. Here is nothing said 
about merit, nothing concerning the natural innocence of youth, 
or the beauty of the juvenile character. You are not thus 
flattered and deceived; but Holy Scripture guides you aright, by 
dictating to you an evangelical prayer, such as God will deign 
to accept — “O satisfy us early with Your mercy. ” Young men, 
though as yet no outward crimes have stained your character, 
yet your salvation must be the work of reigning grace, and that 
for several reasons. Your nature is at the present moment full of sin, 
and saturated with iniquity, and therefore, you are the object of 
God’s most righteous anger! How can He meet an heir of wrath 
on terms of justice? His holiness cannot endure you! What if 
you are made an heir of glory? Will not this be divine grace and 
divine grace alone? If ever you are made meet to be a partaker 
with the saints in light, this must surely be love’s own work — 
inasmuch as your nature, altogether apart from your actions — 
deserves God’s reprobation! It is mercy which spares you, and 
if the Lord is pleased to renew your heart, it will be to the praise 
of the glory of His grace. Be not proud, repel not this certain 
truth of God — that you are an alien, a stranger, an enemy — 
born in sin and shaped in iniquity! By nature, you are an heir of 
wrath, even as others; yield to its force, and seek that mercy 
which is as really needed by you as by the hoary-headed villain 
who rots into his grave, festering with debauchery and lust — 


522 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


“True you are young, but there’s a stone 
Within the youngest breast! 

One-half the crimes which you have done 
Would rob you of your rest.” 

Besides, your conscience reminds you that your outward 
lives have not been what they should be. How soon did we begin to 
sin! While we were yet litde children, we went astray from the 
womb, speaking lies. How rebellious we were! How we chose 
our own will and way, and would by no means submit ourselves 
to our parents! How in our riper youth we thought it sport to 
scatter fire-brands, and carry the hot coals of sin in our bosom! 
We played with the serpent, charmed with its azure scales, but 
forgetful of its poisoned fangs. Far be it from us to boast with 
the Pharisee — “Lord, 1 thank You that I am not as others.” But 
rather, let the youngest pray with the publican — “God be 
merciful to me a sinner.” A litde child, but seven years of age, 
cried when under conviction of sin — “Can the Lord have 
mercy upon such a great sinner as I am, who has lived seven 
years without fearing and loving Him?” Ah, my friends, if this 
babe could thus lament, what should be the repentance of 
those who are 1 5, or 1 6, or 1 7, or 1 8, or 20, or who have passed 
the year of manhood? What shall you say, since you have lived 
so long, wasting your precious days — more priceless than 
pearls, neglecting those golden years, despising divine things 
and continuing in rebellion against God? Lord, You know that 
young though we are, we have multitudes of sins to confess, 
and therefore, it is mercy, mercy, mercy, which we crave at Your 
hands! Remember, beloved young friends, that if you are saved 
in the morning of life, you will be wonderful instances of preventing 
merry! It is great mercy which blots out sin, but who shall say 
that it is not equally great mercy which prevents it? To bring 


523 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


home yonder sheep which has long gone astray, with its wool 
all torn, its flesh bleeding, and its bones broken, manifests the 
tender care of the good Shepherd. But, oh, to reclaim the lamb 
at the commencement of its straying — to put it into the fold, 
and to keep it there and nurture it — what a million mercies are 
here compressed into one! 

The young saint may sweedy sing — 

“I still had wandered but for You; 

Lord, it was Your own all-powerful word, 

Sin’s fetters broke and set me free, 

Henceforth to acknowledge You as my Lord.” 

There are depths of mercy to pluck the withered brand 
from out of the fire when it is black and scorched with the 
flame; but are there not heights of love when the young wood 
is planted in the courts of the Lord, and made to flourish as a 
cedar? However soon we are saved, the glory of perfection has 
departed from us, but how happy is he who tarries but a few 
years in a state of nature; as if the fall and the rising again 
walked hand in hand! No soul is without spot or wrinkle, but 
some stains are spots the young Believer is happily delivered 
from. Habits of vice and continuance in crime he has not 
known; he never knew the drunkard’s raging thirst; the black 
oaths of the sailor never dirtied his mouth. This younger son 
has not been long in the far country; he comes back before he 
has long fed the swine. He has been black with sin in the sight 
of God, but in the eyes of men, and in the open vision of 
onlookers, the young Believer seems as if he had never gone 
astray! Here is great mercy — mercy for which heaven is to be 
praised forever and ever. This, I thinks I may call distinguishing 
grace with an emphasis! All election distinguishes, and all divine 
grace is discriminating, but that grace which adopts the young 


524 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


child so early is distinguishingm the highest degree! As Jenubath, 
the young son of Hadad, was brought up in the court of 
Pharaoh, and weaned in the king’s palace, so are some saints 
sanctified from the womb. Happy is it for any young man — an 
elect one out of the elect is he — if he is weaned upon the knees 
of piety, and coddled upon the lap of holiness; if he is lighted 
to his bed with the lamps of the sanctuary, and lulled to his 
sleep with the name ofjesusllfl may breathe a prayer in public 
for my children, let them be clothed with a litde ephod, like 
young Samuel, and nourished in the chambers of the temple, 
like the young prince Joash. O my dear young friends, it is 
mercy, mercy in a distinguishing and peculiar degree, to be 
saved early, because of your fallen nature, because of sins 
committed, and yet more — because of sins prevented, and 
distinguishing favor bestowed by the grace of God! 

2. But, I have another reason for endeavoring to plead with 
the young this morning, hoping that the Spirit of God will plead 
with them. I remark that salvation, if it comes to you, must not 
only be mercy, but it must be mercy through the cross! I infer that 
from the text, because the text desires it to be a satisfying mercy, 
and there is no mercy which ever can satisfy a sinner, but mercy 
through the cross of Christ. There is no mercy apart from the 
cross! Many say that God is merciful, and therefore, surely, He 
will not condemn them; but in the pangs of death, and in the 
terrors of conscience, the uncovenanted mercy of God is no 
solace to the soul! Some proclaim a mercy which is dependent 
upon human effort — human goodness or merit — but no soul 
ever yet did or could find any lasting satisfaction in this 
delusion! Mercy by mere ceremonies or mercy by outward 
ordinances is but a mockery of human thirst. Like Tantalus, 
who is mocked by the receding waters, so is the ceremonialist 
who tries to drink where he finds all comfort fleeing from him. 
Young man, the cross of Christ has that in it which can give 


525 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you solid, satisfying comfort — if you put your trust in it. It can 
satisfy jour judgment. What is more logical than the great doctrine 
of substitution? — God is so terribly just that He will by no 
means spare the guilty, and that Justice is wholly met by Him 
who stood in the place of His people! Here is that which will 
satisfy your conscience. Your conscience knows that God must 
punish you; it is one of those truths which God stamped upon 
it when He first made you what you are. But when your soul 
sees Christ punished instead of you, it pillows its head right 
softly. There is no resting place for conscience but at the cross! 
Priests may preach what they will, and philosophers may 
imagine what they please, but there is in the conscience of man, 
in its resdessness, an indication that the cross of Christ must 
have come from God, because that conscience never ceases 
from its disquiet till it hides in the wounds of the Crucified! 
Never again shall conscience alarm you with dreadful thoughts 
of the wrath to come, if you lay hold of that mercy which is 
revealed in Jesus Christ! Here, too, is satisfaction for all jour fears. 
Do they pursue you today like a pack of hungry dogs in full 
pursuit of the stag? Flee to Christ and your fears have vanished! 
What has that man to fear for whom Jesus died? Need he alarm 
himself when Christ stands in his place before the eternal 
throne and pleads there for him? Here, too, is satisfaction for 
jour hopes. He who gets Christ gets all the future wrapped up in 
Him. While— 

“There’s pardon for transgressions past; 

It matters not how black their cast.” 

There are also peace, and joy, and safety for all the years 
and for all the eternity to come in the same Christ Jesus who 
has put away your sin! Oh, I wish, young man, I wish young 
Woman, that you would put your trust in Jesus now, for in Him 


526 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


there is an answer to this prayer — “O satisfy us early with Your 
mercy.” 

3. Furthemiore, anxiously would I press this matter of a 
youthful faith upon you, because you have dissatisfaction even now. 
Do I not speak the truth? When looking into the bright eyes of 
the happiest among you, I venture to say that you are not 
perfectly satisfied. You feel that something is lacking. My lad, 
your boyish games cannot quite satisfy you; there is a 
something in you nobler than toys and games can gratify. 
Young man, your pursuits of business furnish you with some 
considerable interest and amusement, but still there is an aching 
void — you know there is — and although pleasure promises to 
fill it, you have begun already to discover that you have a thirst 
which is not to be quenched with water, and a hunger which is 
not to be satisfied with bread. You know it is so! The other 
evening when you were quite alone, when you were quietly 
thinking matters over, you felt that this present world was not 
enough for you. The majesty of a mysterious longing, which 
God had put in you, lifted up itself and claimed to be heard! 
Did it not? The other day, after the party was over at which you 
had so enjoyed yourself, when it was all done, and everybody 
was gone — and you were quite quiet, did you not feel that even 
if you had these things every day of your life — yet, you could 
not be content? You need, you know not what, but you do need 
something to fill your heart. We look back upon our younger 
days and think that they were far happier than our present state, 
and we sometimes fancy that we used to be satisfied then, but 
I believe that our thoughts imagine a great lie. I do, from my 
soul, confess that I never was satisfied till I came to Christ; 
when I was yet a child I had far more wretchedness than I have 
now; I will even add more weariness, more care, more 
heartache, than I know at this day. I may be singular in this 
confession, but I make it, and know it to be the truth. Since 


527 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


that dear hour when my soul cast itself on Jesus, I have found 
solid joy and peace! But before that, all those supposed gaieties 
of early youth, all the imagined ease and joy of boyhood were 
but vanity and vexation of spirit to me. You do feel, if I know 
anything about you, that you are not quite satisfied now. Well, 
then, let me say to you again, that I would have you come to 
Jesus! Depend upon it, there is that in Him which can 
thoroughly satisfy you! What can you need more to satisfy your 
heart than love to Him? Our hearts all crave for an object upon 
which they may be set; we often surrender ourselves to an 
unworthy object which betrays us, or proves too narrow to 
accommodate our heart’s desire; but if you love Jesus, you will 
love one who deserves your warmest affection, who will amply 
repay your fullest confidence, and will never betray it. You say 
that not only does your heart need something, but your head. 
My witness is that there is in the gospel of Christ the richest 
food for the brain! Before you know Christ, you read, you 
search, you study, and you put what you learn into a wild chaos 
of useless confusion; but after you have found Christ, 
everything else that you learn is put in its proper place. 

You get Christ as the central sun, and then, every science 
and fact begins to revolve round about Him just as the planets 
travel in their perpetual circle around the central orb. Without 
Christ, we are ignorant, but with Him, we understand the most 
excellent of sciences, and all others shall fall into their proper 
place. This is an age when, without a true faith in Christ, the 
young mind has a dreary pilgrimage before it. False guides are 
standing, arrayed in all sorts of garbs, ready to lead you first to 
doubt this book of Scripture, then to distrust the whole, then 
to mistrust God and Christ — and then, to doubt your own 
existence, and to come into the dreary dream land where nothing 
is certain — where everything is myth and fiction! Give your 
heart to Christ, young man, and He will furnish you with 


528 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


anchors and a good anchor-hold to your mind, so that when 
stormy winds of skepticism sweep across the sea, and other 
boats are wrecked, you shall outride the storm, and shall always 
be safe. It is a strange thing that people should be so long 
before they are satisfied. Look at some of my hearers today. 
They mean to be satisfied with money, and when they were 
apprentices, they thought they would be so satisfied when they 
earned journeymen’s wages, but they came to be journeymen, 
and then, they were not satisfied till they were foremen! And 
then, they felt they never would be satisfied till they had a 
concern of their own. They got a concern of their own, and 
took a house in the city — but then, they felt they could not be 
content till they had taken the adjoining premises; then, they 
had more advertising and more work to do, and now they begin 
to feel that they never shall be quite easy till they have 
purchased a snug little villa in the country! Yes, there are some 
here who have the villa, and handsome grounds, and so on, but 
they will not be satisfied till they see all their children married; 
and when they have seen all their children married, they will 
not be at rest even then! They think they will, but they will not; 
there is always a something yet beyond. “Man never is, but 
always to be blessed,” as Young puts it. There are Fortunate 
Isles for the mariner to reach, and failing these, there is no 
haven for him even in the safest port. We know some, too, who, 
instead of pursuing wealth, are looking after fame. They have 
been honored for that clever piece of writing, but they are 
desirous of more honor; they must write better, still, and when 
they have achieved some degree of notoriety through a second 
attempt, they will feel that now they have a name to keep up, 
and so they must have that name widened, and the circle of 
their influence must extend. The fact is, that neither wealth, nor 
honor, nor anything that is of ?>wrtal birth, can ever fill the 
insatiable, immortal soul of man! The heart of man has an 


529 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


everlasting hunger given to it, and if you could put worlds into 
its mouth, it would still crave for more. It is so thirsty that if all 
the rivers drained themselves into it, still, like the deep sea 
which is never full, the heart would yet cry out for more. Man 
is truly like the horseleech — he forever says, “Give! Give! Give!” 
But until the cross is given to the insatiable heart; till Jesus 
Christ — who is the fullness of Him who fills all in all — is 
bestowed, the heart of man never can be full! Where shall we 
find a satisfied man but in the Church of Christ? And in the 
Church of Christ I find him, not merely in the pulpit, where 
success and position might satisfy, but I find him in the pew 
humbly receiving the truth of God. I find him in the pew, not 
among the rich, where earthly comforts might tend to make 
him satisfied, but among the poor, where cold and nakedness 
might cause him to complain. I could point you today to the 
workman who earns every bit of bread he eats with more sweat 
of his brow than you would dream of, but he is content. I could 
point you to the poor work-girl who scarcely earns enough to 
hold body and soul together — and yet, in this house of God 
her heart often leaps for joy — for she is wholly resigned. I could 
show you the bedridden woman whose bones come through 
the skin through long lying upon a bed which friendship would 
gladly make soft, but which is all too hard for her weakness — 
and yet, she is content — though a parish pittance is all that is 
given her to feed upon. I say, we have no need to exaggerate, 
or strain, or use hyperboles; we do find in the Church of Christ 
those who have been, and are satisfied with the mercy of God. 
Now, would it not be a fine thing to begin life with being 
satisfied? There are some who do not end it with this 
attainment. They hunt after satisfaction till they come to their 
dying beds, and then still do not find it! But oh, to begin life with 
being satisfied! Not to say at some future date I will be satisfied, 
but to be content now; not when I have climbed to such-and- 


53 ° 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


such a pinnacle I shall have enough, but to have enough now; 
to begin with satisfaction before you launch upon a world of 
troubles! You may do so, my brother; you may do so, my young 
sister, if now, with a true heart, you look to Him who hangs 
upon yonder cross, and commit your soul into His keeping, 
praying this prayer — “O satisfy us early with Your mercy.” 

The reason which our text gives I must comment upon for 
a moment. Our text says — “O satisfy us early with Your mercy; 
that we may rejoice and be glad all our days. "We never rejoice in the 
true sense of the term; we never possess solid gladness till we 
are satisfied with God’s mercy. It is all a mockery and a pretense; 
the reality never comes to us till God’s mercy visits our heart; 
but after that, what joy we know! Tell me that the Christian is 
miserable! O sir, you do not know what the Christian is! We 
need not appear before you with laughing faces, for our joy is 
deeper than yours, and needs not express itself out in immodest 
signs. The poor trader puts all his goods in the window, but the 
rich man has rich stores even in the dark cellar — his 
warehouses are full and he makes no show. Still waters run 
deep, and we are sometimes still in our joy because of the depth 
of our delight. Say we are not happy, sirs! We would not change 
one moment of our joy for a hundred years of yours! We hear 
your joy, and we understand that it is like the crackling of 
thorns under a pot — which crackle all the louder because they 
burn so furiously, and will so soon be gone. But ours is a steady 
fire. We do mourn sometimes; we mourn more often than we 
ought to do; we are free to confess this; but it is not our religion 
which makes us mourn; it is because we do not live up to it, for 
when we live up to it, and have the company of Jesus, we tell 
you — 

“We would not change our blessed estate 
For all that earth calls good or great! 


53i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


And while our faith can keep her hold, 

We envy not the sinner’s gold.” 

Our sickbeds are often as the doorstep of heaven; even 
when we are cast down, there is a sweet solace in our sorrow, 
and a profound joy about our apparent grief which we would 
not give away. God gave it to us, and the world cannot destroy 
it. They who love Jesus Christ early have the best hope of 
enjoying the happiest days as Christians. They will have the most 
service, and the service of God is perfect delight! Their youthful 
vigor will enable them to do more than those who enlist when 
they are old and decrepit. The joy of the Lord is our strength; 
and on the other hand, to use our strength for God is a fountain 
of joy. Young man, if you give 50 years of service unto God, 
surely you shall rejoice all your days! The earlier we are 
converted, having the longer time to study in Christ’s college, 
the more profound shall be our knowledge of Him! We shall have more 
time for communion, more years for fellowship. We shall have 
more seasons to prove the power of prayer, and more 
opportunities to test the fidelity of God than we would if we 
came late. Those who come late are blessed by being helped to 
learn so much, but those who come in early shall surely outstrip 
them. Let me be young, like John, that I may have years of 
loving service, and like he, may have much intimate 
acquaintance with my Lord! Surely those who are converted 
early may reckon upon more joy, because they never will have to 
contend with and to mourn over what later converts must know. Your 
bones are not broken, you can run without weariness — you 
have not fallen as some have done — you can walk without 
fainting. Often the gray-headed man, who is converted at 60 or 
70, finds the remembrance of his youthful sins clinging to him; 
when he would praise, an old lascivious song revives upon his 
memory; when he would mount up to heaven, he suddenly 


532 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


remembers some scene in a haunt of vice which he would be 
glad to forget! But you, saved by divine grace before you thus 
fall into the jaw of the lion, or under the paw of the bear, will 
certainly have cause for rejoicing all your life. If I may have 
heavenly music upon earth, let me begin it now, Lord; put not 
away the viol and the harp for my fingers when they tremble 
with age; let me use them while yet I am young. Now, Lord, if 
there is a banquet, do not bring me in at the end of the feast, 
but let me begin to feast today! If I am to be married to Jesus, 
let it not be when my hair is gray, but marry me to Jesus now! 
What better time for joy than today? Now shall my joys swell 
and grow like a river, which rolls on to a mightier breadth and 
depth as its course is prolonged! I shall rejoice and be glad in 
You all my days, good Lord, if You will now begin with me, in 
this the morning of my days. 

I cannot put my thoughts together this morning as I desire, 
but I still feel an earnest longing to shoot the arrow to its mark, 
and therefore, one or two stray thoughts before I turn to the 
prayer itself, and these shall be very brief. My dear young 
friends, you who are of my own age, or younger still, I beseech 
you, ask to be satisfied with God’s mercy early, for you may die 
early. It has been our grief this week to stand by the open grave 
of one who was, alas, too soon, as we thought, snatched away 
to heaven. You may never number the full ripe years of 
manhood. We say that our years are threescore and ten, but to 
you they may not even be a score; your sun may go down while 
it is yet noon. God often reaps His corn green — long before 
the autumn comes, He cuts down His sheaves. “Because I will 
do this, prepare to meet your God.” Then, on the other hand, 
if you should live — in whose service could you spend your days better 
than in the sendee of God? What more happy employment, what 
more blessed position than to be found, like Samuel, a waiting 
servant upon God while yet you need a mother’s care? Remember 


533 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


how early temptations beset you. Would you not wish to secure your 
early days? And how can you cleanse your ways except by 
taking heed unto them according to God’s Word? Do you not 
know, too, that the Church needsyou? Your young blood shall keep 
her veins full of vigor, and make her sinews strong. Should not 
the love of Jesus Christ win you? If He died and shed His blood for 
men, does He not deserve their best service? Would you desire 
to give to God an offering of the end of your days? What would 
you have thought of the Jew who brought an old bull — who, 
after having used an ox in his own fields till it was worn out, 
should then consecrate it to God? Let the lambs be offered! Let 
the firstlings of the herd be brought! Let God have the first 
sheaves of the harvest! Surely, He deserves something better 
than to have the devil’s leavings put upon His holy altar! “Oh, 
but,” you say, “would He accept me if I came to Him early?” 
Why, you have more promises than the old man has! It is 
written that God will be found of them who seek Him, but it 
is specially written, “They who seek Me early shall find Me.” 
You have a peculiar promise given to you. If there were any 
who could be rejected, it could not by any possibility be the 
young; if there were one whom Jesus Christ could leave, it 
would not be you, for He gathers the lambs in His bosom! 
“Suffer the little children to come unto Me and forbid them 
not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.” May not that cheer 
you, however young you are? Jesus Christ loves to see young 
men and maidens join in His praise! We find that the best of 
saints in the Old and New Testament were those who came to 
Jesus young; certain it is that the pick and cream of the Church 
in modern times will be found among those who are early 
converts. Look at those who are church officials and ministers, 
and in most cases — and the exception only proves the rule — 
in most cases, the leaders in our Israel are those who, as young 
Hannibal was devoted by his parents to the great cause of his 


534 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


country, were devoted by their parents to the great cause of 
Zion and to the interests of Jerusalem. If you would be strong 
for God, eminent in His service, and joyful in His ways, if you 
would understand the heights and depths of the love of Christ 
which passes knowledge, if you would give yourselves before 
your bones are broken, and before your spirit has become 
tinctured through and through with habits of iniquity — then 
offer this prayer — “O satisfy us early with Your mercy, that we 
may rejoice and be glad all our days.” 

II. And now, very briefly, we shall take the text as YOUR 
ADDRESS TO GOD. 

Every word here is significant. “0. ’’This teaches us that the 
prayer is to be earnest. I will suppose that I have led some of you 
young people here now to breathe this prayer to God. Am I so 
unhappy as to suppose that none of you will do it? Are there 
not some who now say, “I will, with my whole heart, God the 
Holy Spirit helping me, now in my pew offer this supplication 
to heaven.” It begins with an “O.” Dull prayers will never reach 
God’s throne. What comes from our heart coldly can never get 
to God’s heart. Dull, dead prayers, ask God to deny them! We 
must pray out of our very souls. The soul of our prayer must 
be the prayer of our soul. “0 satisfy us.” Young man, the Lord 
is willing to open the door to those who knock, but you must 
knock hard! He is fully prepared to give to those who ask, but 
you must ask earnestly! The kingdom of heaven suffers 
violence. It is not a gentle grasp which will avail; you must 
wrestle with the angel. Give no sleep to your eyes nor slumber 
to your eyelids till you have found the Savior! Remember, if you 
do but find Him, it will well repay you though you shed drops 
of blood in the pursuit. If instead of tears you had given your 
heart’s blood, and if instead of sighs you were to give the 
shrieks of a martyr, it would well recompense you if you did 
but find Jesus — therefore, be earnest. If you find Him not, 


535 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


remember, you perish, and perish with a great destruction; the 
wrath of God abides on you, and hell must be your portion; 
therefore, as one who pleads for his life, so plead for mercy! 
Throw your whole spirit into it, and let that spirit be heated to 
a glowing heat. Be not satisfied to stand at the foot of the 
throne and say, “Let God save me if He will.” No, but put it 
thus, “Lord, I cannot take a denial! 0 satisfy me! 0 save me!” 
Such a prayer is sure to be accepted. 

Again, make it a generous prayer, when you are at it. “O satisfy 
us early!” I am glad to see among our young sisters in the 
catechumen class such a spirit of love for one another, so that 
when one is converted, she is sure to look round for another, 
the scores in that class who have found the Lord are always 
searching out some stray young woman in the street, or some 
hopeful ones attending the congregation whom they try to 
bring in, that Jesus may be glorified! The very first duty of a 
convert is to labor for the conversion of others, and surely it 
will not spoil your prayer, young man, if when you are praying 
for yourself, you will put it in the plural — “O satisfy US. ” Pray 
for your brothers and sisters. I am sure we are verily guilty in 
this thing. Those who sprang from the same loins as 
ourselves — would to God that they were all saved with the 
same salvation! You may, some of you, be happy enough to be 
members of a family in which all are converted. Oh, that we 
could all say the same! May the remembrance of this text 
provoke you and me to pray for unconverted brothers and 
sisters more than we have ever done. “O satisfy us. ”If you have 
brought in the eldest, Lord, stop not till the youngest is 
converted; if my brother preaches the Word, if my sister 
rejoices in Your fear, then, let other sisters know and taste of 
Your love! You young people in shops, in warehouses, in 
factories — pray this prayer and do not exclude even those who 


536 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


513 The Young Man’s Prayer - Ps. 

90:14 


have begun to blaspheme — but even in their early youth, pray 
for them — “O satisfy us with Your mercy.” 

See to it, dear friends, in the next place that jour prayer be 
thoroughly evangelical. “O satisfy us early with Your mercy. ” The 
prayer of the publican is the model for us all. No matter how 
amiable or how excellent we may be, we must all come together 
and say, “God, be merciful to me a sinner.” Do not come with 
any hereditary godliness; do not approach the Lord with the 
fact of your infant sprinkling; do not come before Him to plead 
your mother’s covenant. Come as a sinner, as a black, foul, filthy 
sinner, having nothing to rely on or to trust to but the merit of 
God in Christ Jesus! And let the prayer be just such as a thief 
might offer, or a prostitute might present — “O satisfy us early 
with Your mercy.” 

Let the prayer be put up now at once. The text says, “O 
satisfy us early. ’’Why not today? Oh, that it had been done years 
ago! But there was time enough, you thought. There is time 
enough, but there is none to spare. Acquaint yourself now with 
God, and be at peace! “Today is the accepted time; today is the 
day of salvation.” I would to God we would not pray our 
prayers meaning to have them heard so late; let it be — “O 
satisfy us early. ” The man who truly repents always wants to 
have pardon on the spot; he feels as if he could not rise from 
his knees till God has been favorable to him — and mark you — 
when a man has really come to that point that he must be saved 
now, or else he feels that it will be too late, then has come the 
solemn juncture when God will say, “Be it unto you even as 
you will.” 

I must leave this poor sermon of mine with the people of 
God to pray over it. Sometimes, when most I long to plead 
with men’s souls, I find the brain distracted, although the heart 
is warm. God knows, that could I plead with the young, I would 
do it even unto tears. I do feel it such a solemn thing for our 


537 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


country. Happy shall she be if her sons and daughters give their 
young days to God! It will be such a blessed thing for London, 
if our young men in business, and our young women in families, 
become missionaries for Christ. But what a happy thing it will 
be for them! What joy shall they know! What transports shall 
they feel! What a blessing will they be to their households! What 
happy families they will be! Unconverted fathers shall be made 
to feel the power of godliness through their daughters, and 
mothers who despise religion shall not dare to neglect it any 
longer because they see it exemplified and illustrated in their 
sons! We need missionaries everywhere! This great city never 
can, by any possibility, become the Lord’s except by individual 
action. We must have all Christians at work, and since we 
cannot get the old ones to work as we would — since preach as 
we may, they will setde on their lees — we long for new recruits 
whose ardor shall rekindle the dying enthusiasm of the seniors! 
We need to see fresh minds come in all aglow with holy fervor 
to keep the fire still blazing on the altar! For Jesus Christ’s sake, 
I do implore you, you who number but few years — offer this 
supplication in your pew. Do it now. It is a brother’s heart that 
begs the favor. It is for your own soul’s sake, that you may be 
blessed on earth, and that you may have the joys of heaven! 
There is a prayer-hearing God. The mercy seat is still open. 
Christ still waits. May the Spirit of God compel you now to 
come before Him in supplication. Now may He compel you to 
come in, with this as your cry — “O satisfy us early with Your 
mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.” 


538 



514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, June 14th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was 
done in her, came and fell down before Him and told Him all 
the truth.” - Mark 5:33 

JESUS WAS pressing through the throng to the house of 
Jairus to raise the ruler’s dead daughter; but He is so profuse in 
goodness that He works another miracle while upon the road. 
While yet this rod of Aaron bears the blossom of an 
unaccomplished wonder, it yields the ripe almonds of a perfect 
work of mercy. It is enough for us, if we have some purpose, 
straightway to go and accomplish it; it would be imprudent to 
expend our energies by the way. Hastening to the rescue of a 
drowning friend, we cannot afford to exhaust our strength 
upon another in like danger. It is enough for a tree to yield one 
sort of fruit, and for a man to fulfill his own peculiar calling, 
but our Master knows no limit of power or boundary of 
mission. He is so prolific of divine grace, that like the sun which 
shines as it fulfils its course, His path is radiant with loving 
kindness. He is a fiery arrow of love which not only reaches its 
ordained target, but perfumes the air through which it flies! 
Virtue is always going out of Jesus, as sweet odors exhale from 
the flowers; and it always will be emanating from Him, as light 
from the central orb. What delightful encouragement this truth 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of God affords us! If our Lord is so ready to heal the sick, and 
bless the needy, then, my soul, be not slow to put yourself in 
His way that He may smile on you! Be not slack in asking, if He 
is so abundant in bestowing! I will give earnest heed to His 
word this morning, for it may be, though the sermon should be 
mainly intended to bless another, yet incidentally and by the 
way, Jesus may speak through it to my soul. Men speak of 
killing two birds with one stone, but my Lord heals many souls 
on one journey! May He not heal me? Son of David, turn Your 
eyes and look upon my distress, and let me be made whole this 
day! 

The afflicted woman in the narrative came behind Jesus in 
the press and won a cure from Him — all unobserved by the 
multitude. Ah, how many there may be in the crowd who are 
really healed by Jesus Christ, but concerning whom little or 
nothing is known! It is delightful to see conversion-work, to 
trace the good hand of the Lord, and to rejoice therein; but, 
beyond a doubt, when the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed, 
we shall find that Jesus Christ has worked ten times more 
wonders than eyes have seen or ears heard! We must not dream 
that we know all that our infinite God is doing. The works of 
the Lord are great, and are sought out of all them that have 
pleasure therein, but even these seekers see not all — 

“Full many a gem of purest ray serene 
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear. 

Full many a flower is born to blush unseen, 

And waste its sweetness on the desert air.” 

Let each timid hearer now say — “If it is so that there are 
many who receive God’s grace, who through much trembling 
hide themselves from the eyes of men, may it not be so with 
me? May I not this morning venture secredy to touch the Lord? 


540 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


And since the virtue streams abundandy from Him, may I not 
hope that He will bless me; even me, unknown, unnoticed 
though I am.” 

I commence with these two or three notes of 
encouragement, just to tune my harp, for I desire to sing a song 
to the Lord’s beloved, of which the burden shall be — “Comfort 
You, comfort You my people.” The story of this trembling 
woman, from first to last, though it is but a piece of by-play, as 
1 have said before, is one of the most touching and teaching of 
the Savior’s miracles. The woman was very ignorant; she fondly 
imagined that virtue came out of Christ by a law of necessity, 
without His knowledge or direct will. She supposed that the 
holiness and divinity of His nature had communicated a 
mysterious efficacy to His garments. Just as the bones of Elisha 
had restored a dead man to life, so she conceived that the 
garments worn upon the living body of the Savior might 
remove her sickness. She had true faith, but there was, to say 
the least, a tinge of superstition in it. Moreover, she was a total 
stranger to the generosity of Jesus’ character, or else she would 
not have gone behind to steal the cure which He was so ready 
to bestow. Misery should always place itself right in the face of 
mercy. Had she known the love of Jesus’ heart, she would have 
said, “I have but to put myself where He can see me; His 
omniscience will teach Him my case, and His love at once will 
work my cure.” We admire her faith, but we marvel at her 
strange ignorance; for how could she imagine that she would 
be hidden from one whose garment could stop her issue of 
blood? He who could cure her secret malady could certainly 
perceive her secret touch! After she had obtained the cure, she 
rejoices with trembling; glad was she that the divine virtue had 
worked a marvel in her, but she feared lest Christ should retract 
the blessing, and put a negative upon the grant of His grace. 
How sad that she should have such unworthy ideas of our 


54i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


gracious Master — little did she comprehend the fullness of His 
love! 

You and I have not so clear a view of Him as we could 
wish; we know not the heights and depths and lengths and 
breadths of His love, but we know Him better than she did — 
at least we know, for sure, that He is too good to withdraw 
from a trembling soul the gift which it has been able to obtain! 
But here is the marvel of it; litde as was her knowledge, great 
as was her unbelief, and astounding as was her misconception 
of our Lord — yet her faith, because it was real faith, saved her! 
If we have faith as a grain of mustard seed, there is life in that 
grain, and die it cannot. A ray of faith assures complete 
deliverance from the blackness of darkness forever! If in the 
list of the Lord’s children you and I are written, as the feeblest 
of the family, yet being children and heirs through faith, no 
power, human or devilish, can reverse our adoption! If we 
cannot clasp the Lord in our hands with Simeon; if we dare not 
to lean our heads upon His bosom with John — yet if we can 
venture in the crowd behind Him, and touch the hem of His 
garment, we are made whole! Courage, you who are so timid 
that you seldom read your tides clear to mansions in the skies — 
the title is none the less sure, in spite of the fact you cannot 
read it! I would to God your faith were stronger, but God 
forbid that I should wound your sensitive spirits, and 
discourage your growing hopes! My Master quenched not the 
smoking flax; He broke not the bruised reed — neither must the 
servant do so. I had rather see you, with all your timidity, 
exercising a real faith in Jesus, than I would have to mourn over 
you as lifted up with rash presumptuous confidence — without a 
solid ground for your boldness. Better to go limping to heaven, 
than running to hell; better to enter into life crippled or maimed, 
than having two hands, and two feet, and cast into hell fire. 
Courage, I say, you trembler. To cry, “Abba,” with tears and 


542 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


groans, is better than to shout with loud boastings, “Peace, 
peace,” where there is no peace! Happier, by far, to be folded 
with the tender lambs, than to be driven away with the strong 
and lusty goats! 

Now let us turn aside to hear this woman preach. She has 
a word for two classes. First, to the penitent, urging him to a full 
confession. “She told Him all the truth” — penitent, do you the 
same! Next, to the true convert, an exhortation to an open 
profession; for she declared before them all how she had been 
made whole. Secret disciple — “Go and do you likewise.” 

I. This timid woman shall be AN EXAMPLE TO 
PENITENTS to make a full avowal of their state and condition. 
“She told Him all the truth.” There need be no difficulty about 
the matter of prayer with a soul that needs help from Christ. 
Never question your power to pray acceptably if God has given 
you a sense of need. Say not — “I have no eloquence; I cannot 
arrange my words; I cannot fashion a suitable form of 
extemporaneous address.” Remember that none of these 
things are necessary! All that is needed for acceptable prayer is 
that in the name of Jesus you tell the Lord all the truth. You 
require no argument more moving than your misery; you need 
no description more glowing than your sad case, itself, affords 
you. Though you know not how to plead your cause as an 
advocate in a court of law, plead it as the publican in the court 
of mercy! The simple statement of your needs, and the sincere 
expression of your desire that those needs should be supplied, 
for Jesus’ sake, is all the prayer that God asks of you! 

We should, dear friends, if we would come before the Lord 
acceptably, tell Him all the truth about our disease. This woman 
did so. Her malady was such that her modesty had prompted 
her to conceal it from the throng, but she must not hide it from 
Jesus. Her disease had rendered her unclean, so that she had no 
right to mingle with the crowd, since her touch defiled all who 


543 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


touched her. All this defilement she must admit in the presence 
of the Healing One, nor must she, now that her Lord demands 
it, hide it from the multitude who are all about her. Not to gloat 
over sin, but to show how sensible we are of it, we ought to 
make a full declaration of our disease to Jesus, and when He 
wills it, we must conceal from no one what sinners we were 
until divine grace reclaimed us. Sin is our disease! Sinner, 
acknowledge it! Go, show yourself, in all your foulness, to the 
Great High Priest. Confess the depravity of your nature; tell 
Him that your whole head is sick, and your whole heart is faint. 
Do not draw the picture flatteringly when you are in prayer. 
Confess that your thoughts are foul, your imaginations filthy, 
your heart corrupt, and your judgment perverted. Tell Him that 
your memory will treasure up foolishness, but that it drops the 
words of wisdom from its feeble hands. Tell him you are 
altogether as an unclean thing, and that all your righteousnesses 
are as filthy rags. Make a clean breast of your overt acts. Tell 
Him, when you are alone in your closet, precisely what you 
have done; do not disguise neither your crimes, nor mince 
matters by using dainty terms. If you have been a thief, tell Him 
so; if you have been a drunkard, confess it not thus — “Lord, I 
have sometimes indulged the flesh,” but say, “Lord, I have 
been drunk.” Put it plainly! Acknowledge it in your privacy 
before God by its own proper name. It is a great temptation of 
Satan, with convicted souls, to induce them to apply grand tides 
to their sins. I pray you, do not do so! Acknowledge, sinner, 
just what you have been, and wear the sackcloth and ashes 
which befit your state. Call a spade, a spade, and go not about 
trimming your way. This is not the time for your Agags to go 
delicately; they must be hewed in pieces before the Lord your 
God. Confess the aggravations of your sin; conceal not from 
God that you sinned against light and knowledge — against 
many warnings and the strivings of an awakened conscience. 


544 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


Do not hesitate to acknowledge that you have wiped away the 
tears which the gospel forced from you, and have gone once 
again into the world’s sin, and lost every good impression. It is 
well for us if we are seeking mercy of God, to state the worst 
of our case, and not the best; it is a sure sign that mercy will 
soon come, when we are ready to confess to the full, our misery! 
O sinner, where are you? Have you been before my God in 
prayer? Go again, and be more full and clear in your confession; 
you cannot describe your case in terms too black. It is not 
possible for you to exaggerate either your natural or acquired 
guilt. You are a wretch undone without His sovereign grace — 
admit it to Him — and if you can find no words, let the groans, 
and sighs, and sobs of confession pour forth from you, for it is 
the heart and soul of true and sincere prayer to lay yourself in 
the dust at Jesus’ feet, and tell Him all the truth. 

The woman next told the Lord of her sufferings. The peculiar 
disease with which she had been afflicted drained away her 
strength. She must have presented a most emaciated 
appearance; there was no flush of health upon her hollow cheek; 
her gait was that of utter weakness. The toil which her poverty 
compelled her to endure to earn a livelihood must have been 
very painful to her, for she had no strength. Her purse was 
drained by physicians, and her heart, by the flux of blood. Poor 
creature! We can little tell the days of languishing, and the 
nights of pain she endured — and the seasons of despondency 
and despair which would come upon her spirit in consequence 
of the weakness of the flesh. But she told Him all the truth! She 
told Him briefly, but completely, all she had endured. Tried 
soul! You with whom God’s Spirit is at work! Tell the Lord, if 
you would pray aright, all your sufferings! Tell Him how your 
heart has been broken, how your conscience has been alarmed; 
tell Him how your very sleep is scared with dreams, how your 
days are made as black as though they were nights by a lack of 


545 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


hope; tell Him that sin has become a torment to you, that the 
places in which you could once find pleasure have now become 
howling wildernesses to you! Tell Him the harp has lost its 
music, the cup its enticements, the table its charms, society its 
delights — for you are full of your own ways, and your sins have 
become a burden to you. Let your sorrows flow in briny floods 
before the Lord of hosts, for though no stranger can 
intermeddle with your sorrow, your God understands it! Tell 
Him, then, tell Him, troubled sinner, tell Him all the truth! 

Next, I am persuaded that this woman did not hesitate to 
tell Him of her futile attempts for a cure. She had been to other 
physicians; she had suffered many things by them, that is to say, 
some of them had put her under various operations of the most 
painful character; and others had compelled her to drink 
nauseous medicine. These ancient professors of medicine had 
given her sleepless nights, and days of exquisite anguish — all of 
which she might have borne with patience if she had been one 
whit the better, but she rather grew worse. Her doctors, it 
seems, were her worst disease; they added to the issue of her 
blood a waste of her money; they gave her consumption in her 
purse, and vexed her with the plagues of fees. Her substance 
might have yielded her many little comforts, and some extra 
nourishment to sustain her under the fearful drain upon her 
system, but the doctors sucked like vampires and made an issue 
in her pockets more rapid than that in her person! She tells the 
Lord, although that confession was as good as saying, “Lord, I 
have been everywhere else, or else I would never have come to 
You; I have tried everyone, and it is only because all others have 
failed that I present myself before You.” You would think such 
a confession as that would make Him angry, but it was not so. 
I would not have you keep back this part of the tale from your 
Lord and Master. Tell Him you have been to other physicians; 
remind Him how you went to Moses — how he took you to the 


546 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


foot of Sinai, and made you exceedingly fear, and quake, but 
never healed your wounds. Tell Him how you rested upon Mr. 
Civility and his father, Mr. Legality, who said they had skill to 
take the burden from your back — who set you to do this, and 
to do that most irksomely — but never ministered one atom to 
your cure. Tell Him of your many prayers, and how you have 
trusted in them; tell Him of your good works, and how you 
used to repose your confidence in them. You may spread before 
Him the story of your infant sprinkling, your confirmation, 
your Church attendance, your chapel going. Tell Him how you 
were always up to early prayers, and kept the saints’ days — how 
you tried to mortify the body, and to deny yourself many 
comforts; tell Him how you did everything sooner than come 
to Him, and say that even now, if you had not been forced to it, 
you would not have come, for you are so vile by nature, and so 
great an enemy to the cross of Christ, that you would not have 
come to Him if you could have found a shadow of hope 
elsewhere! 

“Well,” one says, “would that be praying?” Yes, dear brother! 
Yes, dear sister, that is the soul of prayer — to tell Him all the 
truth! We cannot expect that He will give us pardon till we 
make our confession fully, and without any reserve. If you will 
cover any sin in your heart, your sin shall condemn you; if there 
is one secret corner of your soul in which you hide away any of 
your corruptions, or follies — there shall a cancer spring up 
which shall eat into your very soul. Tell Him all the truth! Hide 
nothing from Him, even this, your wicked, willful pride in 
going after your own righteousness, and not submitting 
yourself to the righteousness of Christ — tell Him all the truth. 

This poor woman told Him all her hopes. She said with many 
a tear, “Lord Jesus, when I had spent my all and could no longer 
run after the various physicians of different countries, I heard 
of You. It was one evening as I lay on my couch, too faint to 


547 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sit upright. A neighbor came and told me that a son of hers 
who had been born blind had received his sight; and she said 
that the same man, named Jesus of Galilee, a mighty prophet, 
had also restored one who was dead — a widow woman’s son 
at the gates of Nain. Then I said in my heart, perhaps He will 
heal me; and my soul that had been given up to despair enjoyed 
for a moment a beam of hope, for my soul said, ‘If it is possible 
for Him to raise the dead, then He can stop my issue of blood; 
and if He did open the blind eyes, then He can restore me.’ I 
thought, if the journey is ever so long I will take it; if the way is 
ever so rough, if I may but creep into His presence, I will be 
among the company, and, perhaps, when He is stretching out 
His hand to bless, He will bless me, even me; and perhaps the 
man is so full of healing virtue that if He will not look on me, 
yet if I get near enough to look on Him, I shall be made whole.” 
So she would tell him of that hope; she would also tell Him of 
the many disappointments that she met with when she was 
pressing through the throng; how the strong men jostled her, 
and the rough men pushed her back; how the many thoughtless 
told her to be gone, and the zealous few were jealous of her 
place, and struggled to get before her. She would tell Him how 
at last she did come near enough to touch the hem of His 
garment, and how she ventured to touch in the hope that she 
would be made whole. Then she would plead that as she already 
felt a change for the better, she humbly hoped that He would 
not take away this omen of love, but that He would carry out 
the cure and send her away perfectly restored. 

If you desire to pray aright, pour out your hopes before the 
Lord. I remember, when I sought the Lord, I said to Him, 
“Lord, I have read in Scripture that You did hear Saul of Tarsus, 
and that You did save Manasseh. I am a sinner, it is true, great 
as they are; but surely You can save me; and my soul hopes that 
yet You will turn an eye of pity, and say unto me, ‘your sins are 


548 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


forgiven.’” Sometimes that hope grew so strong that I felt as if 
I would be saved — I knew I would. Then, again, that hope went 
down so low that it seemed impossible that He could have pity 
upon me; and I remember I asked Him how it was He could 
have buoyed me up with that fond hope, and put the Scriptures 
in such a way that they looked as if they were meant for me — 
and were sent to beckon me to Christ — and yet I could find no 
comfort in them. Now, you must do the same. Spread those 
disappointed hopes of yours before your God, and tell Him all 
the truth! 

But, be sure you also tell Him your fears. I dare say the 
woman said to Him, “Oh, Son of David, I thought at one time 
it was foolish of me to come to You, for I know, O Jesus of 
Nazareth, that You are very careful concerning the law. Now 
the law says that a woman with an issue of blood is unclean, 
and I thought I had no right to come near to You — that You 
would say to me, ‘Woman, woman, how dare you to mix with 
the throng, and make all these people legally unclean? And what 
is this, your impudence, that you should think of touching Me? 
You whose touch is a defiling one, how could you venture to 
come near to Me?’ Lord, I thought of going back scores of 
times, but it was my necessity that made me bold. I felt I had 
no right to come; but come I must. When I did get the cure 
from You, I touched You surreptitiously without any invitation, 
without daring to do it before Your face, and now I am afraid 
You will curse me and say, ‘Get you gone,’ and add another 
disease to me, and so break the back that is already bent with a 
crushing load.” How soon her fears were removed when she 
had told them! 

Now, poor sinner, tell all your fears, whatever they may be. 
You think your sins are too great? Tell Him so! You fear you 
are not one of His chosen? Tell Him so! You think that He has 
never called you? Tell Him so! You believe that if you did come 


549 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


to Him He would refuse you? Tell Him so, if you dare; but I 
think you would hardly utter so flat a contradiction to His own 
words, “Him who comes to Me I will in no wise cast out.” Do 
you feel your heart is so hard? Tell Him it is like a nether 
millstone, that the adamant might melt before your heart would 
yield. Do you feel as if you could not tell Him? Tell Him that 
you feel as if you could not tell Him. Whatever it is, let all the 
truth come out! No, no! You need not look into the Prayer 
book — you will not find much there that suits a convicted 
sinner; you need not buy a book of family devotions; your own 
poor cries are better than the best written forms! “Oh, my 
prayer will be so broken!” Well, then, it will be all the more 
suitable for a broken heart. But then you say, “It is such an 
unworthy prayer.” Yes, but then you are an unworthy soul; the 
prayer is fitting for the person. If the Great God should hear 
you, you will know that it was not because of your prayer, but 
because of Jesus; for all you did was tell Him the truth; and if 
that prevails with Him, why then, His heart of love, and the 
sufferings of the Savior must have moved Him to have pity 
upon you! 

I pray God the Holy Spirit guide these words which are 
meant to encourage you who have been seeking Jesus. Let me 
urge you to tell the whole of the story for these reasons. The 
Lord knows it all beforehand — you cannot hide it. Whatever your 
sins may have been, though they were perpetrated at night, 
though they were under the shadow of the thickest darkness, 
He saw them all! Secret sins are all committed in the face of 
God. Was it a theft which no one has yet discovered? Or was 
it only a thought, a black thought that no ears, not even your 
own, ever heard? God saw it — God heard it. In His book 
everything which you have done is recorded against you. Be not 
foolish, then — deny not that which is published on the 
housetops of glory! The Judge will publish it at last. If you hide 


550 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


it all your life, it will come out then. Go then, tell it — tell it now! 
To tell this to God will be a very great sendee to you. It will tend to 
make you feel your need more. I believe that often, when the 
penitent begins his confession, he is not half as sensible of guilt 
as at the close of his prayer. If you will bring your soul to look 
at your sin, to study its foulness, to meditate upon its heinous 
ingratitude — while you are considering the subject, the Spirit of 
God will work upon you — and your heart, like the rock in the 
desert, smitten by His rod, shall gush with streams of penitence! 

If your heart is very grieved, do I pray you, remember that 
confession is one of the most rapid ways of getting relief. While 
the banks hold good the lake swells; let them break and the 
water is drained off. Let a vent be found for the swollen lake 
up yonder on the mountains, and the mass of water which 
might otherwise inundate the valleys will flow in fertilizing 
streams. When you have a festering, gathering wound, the 
surgeon lets in the lance and gives you ease. So confession 
brings peace. Would to God without any delay you who need 
a Savior would go to Him and confess your sin right plainly. 
Jesus is no hard-hearted foe, no cruel judge. He loves you. 
Awakened sinner, He will love to hear that story of yours; and 
before you have finished it, He will give you the kiss of love, 
and say, “I have blotted out your sins like a cloud, and like a 
thick cloud your transgressions.” Trust the immense generosity 
of Jesus’ infinitely tender heart to give you your soul’s desire — 
the complete and perfect forgiveness of your sin! I have thus 
bid this woman become the preacher of this morning, and 
speak to those who are penitent. May the Word be blessed! 

II. We now change the subject for a very short time, to 
address THOSE WHO ARE CONVERTED, BUT WHO, LIKE 
THIS WOMAN, HAVE NOT YET ACKNOWLEDGED THEIR 
FAITH IN THE PRESENCE OF OTHERS. 


55i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Our Savior will do nothing by halves. The woman may be 
content with having her body healed — Jesus is not satisfied till 
her soul is recovered, too. She has gained the cure, but she 
would probably go slinking away with the retiring multitude to 
hide herself from all observation. This will not be for her good, 
nor for the Master’s honor, therefore, He takes means to get a 
plain confession from her. Turning around, He says, “Who 
touched Me?” At first, there is no answer; He puts it again, 
“Who touched Me?” They all deny. Peter, moreover, takes 
upon himself to upbraid the Savior for asking so absurd a 
question — “ The multitude throng You,” he says, “how can 
You say, ‘Who touched Me?’” But He looked around, and 
probably fixing His eyes at last upon the woman herself, He 
said, “Somebody has touched Me, for I perceive that virtue is 
gone out of Me.” That “somebody” came out of the crowd, 
and falling flat on her face, she declared before them all, so 
Luke says, what had been done in her. 

Now, in the great work of salvation, as we have remarked 
before, there are many who are saved who, through timidity, 
do not come forward and confess what Jesus Christ has done 
for them. I believe that our Lord often uses singular means to 
make His secret ones come out and acknowledge Him. The 
words I may speak just now may be a part of His plan by which 
He will make yonder “somebody,” whoever that may be, this 
sister somebody, this brother somebody, who has touched Him, 
come out and declare before all what the Lord has done. 

His reasons for compelling her to make an open 
confession, were doubtless three. It was for His glory — 

“Why should the wonders He has wrought, 

Be hid in darkness and forgot?” 


552 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


When I look abroad upon nature, it is true, I do not see 
nature fussily trying to make itself tidy for a visitor, as some 
professors do, who, the moment they think they are going to 
be looked at, trim up their godliness to make it look smart. But 
on the other hand, nature is never bashful. She never tries to 
hide her beauties from the gazer’s eyes. You walk the valley; the 
sun is shining, and a few raindrops are falling; yonder is the 
rainbow — a thousand eyes gaze at it! Does it fold up all its 
lovely colors and retire? Oh, no! It shrinks not from the eyes 
of man. In yonder garden all the flowers are opening their 
lovely cups, the birds are singing, and the insects humming 
amid the leaves. It is a place so beautiful that God Himself 
might walk therein at eventide, as He did in Eden. I look 
without alarming the bashful beauties of the garden. Do all 
these insects fold their wings and hide beneath the leaves? Do 
the flowers hang down their heads? Does the sun draw a veil 
over his modest face? Does nature blush until the leaves of the 
trees are scarlet? Oh, no! Nature cares not for gazers, and when 
any come to look upon her, she does not hasten to wrap a 
mande over her fair form, or throw a curtain before her 
grandeur! So the Christian is not to be always wishing to expose 
what is in him; that were to make himself a Pharisee; yet, on 
the other hand, if God has put anything that is lovely and 
beautiful, and of good repute in you, anything that may glorify 
the cross of Christ, and make the angels happy before the 
eternal throne, who are you that you should conceal it? Who 
are you that you should rob God of His praise? What? Would 
you have all nature’s beauties hid? Why, then, hide the beauties 
of divine grace? Jesus Christ deserves to be confessed before 
men. He is not ashamed to acknowledge Himself our friend 
amidst the splendors of His Father’s court; nor was He 
ashamed amidst the mockery and spitting of Pilate’s hall! Why, 
then, should you find it a hardship or a difficulty to acknowledge 


553 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Him? Acknowledge Him! I ought to feel proud of the honor to 
be allowed to acknowledge Him! I, who am black with sin, 
ashamed to call Him husband who is the fairest of the children 
of men? I, who am poor as poverty, blush to acknowledge that 
the King of kings calls Himself my brother! I, who deserve the 
deepest hell; I, ashamed to admit that Christ has washed me in 
His precious blood, and set my feet upon a rock, and put a new 
song into my mouth? My Master, I cannot be ashamed of You! 
How can it be? — 

“No, when I blush, be this my shame, 

That I no more revere His name!” 

My brother, my sister, you who keep in retirement and hide 
your candles under a bushel, you should not do so. For the sake 
of His dear name, who loved you with an everlasting love, and 
has engraved you upon the palms of His hands — come forth 
and declare your faith! 

Doubdess Christ would have her confession for the good of 
Jairus. Did that strike you? Jairus needed much faith. He was 
just informed that his child was dead. Some faith was needed 
to believe that Christ could heal the sick; but that He could 
restore the dead? What faith was needed here? Therefore, this 
woman’s confession is put in to nourish the faith of the 
trembling ruler of the synagogue. You do not know, dear 
friends, of how much service your open confession of Christ 
might be to some trembling soul. One reason why we have 
Churches and are joined in fellowship is that we may help the 
weak; that by our daring to say, “Christ has saved me, ” others 
may take heart and may come to Him, and find the same mercy! 
“Oh, but,” you say, “The Church does not need me.” Then, / 
might say the same, and all Christians might say the same. 
Where would there be a visible Church on earth at all? What is 


554 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


right for one Christian to do is right for all to do; and if is right 
for you to neglect professing Christ, then it is right for all 
believers to do so! And then, where is the Church? Where is 
the ministry? Where is Christ’s truth? How are sinners to be 
saved at all? Suppose, my brothers and sisters, that John Calvin 
and Martin Luther had said — “Well now, we know the truths 
of God; but we had better be quiet, for we can go to heaven 
much more comfortably. If we begin preaching, we shall set the 
entire world by the ears, and there will be a deal of mischief 
done; hundreds of persons will have to be martyrs for their 
faith — and we shall be subject to many hardships.” They had 
quite as much right to hide their religion as you have! They had 
quite as much reason for the concealment of their godliness as 
you have. But, alas, for the world, where would have been the 
Reformation if these had been as cowardly as you are, and like 
you, had skulked to the rear in the day of battle? 

I ask again, what would be the wretched lot of England, 
what calamities would happen to our island, if all who know 
Christ as you know Him were to act as you do? There would 
be no ministers to preach the gospel! Why, I might today be 
sitting in my own house reading my Bible, or enjoying private 
prayer with much comfort; I certainly would not be pleading 
with sinners if I imitated your example. Where would be the 
deacons of our Churches and other useful Church officers? 
Where? Echo only answers, “Where?” if all were like you! How 
would the heathen be converted? Who would be the missionary? 
Who would venture among the heathen if they were like you? 
The Christian would be dumb and have no testimony! In fact, 

I must add there could be no Christians! Even if there could be 
a number of secret Christians everywhere, then the world 
would say, “The religion of Christ is the most despicable 
religion under the sun, for those who believe in it will not join 
together; they will not even profess it; they are so ashamed of 


555 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


their Master, that they will not come forward, any of them, to 
acknowledge what He has done for their souls!” You are acting 
inconsistently if you will not come forward and acknowledge 
your Lord. My dear brothers and sisters do not shirk it! I mean 
some of you who have been attending here for years, and ought 
to have been members of this Church years ago; and I mean 
others of you who have come in here this morning, who have 
known the Lord some litde time, and ought to be united with 
other Christians. I say, think about how much real good you 
might do after you have once broken through the shell and told 
others what Jesus has done for you! You would find that after 
having once made a profession, you would be obliged to speak 
for your Lord — and who can tell what a career of usefulness 
might be opened up before you if you would but dare to do 
this for His sake? 

Moreover, I have no doubt that the main reason why Jesus 
Christ would have this woman declare what was done in her 
was for her own good. Suppose He had let her go home 
quiedy — there she goes — when she reached home she would 
have said, “Ah, I stole that cure; I am so glad I have it.” But 
there would come a dark thought — “One of these days it will 
die away; I shall be as bad as ever, for I never asked Him.” 
Conscience would say to her, “Ah, it was a theft.” And though 
she might excuse herself, still she would not be easy. Now 
Christ calls her up, and conscience cannot disturb her, for He 
gave her the cure before them all! She will not be afraid of the 
return of her disease, for Jesus said, “Your faith has made you 
whole.” 

What a blessing it would be to some of you if you would 
come out and confess your Lord and Master. “Well,” says one, 
“I do not like baptism.” There are a great many naughty 
children in the world who do not like to do what their father 
tells them; but those children often get whipped, and this will 


556 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


probably be your lot. Our good brother, who spoke here last 
Sunday evening, astounded me by leaving out part of the text 
which he most frequendy quoted. If he quoted a text he should 
quote it all. “He who believes shall be saved,” he said. I know 
no such text in Scripture! There are texts very like it, and the 
doctrine is true, but the text is, “He who believes and is baptised 
shall be saved.” So the text stands. Those of us who are Baptists 
are supposed to lay too much stress on baptism. I think the 
danger is in not having stress enough upon it! I know this, if 
my Master tells me to preach the gospel to every creature and 
puts it thus, “He who believes and is baptized shall be saved,” 
I dare not take the responsibility of leaving out part of my 
Master’s message! I know that he who believes is saved; but, 
mark you, I would not run the risk of willfully refusing to attend 
to the second part of my Master’s command! If there is 
anything in Scripture that is as plain as noonday, it is the 
baptism of believers. The deity of Christ is a point which might 
quite as readily be disputed as the baptism of believers in Jesus. 
Let any simple-minded man take the Bible without prejudice — 
and I conceive that it would be impossible for him to read it 
without discovering that the believer in Jesus is to be buried 
with Christ in baptism! 

Little do our friends know how much mischief they do by 
teaching infant sprinkling! I believe it to be the root and pillar 
of Popery, the stronghold and bastion of Puseyism. It is an 
invention of man, against which Christians ought to protest 
every day, because infant sprinkling is a practical denial of the 
need of personal godliness. It is not so intended by those who 
use it — but it is so read and interpreted by the world. It puts 
into the Church those who are not in the Church; it gives 
religious rites to the unconverted; it teaches men that because 
their mothers and fathers were good people, therefore they are 
Christians — whereas they are not — they are heathens, and as 


557 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


much heathens as if they were bom amidst the heathens huts! 
They are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity, 
notwithstanding all their parents’ excellence. To give Christian 
ordinances to unconverted persons is to pervert the testimony 
of God’s Church! The baptism of the believer in the name of 
Christ is, and must be, a significant emblem of death to the 
world. It is the crossing of the Rubicon, the throwing away of 
the scabbard, and the drawing of the sword against the world 
forever. It is an ordinance whose sign can never be erased; an 
ordinance which disgraces and shames a man in the world’s 
eyes more than anything else, the reproach of Christianity, the 
scoff and scorn of his religion, is believer’s baptism; and 
blessed is that man who so can look at it — and then, for Jesus’ 
sake — take up his cross and follow Him! 

“Well,” says one, “I do not see it.” My dear brothers and 
sisters, if you cannot see it, I cannot help that. Your conscience 
is not the rule of your duty, but God’s Word is; and if God’s 
Word commands it, whatever your conscience may say about 
it, you are sinning if you refuse to obey! Oh, I would press this 
point upon you of making an open declaration, and of doing 
so in Christ’s way, for you have no right to do it in a way of your 
own! It is idolatry to worship the true God by a wrong method. 
Acceptable service can only be rendered to God in His own 
way. To the law and to the testimony; if we speak not according 
to that word, it is because there is no light in us. I believe that 
after you have once thus professed your faith before men, your 
courage will grow; your separation from the world will be more 
complete; you will be a marked man, often a despised man! 
People will point you out and say, “There is one of your 
Methodists.” Your profession will distinguish you from the 
world, and will be a bond to keep you right, a heavenly chain 
of gold to bind you fast to the principles of your Lord and 


558 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


514 Tell It All - Mark 5:33 


Master’s truth! Do, with this poor woman, I plead, tell all the 
truth — and tell it in your Master’s way! 

Now I send you away, dear friends, reminding penitents of 
that with which we began — the necessity of telling Jesus all — 
still wishing, however, that you who have found a Savior, would 
tell the world all, and bear your witness that, let others do as 
they will, as for you and your house, you will serve the Lord! 
And unto the name of God be glory forever. Amen. 


559 



515 The Sinner’s Advocate - 1 John 2:1 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, June 21st, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“My little children, these things write I unto you, that you 
sin not. And if any man sins, we have an advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.” - I John 2:1 

THE APOSTLE JOHN presents us with a very clear and 
emphatic testimony to the doctrine of full and free forgiveness 
of sin. He declares that the blood of Jesus Christ, God’s dear 
Son, cleanses us from all sin, and that if any man sins, we have 
an advocate. It is most evident that he is not afraid of doing 
mischief by stating this truth of God too broadly; on the 
contrary, he makes this statement with the view of promoting 
the sanctity of his “little children.” The objective of this bold 
declaration of the love of the Father to His sinning children is, 
“that you sin not.” This is a triumphant answer to that grossly 
untruthful objection which is so often urged by the adversaries 
of the gospel against the doctrines of free grace — that they lead 
men to licentiousness. It does not appear that the Apostlejohn 
thought so, for in order that these “little children” should not 
sin, he actually declares unto them the very doctrine which our 
opponents call licentious. Those men who think that God’s 
grace, when fully, fairly, and plainly preached, will lead men into 
sin, know not what they say, nor what they affirm! It is neither 
according to nature nor to grace for men to find an argument 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


for sin in the goodness of God. Human nature is bad enough — 
and far be it from me to flatter that leprous criminal, that 
reeking mass of corruption — even a natural conscience revolts 
at the baseness of sinning because divine grace abounds! Shall 
I hate God because He is kind to me? Shall I curse Him because 
He blesses me? I venture to affirm that very few men reason 
thus. Man has found out many inventions, but such arguments 
are so transparendy abominable that few consciences are so 
dead as to tolerate them. Bad as human nature is, it seldom turns 
the goodness of God into an argument for rebelling against 
Him; as for souls renewed by divine grace, they can never be 
guilty of such infamy. 

The believer in Jesus reasons in quite another fashion. Is 
God so good? — then I will not grieve Him. Is He so ready to 
forgive my transgressions? — then I will love Him, by His grace, 
and offend no more. Gratitude has bands which are stronger 
than iron, although softer than silk. Think not, sirs, that the 
Christian needs to be flogged to virtue by the whip of the law! 
Dream not that we hate sin merely because of the hell which 
follows it! If there were no heaven for the righteous, the sons 
of God would follow after goodness because their regenerated 
spirit pants for it; and if there were no hell for the wicked, from 
the necessity of his newborn nature, the true Christian would 
strive to escape from all iniquity. Loved of God, we feel we 
must love Him in return. Richly, yes, divinely forgiven, we feel 
that we cannot live any longer in sin. Since Jesus died to rid us 
from all uncleanness, we feel that we cannot crucify our Lord 
afresh, and put Him to an open shame. We need no nobler or 
more cogent arguments to lead a man to thorough consecration 
to God’s cause, and detestation of all evil than those fetched 
from the free grace of God! And what if some men do pervert 
the doctrine? Do not wicked minds corrupt everything. ? What 
truth is there in Scripture with which a man may not ruin 


561 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


himself if he wills? Did not the prophetic eye of our Lord 
anticipate this when it was written that to some the Word of 
God is, “a savor of death unto death?” Have there not been in 
all ages men who hold the truth of God in licentiousness? 
When were there not evil men to wrest Scripture to their own 
destruction? Shall we keep back the children’s bread least the 
dogs should steal the crumbs? Shall we destroy health-restoring 
drugs because fools may poison themselves with them? Shall 
all the trees be cut down for fear the owls should build their 
nests in them? Shall the sea be dried up because sharks swim in 
it? Shall the pure virgin truth of God be condemned because 
gross villains have forged her name and abused her character? 
God forbid! Let us never blush to preach the whole gospel, and 
to preach its full forgiveness of sin in the boldest and baldest 
manner, believing that the naked breasts of truth are her best 
armor, and that she is least protected when she is encumbered 
with a coat of mail of human reasoning and prudence! 

As God shall help me, then, believing that the doctrine of 
free grace and of God’s infinite love to His people is a doctrine 
which will lead the “litde children of God” to avoid all sin, I 
intend, this morning, to preach that doctrine. May God grant 
that the result may be according to His mind and will! 

I. We commence our exposition of the text with the 
remark that THE SAINT IS STILL A SINNER. 

Our aposde says — “If any man sins.” The “if may be 
written in as small letters as you will, for the supposition is a 
matter of certainty. “If any man sins”? Although the gentle 
hand of the beloved disciple uses such mild and tender terms, 
putting it as a supposition — as though it were an astonishing 
thing after so much love, and mercy, and kindness, that we 
should sin — yet, John very well knew that all the saints do sin, 
for he has himself declared that, if any man says that he does 
not sin, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him! Saints are, 


562 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


without exception, still sinners! Far be it from us to deny that 
divine grace has worked a wondrous change — it were not grace 
at all if it had not. It will be well to note this change. The 
Christian no longer loves sin; it is the object of his sternest horror. 
He no longer regards it as a mere trifle, plays with it, or talks of 
it with unconcern. He looks upon it as a deadly serpent whose 
very shadow is to be avoided; he would no more venture 
voluntarily to put its cup to his lips than a man would drink 
poison who had once almost lost his life through it. Sin is 
dejected in the Christian’s heart, though it is not ejected. Sin 
may enter the heart, and fight for dominion, but it cannot sit 
upon the throne! It haunts the town of Mansoul, and lurks in 
dens and corners to do mischief, but it is no longer honored in 
the streets, nor pampered in the palace. The head and the hands 
of Dagon are broken, although the stump remains. 

The Christian never sins with that enormity of boasting of which the 
unregenerate are guilty. Others wallow in transgressions, and make 
their shame their glory, but if the believer falls, he is very quiet, 
mournful and vexed. Sinners go to their sins as children to their 
own father’s orchard, but believers slink away like thieves when 
they have been stealing forbidden fruit. Shame and sin are 
always in close company in a Christian; if he is drunk with evil, 
he will be ashamed of himself, and go to his bed like a whipped 
cur. He cannot proclaim his transgressions as some do in the 
midst of a vulgar crowd, boasting of their exploits of evil. His 
heart is broken within him, and when he has sinned, he goes 
with sore bones for many and many a day. 

Nor does he sin with the fullness of deliberation that belongs to 
other men. The sinner can sit down by the months together 
and think over the iniquity that he means to perpetrate, till he 
gets his plans well organized and has matured his project; but 
the Christian cannot do this. He may put the sin into his mouth 
and swallow it in a moment, but he cannot continue to roll it 


563 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


under his tongue. He, who can carefully arrange and plot a 
transgression, is still a true child of the old serpent! 

And again, the believer never chews the cud of his sin; for after he 
has sinned, however sweet it may have been in his mouth, it 
becomes bitterness in his heart — and glad enough is he to be 
rid of it altogether. The retrospect of sin to a converted man is 
nothing but blackness and darkness in his heart. 

The Christian, unlike other men, never finds enjoyment in his 
sin; he is out of his element in it. Conscience pricks him; he 
cannot, even if he would, sin like others. There is a refined taste 
within him which all the while revolts at the apparendy dainty 
morsel of sin. The finger of divine grace, with its secret and 
mysterious touch, turns all the honey into gall, and all the 
sweetness into wormwood. If the Christian shall sin, and sin I 
grant he will, yet, it shall always be with half-heartedness — still, 
he clings to the right — the evil that he would not, he does, while 
the good that he would do, he fails to perform. 

You will notice, too, how different the Christian is as to the 
habit of sin. The ungodly man is frequent in overt deeds of 
rebellion, but the Christian, at least in open acts of crime and 
folly, rather falls into them rather than lives in them. The 
swallow dips with his wing the brook, and then, he is up again 
into the skies, soaring toward the sun; but the duck can swim 
in the pool or dive under the water — it is in its element. So the 
Christian just touches sometimes with his wing — alas, for 
him — the streams of earth, but then, he is up again where he 
should be; it is only the sinner who can swim in sin and delight 
therein. You may drive the swine and the sheep together side 
by side; they come to some mire and they both fall into it, and 
both stain themselves; but you soon detect the difference in 
nature between them — for while the swine lies and wallows 
with intense gusto — the sheep is up again, escaping as soon as 
possible from the filth! So with the Christian; he falls, God 


564 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


knows how many times, but by His grace, he rises up again — 
it is not his nature to lie in sin; he abhors himself that ever he 
should fall to the ground at all — while the ungodly goes on in 
his wicked way till sin becomes a habit, and habit, like an iron 
net, has entangled him in its meshes! 

There are all these degrees of difference between the 
Christian and the ungodly man, and far more, for the believer 
is a new creature — he belongs to a holy generation and a peculiar 
people; the Spirit of God is in him, and in all respects, he is far 
removed from the natural man, but for all that, we must come 
back to that with which we started — that the Christian is still a 
sinner! He is so from the imperfection of his nature. His nature is 
such that he cannot but sin until the old Adam shall die in 
him — and that will not be till the funeral knell is tolled for 
himself! Sin, by reason of his imperfection, pollutes the best 
thing the believer does. Sin mars his repentance. There is filth 
in our tears, and unbelief in our faith. The best thing we ever 
did apart from the merit of Jesus only swelled the number of 
our sins, for when we have been most pure in our own sight, 
yet, like the heavens, we are not pure in God’s sight, and as He 
charged His angels with folly, much more must He charge us 
with it, even in our most angelic frame of mind! The song that 
thrills to heaven, and seeks to emulate seraphic strains, has still 
mortal infirmity in it. The prayer which moves the arm of God 
is still a sinful prayer, and only moves that arm because the 
Sinless One, the great Mediator, has stepped in to take away the 
sin of our supplication! I dare to say it — the best faith or the 
highest degree of sanctification to which a Christian ever 
attained on earth, has still so much of the creature’s infirmity 
in it as to be worthy of God’s eternal wrath l In itself considered, 
there is so much sin about the highest and loftiest thing to 
which the creature can attain, that we mournfully confess — 


565 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“We are altogether as an unclean thing and all our 
righteousnesses are but as filthy rags.” 

As the Christian thus sins in his devout performances, so 
he constantly errs in the everyday tenor of his life. Sins of omission to 
wit — how many of these may be compressed into a single hour? 
Oh, what multitudes of things we have left undone! Remember 
that these make up a very great part of the sins which bring the 
curse. “I was thirsty and you gave Me no drink; sick and in 
prison and you visited Me not.” Have we no sins of 
commission? Our thoughts, our imaginations, our words, and 
must I not say our deeds — have these been what they should be? 
If any man dares to tell me that he lives for a single day without 
a sinful deed, I will dare to tell him that he never knew himself! 
Do but look at your own chamber. If you disturb it, I see but 
little dust floating about in it, but if a stray sunbeam shall enter 
through the window, 1 see millions upon millions of little 
particles dancing up and down! And I discover that the whole 
of what I supposed to be clear, pure air is filled with 
innumerable atoms of all sorts of things, and that I am 
breathing these even in the purest atmosphere! So is it with our 
heart and life. When the Spirit shines into us, we see that the 
atmosphere of life is as full of sin as it can hold, and a man may 
sooner count the hairs of his head, or the sands upon the 
seashore, or the drops of the dew of the morning upon the 
grass, than count the sins of a single day! O Lord, You know 
us, but we know not ourselves; yet this much we know, that we 
are a people full of sin, and laden with iniquity. You will tell me 
these are little sins, but I remind you that a multitude of grains 
of sand may overload a vessel quite as surely as bars of iron — 
and therefore, these daily iniquities should be confessed with 
care, and repented of with sincerity. The Christian, then, from 
the imperfection of his nature, sins. The old unchanged 
fountain of Marah must send forth bitter water. The old Adam 


566 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


can do nothing else but sin. Fire can do nothing but bum; water 
can do nothing but quench tire; everything acts according to its 
nature. The new nature that is in us cannot sin, because it is born 
of God; it is so heavenly and divine that it never stoops to 
anything like sin. There is a spark of the celestial and of the 
perfect within every believer which never can be quenched; but 
the old Adam, that which made Paul cry out — “O wretched 
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this 
death?” — must sin, and as certainly as sparks fly upward, so 
certainly the old nature will commit iniquity! 

Moreover, many Christian people sin from certain peculiar 
infirmities. You know, each of you, what your own infirmity may 
be, at least I hope you have been watchful enough to discover 
it. Some sin through shortness of temper; they are not long-winded 
in patience with their fellow creatures; they are vexed; they 
grow hot — perhaps they imagine some cause for anger where 
there is none — and they wax warm, and speak unadvisedly with 
their tongue. This gives much trouble to many of the most 
gracious of men. A hasty temper is a perpetual temptation. 
There are others who have a high and proud spirit, and if they fancy 
they are a litde snubbed or put into the background, at once 
they feel inclined to resent it. There — listen to him — “I am not 
to be thus trod upon! Who dares to treat me thus?” Many who 
have done good service for Christ have had to carry that thorn 
in their flesh even down to their graves. Sensitiveness, a high 
spirit, a suspicious temperament — these are like blisters to the 
feet of a pilgrim — he will always walk painfully, if not slowly. 
Some of us have to contend with sloth. Perhaps we are afflicted 
with an inactive liver, and the physician has never been able to 
touch the complaint. God help the man thus afflicted, for he 
will need to whip himself every day to his duty, and often he 
will feel so dull and sleepy, that he will wish for Cowper’s 
“lodge in a vast wilderness, some boundless connection of 


567 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


shade,” that he might hide himself in quiet from the toil of the 
spiritual harvest. How many we know, dear friends, who have 
to contend with constant unbelief brought on through depression of 
spirits. Their nerves, perhaps, have experienced a great shock at 
some period in life and, constitutionally, they always look at the 
black side of affairs. If they see a grassy knoll, they suspect it to 
be an extinct volcano; and if they happen to be in a green valley 
where the mountains frown like the battlements of heaven, 
they are dreadfully afraid that an avalanche must certainly come 
down and destroy them. They cannot help it; it is a peculiarity 
of their constitution, but it leads them into much sin, and 
should cause them much repentance before the face of the 
living God. 

So I might go on to mention the peculiarity of some who 
are sujferingfrom bashfulness. They will often be tempted to hold 
back where they ought to go forward — and if not to disown 
their Master — yet not to proclaim their love for Him as boldly 
as they should. The Christian, when he reads this verse, “If any 
man sins,” may well say — “Ah, indeed I do; through these 
infirmities I constantly commit iniquity.” And then, dear 
friends, we all sin from the assaults of evil. There are times when 
we are not watchful, and as Satan is always on his watchtower, 
he is sure to attack us just then. We wear our visor up, and then 
in flies the stone from the infernal sling! We have forgotten a 
piece of our armor, and the enemy spies our nakedness and 
cuts us deep, leaving a scar for years. The temptations of the 
world, when we are thrust into ungodly company, and the trials 
of business, and even of the household — all these in unguarded 
moments may take the Christian off his feet. Ah, my brothers 
and sisters, Paul, who was not a whit behind the very chief of 
the aposdes, yet called himself the chief of sinners; and we with 
far inferior graces must take the lowest place, acknowledging 
that in us, that is in our flesh, there dwells no good thing. Sinner 


568 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


is my name, sinner my nature, but thanks be to Him who came 
to save sinners, I am a sinner saved by free grace! 

II. I now leave that point for a second one full of comfort. 

OUR SINS DO NOT DEPRIVE US OF OUR INTEREST IN 

Christ. 

Note the text. “If any man sins we have an advocate.” Yes, 
we have Him though we sin! We have Him still. It does not say, 
“If any man sins he has forfeited his advocate,” but “we have 
an advocate.” sinners though we are, all the sin that a believer 
ever did or can be allowed to commit, cannot destroy his 
interest in the Lord Jesus Christ; into whatever he may be 
allowed to fall, yet none of these things can by any possibility 
touch his title deeds! Indeed, in some characters Jesus is only 
mine when I can claim the name of sinner; I cannot have an 
advocate unless I sin, otherwise I do not need one! Who needs 
an advocate to plead his cause in a court of law if there is no 
suit against him? Sin is a charge against me; I am a sinner; I 
have an advocate. I have today a brother in Christ. “Go, tell my 
brethren,” He said; and yet, they had all forsaken Him, and 
therefore were all sinners — but He was still their brother! I 
have a husband in Christ too, though I sin. “Israel has forsaken 
Me,” says God, “and played the harlot. She has gone whoring 
from Me, but return, return, for I am married unto you.” She 
is still His wife, you see, though she had gone into adultery. The 
Christian, even when he has stained and fouled himself, is still 
the spouse of Christ for all that; we are members of His body, 
and if so, the members cannot be removed or taken off and 
on — limbs are not so easily removed! Did not Christ wash 
Peter? Peter was a member of Christ’s own body, and yet Peter 
needed washing. O blessed picture, the Head washing the feet! 
So at this day, stained though we are, we are claimants of Christ 
as Head of our body. And, beloved, we know that 
notwithstanding all our sin, we are perfecdy justified in Christ, 


569 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


for He justifies the ungodly. We know, too, that we are 
perfectly accepted, for we are accepted in the beloved, and not 
in ourselves. Notwithstanding all our iniquities, we are 
pardoned, for the fountain is opened for sin, and for all 
uncleanness — not for righteousness and purity — but for sin 
and for uncleanness! 

Therefore, we conclude that all our sins do not deprive us 
of that which Christ is to us, namely, the fountain of life, and 
light, and purity, and safety. Oh, my brothers and sisters, if our 
first tide to Christ had depended on our good works, then it 
would fall when our works grew bad, but He loved us when we 
were as bad as we could be — 

“He saw us ruined in the fall, 

Yet loved us notwithstanding all.” 

He chose us when we were sinners; He bought us when we 
were sinners; He loved us when we were dead in trespasses and 
sins; and if we are as bad as that today, He still loves us. If our 
right to heaven rested on the covenant of works, that unstable 
tenure, it would soon fail us; but seeing it rests on the covenant 
of grace, which has no conditions in it, but which is of pure 
immutable grace from first to last, therefore be it known unto 
you, O sons of God, that notwithstanding all your faults and 
failings, wanderings and backslidings, He is your God, and you 
are His children! He will be your God to all eternity, and you 
shall be His children world without end. “What a bold thing to 
say!” says one. Yes, and did I not tell you that I meant to say it 
to the little children, that they sin not? I believe that the bold 
open statement of the fact that all the sin that a believer can 
commit cannot mar his interest in Christ, though it may mar 
his enjoyment of that interest for the present, believing, I say, 
that this doctrine, instead of driving men to sin, will draw them 


570 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


to love that gracious and immutable God, who notwithstanding 
all our sins and cares and woe, will never allow us to perish! 

III. Now let us change the note a little. Our third point is 
THAT THE ADVOCATE IS PROVIDED ON PURPOSE TO MEET 
THE FACT THAT WE ARE STILL SINNERS. 

If I am a sinner, then there is a court, and there is one who 
sits as Judge — the Father. There is a charge against me, 
otherwise I would not need an advocate to meet it — and this 
implies that I have sinned. There is an adversary to press his 
suit against me, and he would hardly venture to do this if there 
were no sin. There must be a right of reply on my part; I must 
have the right to put in a disclaimer in court, and to stand up 
and plead before the bar of justice. He who has a right to plead 
in court is the man who is accused — the man who has some 
offense. If I were neither accused nor had been a sinner, then 
I would have no right to occupy the time of the court; but being 
a sinner, and being brought up upon that charge, and having 
one who presses the charge against me, I have a right to reply, 
and that reply, through God’s good grace, I have a right to 
make through my advocate! 

Let us say, concerning our advocate, that He is ordained 
with a special view to sinners. Ail His names and attributes 
prove Him to be a suitable advocate for such. You and I, who 
though saved, are still sinners, may safely put our case into His 
hands, for look who He is — “Jesus Christ the righteous.” 

“Jesus. ” Ah, then He is an advocate such as I want, for He 
loves me, and takes an interest in me! Jesus is the name of one 
who became man for my sake. He knows what sore 
temptations mean, He understands what trials mean, what 
afflictions mean. I am glad I have one who will be interested in 
my welfare, and will plead for me as a friend for a friend, and 
as a brother for a brother. I thank God, that though I sin, I still 
have Jesus who is my, “brother born for adversity,” the friend 


57i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of sinners, and will, therefore, plead the sinner’s part! Is His 
name Jesus? Then, He is sure to succeed, because “They shall 
call His name Jesus, for He shall save His people from their 
sins.” His very name implies His success! Is His name Jesus? 
Then, if He does not succeed in my case, His honor is 
compromised. He is called Jesus because He does save 
sinners — if He does not save me — He is not Jesus! If I, a sinner, 
trusting in Him, give Him my cause to plead as my advocate, 
and I am tried, and the verdict is against me, He is not Jesus! 
He may lay down His claim to be Jesus, for He does not, and 
cannot save His people from their sins! Beloved friends, do you 
not see how the saint is regarded as a sinner because He who 
is his advocate is the appointed Savior of sinners? He is put 
down as their advocate, I say, because He is the sinner’s friend. I 
never heard of His pleading for the righteous; 1 never dreamed 
of His being the friend of the sinless; I find Him always on the 
side of publicans and sinners — offenders, and those who have 
gone out of the way; and therefore I conclude, that sinner 
though I am, continually sinning as I am, I may leave my case 
with Jesus, for He is just the advocate the sinner needs! 

Notice, next, it is “Jesus Christ” — Christos — the anointed. 
This shows His authority to plead. There are only certain 
gentlemen who can plead in the Court of Chancery, and only 
certain others that can enter the Common Pleas, or the King’s 
Bench. Jesus Christ has a right to plead, for He is the Father’s 
own appointed, the Father’s own anointed. My soul, you have 
a good pleader, one whom God Himself has chosen to plead 
the sinner’s cause! If he were of your choosing, he might fail, 
but if God has laid help upon one who is mighty, feel safe to 
put your trouble where God has laid His help. He is Christ, and 
therefore authorized; but I add, He is Christ, and therefore 
qualified, for the anointing has also qualified Him for His work. 
He can plead better than Jacob pleaded when he spoke for 


572 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


Benjamin; He can plead so as to move the heart of God and 
prevail. What words of tenderness, what sentences of 
persuasion will He use when He stands up to plead for me! But 
more, He is Christ — that is, He is God’s Messiah — therefore, 
God would not send Him unless He guaranteed Him! If God 
should send into this world a Savior who could not save, then 
God would have no mercy. God’s appointing and sending 
Christ is a guarantee of Christ’s success! Oh, my soul, you have 
one well-fitted to be your advocate, and one who cannot but 
succeed! Leave yourself entirely in His hands! 

Notice next, it is “Jesus Christ the righteous. ’’This is not only 
His character, but it is His plea. It is His character, and if my 
advocate is righteous, then I am sure He would not take up a 
bad cause. I do not know, it may be right for a lawyer to plead 
for a villain when he knows him to be a villain, but this I think, 
the greater villain the lawyer is, the better qualified would he be 
to do it. But my Lord and Master, the great advocate, would 
not plead a bad cause, for He is Jesus Christ the righteous; 
therefore if I sin, if I am put down among the many men that 
sin — if He pleads for me, my case must be good — for He 
would not take up a bad one! But how can He do this? Why, 
because He meets the charge of unrighteousness against me by 
this plea on His part — that He is righteous! He seems to say to 
the great Father in the day when the sinner stands arraigned — 
“Yes, My Father, that sinner was unrighteous, but remember 
that I was accepted as His substitute; I stood to keep the law 
for him, and gave My active obedience; I went up to the cross 
and bled, and so gave My passive obedience; I have covered 
him from head to foot with My doing and My dying; I have so 
arrayed him that not even the angels are adorned as he is, for 
though they may be clothed with the perfect righteousness of 
a creature, I have given him the righteousness of God Himself! 
1 am become unto My people the Lord, their righteousness; 


573 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


look-, I have taken the jewels out of My crown to bedeck them; 
I have taken the garments from My own back to cover them, 
and the blood from My own veins to make the dye in which I 
have dipped their garments, till they are purpled with imperial 
glory.” What can there be asked more for the sinner than this? 
Jesus Christ the righteous stands up to plead for me, and pleads 
His righteousness. And mark, He does this not if I do not sin, but 
if I do sin! There is the beauty of my text. It does not say, “If 
any man does not sin we have an advocate,” but “if any man 
sins we have an advocate.” So that when I have sinned, and 
come creeping up to my closet with a guilty conscience and an 
aching heart, and feel that I am not worthy to be called God’s 
son, I still have an advocate, because I am one of the many men 
who sin. I sin and I have an advocate! Oh, I know not how to 
express the joy I feel in my soul to be able to put it so! It is not, 
“If any man is righteous, we have an advocate.” It is not, “If 
any man is prayerful, and careful, and godly, and walks rightly, 
and in the light of God,” and so on, but “If any man SINS we 
have an advocate.” Oh, my soul, there is the music of God’s 
heart in those words; music such as the prodigal heard at the 
festival which welcomed his return! “If any man sins we have 
an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.” 

IV. And now, we turn to our fourth point, which is that 
THIS TRUTH, SO EVANGELICAL AND SO DIVINE, SHOULD 
BE PRACTICALLY REMEMBERED. 

It should be practically remembered, dear friends, at all 
times. Every day I find it most healthy to my own soul to try and 
walk as a saint, but in order to do so, I must continually come 
to Christ as a sinner. I would seek to be perfect; I would strain 
after every virtue, and forsake every false way, but still, as to my 
standing before God, I find it happiest to sit where I sat when 
first I looked to Jesus, on the rock of His works, having nothing 
to do with my own righteousness, but only with His! Depend 


574 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


on it, dear friends, the happiest way of living is to live as a poor 
sinner, and as nothing at all — having Jesus Christ as all-in-all. 
You may have all your growths in sanctification, all your 
progress in graces, all the development of your virtues that you 
will; but still I do earnestly pray you never to put any of these 
where Christ should be. If you have begun in Christ, then finish 
in Christ; if you have begun in the flesh, and then go on in the 
flesh, we know what the sure result will be. But if you have 
begun with Jesus Christ as your Alpha, let Him be your Omega! 
I pray you never think you are rising when you get above this, 
for it is not rising, but slipping downwards to your ruin. Stand 
still to this — 

“Nothing in my hands I bring, 

Simply to Your cross I cling. 

Still a sinner, but still having an advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ, the righteous — let this be the spirit of your 
everyday life. 

Make this essentially the rule of your life on particular 
occasions. Here let me say a word that may at once comfort and 
enlighten some here who are in darkness. When the Spirit of 
God gives you a clearer view of your own depravity, mind that 
you hold to this — “If any man sins we have an advocate with 
the Father.” Perhaps when you were first converted you did 
not suspect the depth of wickedness that lay in your heart; 
perhaps you did not believe that you could be as unutterably 
bad as you really were. But lately the fountains of the great deep 
have been broken up, and you have been horrified; you are 
almost driven mad, or else into despondency and despair by 
this discovery of your innate corruption, until you flee to this — 
“sinner as I am, and never more consciously so than I am now 
that God’s Spirit has enlightened me, I yet know that if any man 


575 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sins we have an advocate with the Father and I, black, foul and 
filthy — more foul and filthy than I ever thought myself to be — 
put my case into the hands of my advocate, and leave it there 
forever.” When after this you have fallen into sin, and oh, I may 
address some members of this church who have done this 
though the pastor knows it not — you have fallen into some sin 
that pricks your conscience; you carry about with you a 
something that will not let you sleep at night; there is a sin that 
disturbs you, and you wish you could forget that you had 
committed it; you have gone before God as David did; you 
have used the language of the 51st Psalm, but you cannot get 
rid of that sin; you believe you are a child of God sometimes, 
but that sin has got into your conscience and, like a cancer, is 
eating into your comfort. My brother, my sister, now is your 
time — “If any man sins, we have an advocate with the Father.” 
Jesus Christ is of no use to you if He will only save you when 
you have no sin! Let me repeat it — now, you are a sinner; now, 
you are condemned by the verdict of your own conscience; 
now, you have sinned, sinned willfully and foully — and God 
forbid that I should extenuate your sin; yet, let your sin be as 
gross, and black, and hellish as it may be, if you believe in Jesus 
Christ you have an advocate with the Father, and through that 
advocate your cause shall rest, and your sin shall be put away! 
Perhaps you will tell me that your sin has had some gross 
aggravation about it. If you are a Christian it has, for a Christian 
always sins worse than other men; if the sin is not in itself as 
bad as other men’s, it is worse in you. For a king’s favorite to 
play the traitor is villainy, indeed. For one who has been highly 
favored, as you have been, with visits of love from Jesus — to 
be false to Him — oh, this is shame, double shame to Him! For 
you who have been washed in His blood to crucify Him afresh, 
what shall I say to that? You deserve the hottest wrath of God 
and the deepest hell! But thus says the Lord unto you — “I have 


576 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


blotted out your sins like a cloud, and like a thick cloud your 
iniquities; return unto Me.” “If any man sins, we have an 
advocate with the Father.” It does not say, “If some men sin 
we have no advocate.” Or, “If some men sin in an aggravated 
way.” No, it is not put so. It says, “If any man sins, we have an 
advocate with the Father.” So that, though you have heaped 
aggravations one upon another, and your crime has been as 
foul as any that could have been committed, still you can say, 
“We have an advocate.” Fly with a humble, contrite heart and 
throw yourself at the feet of that advocate, and by His blood, 
and by His wounds, He will plead for you, and you shall prevail! 

What if I add to all this that you have so sinned as to bring 
a scandal upon the name of God, upon His church, and upon 
His cause? Oh, my brothers and sisters, you may well weep in 
secret; you may weep tears of blood for having done this, but 
still, for all that, I cannot shut the gate where God sets it wide 
open! I have not a thunderbolt for you; if you are a child of 
God, mercy is still free, and still it is preached to you — “If any 
man sins,” publicly, like David, so as to make God’s enemies 
to blaspheme, yet still, “We have an advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the righteous.” Oh, what splendid mercy is this! 
Archangel never dreamed of such mercy as this to sinners, to 
real sinners, to hugely vile sinners, to black, hellish sinners, to 
devilish sinners, to such as no adjective can be found to 
describe them! Yet, if they believe in Jesus, sin as they may, they 
still have, “an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
righteous.” 

I wish I could meet the case of that brother yonder, who 
has long given up all hope of ever being restored. He has been 
excommunicated; he has been driven away from the society of 
the godly; he thinks, though he is in this house this morning, 
he has no business here; and sometimes the devil has tempted 
him to make away with himself, and he has said, “If I must be 


577 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


lost, I may as well be lost at once.” Ah, but, my brother, you 
dare not do it with such a text of Scripture as this before your 
eyes! The Lord still loves you, and if He ever loved you, all your 
sin cannot wean His heart from you! You may have gone to the 
utmost length of your tether, but He has so tied you that you 
can never go beyond it! You may have gotten to the very 
extremity and edge of the precipice, but over that edge you 
must not, and you shall not go! This day, He sends me to stop 
you. Return! Return! Return! A Father bids you return! You are 
feeding swine today, and all foul and filthy as you are, you 
would gladly fill your belly with their husks; but you cannot — 
you have a hunger that husks can never satisfy! Your Father 
waits to receive you. Come, He will meet you; He will fall upon 
your neck and kiss you; He will set you at His own table, and 
there shall be music and dancing for you. The best robe awaits 
you, prodigal! The fatted calf is killed for you! Come! O believe 
it! Believe that God is able to do this great thing for you. “As 
high as the heavens are above the earth, so high are His 
thoughts above your thoughts, and His ways above your 
ways.” — 

“What though your numerous sins exceed 
The stars that fill the skies, 

And, aiming at the eternal throne, 

Like pointed mountains rise,” 

yet still the red sea of Jesus’ blood shall cover the tops of 
the mountains of your sins, till, like Noah’s ark, that floated 
twenty cubits upwards, the tops of the mountains shall be 
covered! “If any man sins” — here, you see, there is nothing 
said about goodness, nothing about virtue, or tenderness of heart — 
it is only put, “If any man sins, we have an advocate.” 


578 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


515 The Sinner’s Advocate - I John 2:1 


O you who believe in Jesus, pray for those who believe not, 
that they, too, may have an advocate! If you and I have come 
and put our trust in Him, and found a shelter in His wounds, 
let us never be satisfied till we see our children, our brothers, 
our sisters, our friends, our kinsfolk brought to this advocate! 
Go and tell it wherever your voices can be heard, that Jesus 
Christ receives SINNERS, and that He eats with them. Go and 
say that He is the sinner’s friend, and that He is willing to take 
them as they are, and wash them and make them whiter than 
snow. Since you have proved it yourself, and need to prove it 
every day, try and bring others to the conviction of it that they, 
with you, may sing to the praise of that divine love which has 
given the advocate to every believer, whatever his guilt and 
condemnation may have been! The Lord bless you now, for 
Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


579 



516 The Minister’s Stock-Taking - 
Acts 28:24 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, June 21 st, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“And some believed the things which were spoken, and 
some believed not.” - Acts 28:24 

THIS IS the only proper way to calculate the results of our 
ministry. We just want the account book ruled with two 
columns. On one side we must put down the long list of the 
some who believe not; and on the brighter side we may enter 
what is too often, the far less number of the some who believe. 
This is the only true method; I repeat it, by which we can hold 
a stock-taking so as to ascertain the net profit of the preaching 
of the gospel. We must not estimate the good that is done by 
the number of those who listen. It is a very pleasant thing to 
see the house of prayer filled to overflowing. It is intensely 
delightful to reflect that often on the Sunday evening in 
London the theatres are full, St. Paul’s Cathedral is full, and 
multitudes of churches and chapels are crowded with willing 
listeners. Still, it is not all pleasure. Instead of its being of any 
advantage for the persons who have heard the gospel but have 
not believed, it will rather increase their doom! If they have only 
heard, and the truth of God has penetrated no deeper than the 
natural ear, then alas for the preachers who have spent their 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


strength for nothing! And alas for the multitudes who, having 
ears, have heard as though they heard not! 

Nor ought we to calculate the result of our work by the 
persons who have been pleased with our ministry! What man 
is not gratified when he hears that the people have been pleased 
with his preaching? It is not in flesh and blood for a man to be 
unpleased by applause. The love of praise is ingrained in human 
nature — 

“The proud to gain it toils on toils endure, 

The modest shun it but to make it sure.” 

But still, it were a miserable thing if all that a man 
accomplishes is just to win the ear and to strike the people with 
wonder at the amazing way in which he could utter forth the 
words of truth. Shall God’s servants live upon the breath of 
men’s nostrils? Can the approval of the crowd be nutritious 
enough to constitute the solid food of a God-sent herald of the 
cross? Never! When a man has to die, this shall give him no 
comfort. To have preached faithfully, though some were angry, 
will always be consolatory. To have preached unfaithfully, or to 
have held back any part of the truth of God, though he may 
have won universal acclaim, would be but a passport to hell at 
the last! No, no, if our ministry has only pleased people, it is 
good for nothing. A sermon often does a man most good when 
it makes him most angry. Those people who walk down the 
aisles and say, “I will never listen to that man again,” very often 
have an arrow rankling in their breast. Smarting from a wound 
that never will be healed till God heals it — they will come again 
right enough. Others, alas, who are quite pleased and delighted, 
will come and go from the place of the holy, unimpressed, and 
unimpressionable as slabs of marble — down which the oil runs 
without producing the slightest impression! 


581 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Nor even do we dare hastily to calculate the effect of our 
ministry by the number of persons impressed with serious 
convictions. Of course, it is a hopeful sign to see the people 
weep under the Word, especially if it is the gospel that moves 
them to weep, and not the pathos of the preacher! I do not 
think it does anybody much good spiritually when tears are 
excited simply by the description of a funeral, or by being 
reminded of one’s childhood, or of one’s parents. Some 
preachers appeal much to the passions, and think when the 
congregation is weeping, good is being done. I do not see the 
use of it at all. When the preacher can make these natural 
emotions a platform upon which to stand and work upon the 
conscience, then it is well and good, but if he has only succeeded 
in drawing briny tears from mortal eyes, they may flow until the 
floor is watered with them without any salutary result. We must 
go deeper than the eyes; we need to make the heart weep; we 
need tears of penitence for sin, not tears of regret for departed 
husbands and wives! We need emotions which spring from a 
startled conscience — not those which come from a lack of 
resignation to the divine will. No, dear friends, we have done 
nothing after we have preached a thousand times unless we can 
write down that some believe on the Lord Jesus! 

I. Turning to our text a little more closely, let us remark, in 
the first place that, UNDER THE BEST MINISTRY IN THE 
WORLD THE RESULTS WILL BE DIVERSE, AND THAT YOU 
NEED TWO COLUMNS TO WRITE THE ACCOUNT IN. 

There will always be the some who believe and the some 
who believe not. This is not altogether the minister’s fault. It is 
the custom of the age to blame ministers very much, and I dare 
say we deserve it; but still the blame in this matter does not lay 
entirely with us, for even when Paul preached — a model 
preacher, he! — there were, “some believed the things which 
were spoken, and some believed not.” Did I say that Paul was 


582 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


a model preacher? Let me prove it. Was he not a model 
preacher as to matter ? There are some persons who gready 
admire a doctrinal preacher. They like a man who will lay down 
the doctrines as a master-builder would put the stones — one 
here, another there — each one in its proper place. When they 
go up to the house of prayer they say they really want to learn 
something, to get some thought, to get a deeper insight into 
some great Biblical truth, and they are not satisfied unless their 
understandings are provided for. Mere appeals to the passions 
they do not care about; they want to have their minds 
enlightened! Well, a doctrinal preacher is an exceedingly useful 
man, especially if he does not degenerate into endless 
controversy, preaching Christ of envy and strife. I have heard 
it said that while a course of some 12 lectures by any ordinary 
lecturer on geology would give you a pretty clear idea of the 
science, you might sit and listen to 1,200 sermons upon 
Christianity by some ministers, and never get an idea of what 
are its fundamental doctrines. If it is so, it is a crying evil, and 
grievously will the church have to answer for it in the ill that 
will come upon her! It may be so in some cases, but I am sure 
it was not so with the apostle Paul. Who could preach doctrine 
more clearly than he did? If you want the very highest doctrine, 
read the 9th chapter of Romans. If you would have a clear 
system of truth, read the Epistle to the Ephesians. If a young 
man wants to get a body of divinity in miniature, he has only to 
read that Epistle. The aposde is full of the weightiest matter, 
and the most important truths. He keeps back nothing that is 
profitable for the people. He can say, “I have not shunned to 
declare the whole counsel of God.” To him it never was a 
question as to which part of the truth would best please the 
people; he gave them the whole of it in due season. But yet even 
under the aposde Paul there were some that believed not! And 
you, young man, if you have been listening to the gospel under 


583 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


any minister, if you have not been converted, neither would 
you have been if you had heard Paul! Having Moses and the 
prophets with you at this day, if you do not believe them, 
neither would you be converted, though an aposde should rise 
from the dead! 

I think I hear one observe — “Well, I do not care for a 
doctrinal preacher myself. I like an experiential preacher best.” Be 
it so, dear friend, and I can fully approve your choice; I like an 
experiential preacher, because he can get inside a man’s heart 
and see what is there. He knows just what 1 am, and what I feel. 
If I am distressed, he has been distressed, too; and he can talk 
of my temptations and of my trials, because they have been his 
own. If I am full of comfort or full of joy he has been up on 
the mountain, too, and he tells me of my ecstasy and of my 
delights. If I find some knotty passage in my inner life, he can 
translate it for me, for he has been through it all himself. 
Perhaps of the three orders of preachers — the doctrinal, the 
experiential, and the practical — the experiential preacher is the 
most useful. I think if one had to choose which should be his 
pastor, he should prefer such a man as this, for a ministry 
without any experience in it must be a very poor, miserable, 
savorless thing to the people of God. But do you not think that 
in this respect the apostle Paul, himself, was a perfect model? 
Would you understand the conflicts of the human heart? Does 
not Paul paint them to life as he says — “When I would do good, 
evil is present with me; to will is present with me, but how to 
perform that which is good I find not”? And again, “O 
wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body 
of this death?” Does he not express the sighing and longing of 
all the children of God who have been vexed with contests 
within? On the other hand, if you have high and glorious 
frames, the apostle can go with you, and beyond you, and tell 
you of times when he was caught up to the third heavens, and 


584 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


heard things which it is not possible for a man to utter! Are you 
full of assurance and confidence? Then Paul preaches to you 
from this text — “I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, 
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, 
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other 
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” Are you full of 
apprehensions? Then he fears and trembles with you — “Lest 
that by any means when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway.” Paul had his doubts and fears, and was 
afraid that he might perish, after all; yet he had his high flights 
and glorious confidences, and knew that the believer in Christ 
could never be cast away. But mark you, if you have listened to 
the preaching of the gospel, and have remained an unbeliever 
under it, neither would you be converted though the aposde 
Paul’s deep experiential knowledge should be brought to bear 
upon your conscience; for even under him there were some 
who believed not — and so I suppose it would be even were he 
here now. 

Then there is the practical preacher, and some men greatly 
admire him. So do I if he does not become legal, and if he does 
not degenerate into a preacher of mere morality. If he shall urge 
holiness upon the people of God, from evangelical motives, he 
may be very useful, but if upon legal terms he strives to stir the 
people of God to good works, he will do more harm than good! 
Yes, the practical preacher is very useful. The man who tells me 
precisely what my duty is in my sphere of life, talks to me as a 
husband, a master, a servant, or as a son — who when I come 
after the cares of the week and sit down in my pew — refreshes 
my memory about my week’s faults, and tells me how to behave 
myself during the week that is to come — such a man is useful. 
And who did this as well as the apostle Paul? That same Epistle 
to the Ephesians, which is an epitome of doctrinal theology, 


585 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


also contains the practical precepts of the gospel fully written 
out. Children, parents, fathers, husbands, wives, servants, 
masters — the aposde has a word to everyone. He is pre- 
eminently practical, generally basing his appeals for righteous 
conduct upon some divine motive. Yet, dear friends, if you 
have not been converted, I have no reason to believe it is 
because your ministers fail on the practical points, for even had 
you heard the aposde, who was a pattern in this respect, neither 
would you have been converted, for under him some believed 
not! Now put the practical, the experiential, and the doctrinal 
together, and you get the model exhibited in the aposde Paul. 
Would that we had such preachers in all pulpits, and such 
ministers to preside over all flocks! But even if such were given 
to us, there would still be some who believed not. 

‘Yes, yes,” says one, “I do not doubt that the >?iatter was 
right enough. But you know there is more required of a 
preacher than matter; it is manner we want.” Well now, I hold 
that the aposde Paul was a model preacher as to manner, too. 
He was a bold preacher. He never feared the face of man, but 
preached just what the Lord told him, in the Lord’s own words, 
whether men would hear or whether they would not! He was 
an eloquent preacher. Barnabas was no mean speaker, but Paul 
was a better speaker than he was; for at Lystra they called Paul, 
“Mercury,” and Mercury was their god of eloquence. Perhaps 
the concluding part of the 8th chapter of Romans is the most 
remarkable piece of human language ever known. He who 
wrote it was a master, able to soar with eagle wings to any 
height, yet willing for the most part to keep near the ground. 
“Not with enticing words of man’s wisdom, but with simplicity 
and godly sincerity he ordered his speech.” He was a profound 
thinker, capable of the deepest argument or the finest allegory, 
but withal an easy talker, who loved to tell of the grace of God! 
When occasion required, as an impassioned orator, his 


586 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


thunders could make Festus tremble, and his persuasive 
appeals could wring confessions from Agrippa; but as a teacher 
in the Church of God, he was proverbially plain spoken. He 
spoke like a child, and babes in divine grace were fed under his 
ministry as with pure milk. This is just the style we need; not 
the simplicity of ignorance, but the dignified simplicity of the 
man who has really the highest intellect, if he cared to show it, 
but who rather chooses to instruct the poor and ignorant. Then 
the aposde was very affectionate with his boldness and simplicity. 
He loved the souls of men. He felt sometimes such a passionate 
longing to save souls, that he was almost ready to lose his own 
soul, if he might but save others! “Oh,” you say, “but that was 
an extravagant thing for him to say.” Yes, love is often 
extravagant, and I will never believe that a man has any love at 
all if he speaks in a cold, calculating way. Love must sometimes 
speak in rapturous phrases, which in its cooler moments it 
would not endorse. When 1 hear the aposde say, “I could wish 
myself accursed from Christ for my brothers and sisters 
according to the flesh,” I understand what his love means. He 
feels as if his own personal interest in Jesus he would gladly 
give up, if he might but see his own kindred saved — it is in a 
spirit akin with that of Moses, when he said, “If not, blot my 
name out of the book of life.” Dear, dear! How critics and 
commentators have stumbled over these two passages! They 
cannot make it out; they cannot understand it. But I tell you, 
Paul meant exacdy what he said! I have felt the same strong 
emotion boiling in my own soul when I have looked upon 
some immense congregation, and my heart has yearned for 
their conversion. I have felt that if I could die as a substitute 
for them I would do it. Of course, in more sober moments, no 
man would ever barter his own soul’s salvation on any 
account — nor is it possible that such a ransom could be 
accepted. Still, love makes one feel as if even that were less than 


587 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the evil that threatens our people, and we exclaim, with Esther, 
“How can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?” The 
aposde, thus full of eloquence, of love, and of holy boldness, 
seeking after souls, pressing them home with blessed 
arguments, pleading with them night and day with many 
tears — was a faithful and a perfect minister — as nearly as 
mortal can be. “Oh,” says one, “I wish I sat under such a 
minister!” Yes, but are you converted to God? For if you are 
not, I am not sure that you would be saved if you had Paul, 
himself, for a pastor! If at your wish he could leave his grave, 
start up, unwrap his grave clothes, and address you from this 
pulpit, I have no reason to believe that his voice would have 
any more power over you than another man’s voice. Paul would 
plant in vain where others have not been successful, and if you 
have not believed on Jesus with this book in your houses, with 
your Sabbaths repeated hundreds of times, with earnest, 
affectionate parents, and with loving friends, neither would you 
be converted though Paul rose from the dead! 

II. I now proceed to notice, in the second place, THE TWO 
SORTS OF PEOPLE, AND THE REASON WHY SOME 
BELIEVED, AND WHY SOME BELIEVED NOT. 

There were some who believed. Shall I describe them? So far as 
one young man is concerned, I will just give a little sketch of 
his history, and that sketch will suffice for all. He dropped in 
one Sunday morning to hear the preacher; he stood in the aisle, 
for he did not intend to stay the whole time, but the place was 
full and he could not get out. He listened; he thought it very 
commonplace; it did not attract his attention much; but all of a 
sudden — yes, it was so — the truth of God dropped right into 
his heart! He listened with greater interest than he had done 
before; he gathered himself up. Another sentence came. When 
he came in, he was like a man in armor. All the shots fell upon 
his armor and were repelled; but now something had got in 


588 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


between the joints. He listened again. The preacher went on to 
discourse of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, 
and the young man felt as if there was no one else in the place! 
The minister’s eyes were on him! He began to tremble. “What 
must I do to be saved?” was the language that was in his heart, 
though he could not utter it with his lips. He walked out of that 
aisle a calm and quiet man; he went home; there was no talking 
on the way; he went into his chamber. Well, I will not say he 
prayed the first time, but it was something like it, for he 
breathed out words like these, “Oh, ah, would that!” He began 
to have living desires after the living God. In the evening he 
went to the house of God again. It seemed that night as if the 
preacher prepared a most terrible sermon on purpose for him! 
The whole sermon through, the great hammer of God seemed 
to be breaking his flinty heart smaller and smaller, till there was 
not a single piece of it that was not ground to powder! He could 
not help feeling that there was no hope for him — that mercy 
would never reach his case. He had thought that morning that 
he was about as good as most people, and that if it did not fare 
well with him, it would fare ill with the entire world; but now 
he felt himself to be the vilest of the vile! He could not 
understand it, nor could his friends, either. They thought he 
had been taken with a fit of madness; they hoped it would wear 
off; but it did not wear off. He was very quiet that week; he 
could not go out with his friends to places of amusement as he 
had been accustomed to do. One of them did get him to one 
place, but he was so miserable that he came out when it was 
half over and said, “I have no taste for such things now. I 
cannot stay.” Well, I do not know how long it was that this 
went on — in some cases it is only a few minutes, in others it is 
a long, long time. I knew one young man with whom it lasted 
for five years — and he stands here today to tell of that long 
period of affliction. That young man went in a state of sadness 


589 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and grief on account of sin, seeking rest and finding none, till 
one morning the preacher lifted up Christ upon the cross and 
said — this is the import of the words he used — “You see the 
Hebrew prophet raise the bronze serpent high upon the cross. 
Look, look, you who are bitten with serpents! Turn here your 
eyes — however swollen you are, do but look! There is life in a 
look at the bronze serpent for any of you, for all of you.” And 
then, the preacher said, “See Jesus hanging there on His cross? 
His wounds are streaming; His head is bowed down with grief. 
There is life in a look at the Crucified. Sinner, there is life this 
moment for you.” He explained that to look was simply to trust 
Christ, and to put one’s confidence in the blood and merits of 
the Lord Jesus. Well, the young man had heard that a great 
many times, but he had never heard it with his conscience before; 
it had never sunk deep down into his heart. Now it came home 
to him! Standing there in the aisle just as he was, conscious of 
his guilt and ruin, he turned his eyes to Jesus; he looked; he 
lived! He went his way like a man who had received a new life; 
he was blessed, happy, JOYFUL! A tremendous burden had 
rolled into the deep sepulcher; the chains had been snapped 
from his manacled wrists; he was free! And whereas he could 
not creep before, he now ran and danced for joy and gladness 
of heart! That is how it all came about. The conversion was so 
worked by his simply hearing his ruin, and learning the remedy. 
The young man waited awhile in prayer and silent meditation, 
and matured the piety which God had given him. He then came 
forward and made a profession of his faith. It was a happy day 
when he saw the pastor and told his experience, when he was 
joined to the Church and separated from the world. From that 
day, all who knew him could but marvel at the change! 

And now comes the question, ‘Why did some believe?” Well, 
it was not any difference in the preacher, for the same preacher 
addressed both. It was not any difference in the sermon, for 


590 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


the same sermon was preached to all the people, and yet some 
believed and some did not. It could not be the power of 
persuasion, for there were some who were persuaded, and 
some that were not by the very same address. Nor can we 
attribute it to a difference of constitution, for that would be to 
make salvation of works, and not of divine grace! Were we to 
bring up the old legal covenant again, and thus preach another 
gospel, then we would be accursed. I only know of one answer 
to this question, “Why did some believe?” And the answer is 
this — because God willed it. “He will have mercy on whom He 
will have mercy, and He will have compassion on whom He 
will have compassion.” “It is not of him who wills, nor of him 
who runs, but of God who shows mercy.” If any man is saved, 
it is not because he willed to be saved; if any man is brought to 
Christ, it is not of any effort of his, but the root, the cause, the 
motive of the salvation of any human being, and of all the 
chosen in heaven is to be found in the predestinating purpose 
and sovereign distinguishing will of the Lord, our God! I know 
some Christians do not hold this as a doctrine, but I believe 
there is no Christian alive who does not believe it as a matter 
of experience. I was once with a good Christian man who was a 
little blind in both eyes, and he laid down this theory — if God 
gave grace to one, He was bound — just listen to this — He was 
bound to give it to all! God, he said, was no respecter of 
persons, which 1 interpret to mean that He did not owe 
anything to anybody, but did just as He liked with them, but he 
understood it to mean that God gave alike to all, and that if He 
gave anything to one, He must give the same to another! You 
see, however, that if it is a matter of debt to anybody, then it is 
not a matter of grace any longer. Well, after that, we had prayer, 
and my friend prayed for his own family and his unconverted 
relatives — yes, actually prayed to God to give more grace to them 
that they might believe and be saved! When he had done, I said, 


59i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“Well now, that would have been a very proper prayer for me 
to offer, because I think it just for God to give more to one 
than He does to another, but it was a very improper prayer for 
you, and completely subversive of your own theory; in fact, you 
have no right to make a distinction, and to pray for your own 
child more than for anybody else’s child. According to your 
scheme you believe that God ought to serve all alike, whereas 
I believe that no man has any claim on God — that if He pleases 
to save anyone, He has a right to do it — and that if men perish, 
they perish because they deserve to perish, and I, therefore, can 
present special petitions to God for special persons.” 

I remember hearing of a case where a very high Calvinistic 
brother never would believe that a Wesleyan could have the 
grace of God in him, so bigoted was he to his own views. One 
night there was a prayer meeting, and the gas would not light. 
They could not get it to light, and at last it was proposed to 
hold the meeting in the dark. A Wesleyan prayed first. He was 
at the far end of the room and he prayed, oh, so sweedy! Our 
Calvinistic friend said — “What a delightful prayer! What a 
depth of doctrinal knowledge! What a blessed character that 
person must be!” So he watched for him when he came out — 
he stood at the door to find him — and to his surprise 
discovered who had been offering the prayer that was so full of 
divine grace and the truth of God! I believe that if once we 
came to real, experiential godliness, we should not find a child 
of God anywhere that would not in some form or other 
subscribe to the substance of what I have asserted — that it is 
God who quickens the souls of those who believe — and that if 
men are saved, all the glory must be unto God from first to last, 
and not an atom nor a particle can be attributed to the goodness, 
or the power, or the will of the creature. This is a doctrine 
which some people have not learned very fully yet, but they will 
have to learn it if they are God’s people. Jonah, you know, had 


592 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


never learned it from the schools, but when the Lord got him 
in the whale’s belly, at the bottom of the mountains, with the 
weeds wrapped about his head, then it was that he said, 
“Salvation is of the Lord.” And often some sore trials and 
terrible afflictions are necessary schoolmasters to teach us this 
lesson — that salvation is of the Lord, alone! 

Now let me change the note, and speak a few words respecting 
the some who believe not. They are of different characters. Some of 
you were brought up at a Sunday school; you have attended a 
place of worship nearly all your lives, and yet you have not 
believed in Christ. There are others who do not often go to the 
house of God — in fact they have got into the habit of spending 
their Sundays in dissipation or frivolity. These are among the 
some who believe not, and some of them try to quiet their 
conscience by pretending that they do not believe the Bible to 
be true. They set up for Atheists, or Deists, or Freethinkers, 
and when they can get some fools to applaud them, they vent 
out their spleen against the saints, and their blasphemy against 
God — albeit they do not believe their own blasphemies. Their 
consciences are uneasy. Atheism affords no rest for the soles 
of men’s feet. Let a man go to the utmost extent in abandoning 
moral restraints and disowning religious obligations, there is 
still an aching void within him which even hell itself cannot fill! 
The man feels that he needs something, he knows not what, 
but it is the cross of Christ, and faith in a crucified Savior that 
alone can supply the cravings of man’s inner nature! Some of 
these people who believe not are very moral. There is that 
young lady yonder, amiable and admirable in her degree, but 
she does not believe, therefore the crudeness of her tastes, the 
lack of harmony in the colors that vary her disposition. There 
is that young man over there who is full of commercial integrity, 
his employer would trust him with a bag of untold gold; but he 
is among the some who believe not! And with strange 


593 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


inconsistency he relies on one virtue which procures him 
respect among men, to cover a thousand vices which proclaim 
his alienation from God. On the other hand, there are a great 
many of them who are debauched, and who go very far astray. 
We must put you all down together. There are no third parties. 
You either believe or you do not. If you have believed in Jesus, 
bless and praise Almighty God, but if you have not, listen a 
moment while I try to answer the question — 

Why do you not believe ? There are some people who will be 
ready to say, “Just listen what contradictory doctrine is 
preached!” I cannot help it. The only reason why you do not 
believe in Christ is because you will not. The reason why you are 
an unbeliever at this hour is your own will, and nothing but 
your own will! It is not that you have not heard the gospel; you 
have heard it! It is not because it is unworthy of your credence; 
it is the most reliable intelligence in the entire world! It is not 
because it does not deserve your faith; it claims and demands 
it! It is not because you have never been awakened; you have 
had impressions without number! You remember when you 
had that fever? You know there was a something striving with 
you that would have brought you to the cross, but you would 
not come. The reason why you have not come to Jesus is 
contained in Christ’s own words — “You will not come unto 
Me that you might have life.” Give me not back an answer that 
would excuse yourself and charge God foolishly; it is not God’s 
fault that you are not a believer! It is your own fault and your 
own fault, alone. I know there are some very wicked persons 
and some on the other hand, who claim to be very orthodox, 
who lay the damnation of men at God’s door — but God forbid 
that your soul or mine should have any sympathy with such 
blasphemy as that! I will suppose a case. There is a woman who 
has stabbed her own child, reddened her hands with the blood 
of her own offspring. She is brought up to the court to be tried 


594 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


for murder, and she makes use of a singular defense. Her 
counsel bids her be silent, but she will speak. She says, “My 
Lord and gentlemen of the jury, I am not guilty; I did stab my 
child, it is true, but I did it as the agent of God; I was decreed 
to do it; I could not help it; I was predestinated to do it, and 
the fault, therefore, lies not with me, but with God.” Now the 
impression made in the court would be this — that a person 
whose moral sense was so depraved would be quite capable of 
murder or any other crime. A state of heart which would allow 
a person to give utterance to such a saying against God would 
allow murder to be thought of without any compunction 
whatever. I should not wonder at such a remark being made by 
the culprit! But suppose the lawyer, himself, the woman’s 
counsel, should get up and claim the attention of the judge and 
the jury, and should say, “Gentlemen, really, this woman is not 
guilty when you come to think of it, for it was foreordained 
from before the foundation of the world that she should do 
this! She was predestinated to it, and therefore, my Lord, moral 
culpability does not rest with her.” Can you think what the 
judge would say — such a man as the late good Lord Chancellor 
Campbell? Why, I think I see him rise from his seat and exclaim, 
“Hold your tongue, sir, or else change your line of argument! 
For as long as I am one of the judges of this realm, I will never 
sit in this court to hear God openly and publicly blasphemed. 
If you do not change your line of argument the usher shall put 
you out.” And I am sure every Englishman in the court would 
applaud a judge for so saying! Verily you would hold your 
breath and feel your blood chilled in your veins at the very idea 
of murder being laid at the door of God! 

What then shall I say of those men, calling themselves 
ministers of Christ, but who become the devil’s advocates, and 
preach that the ruin of men’s souls is the result of divine 
sovereignty, that God’s decree damns men, and not their own 


595 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sins? O my soul, come not into their secret — with their 
confederacy be not joined! This is sewing pillows to all 
armholes! This is, indeed, stuffing beds with down for sinners 
to sleep on, till at last they wake up in damnation! Sinner, you 
know it is a lie; it is a gross lie to say that God is responsible for 
your damnation! If your soul shall perish, it shall perish as a 
suicide, for you will have ruined yourself. “O Israel, you have 
destroyed yourself.” If the damned in hell could be made to 
believe that they did not deserve to be there, why hell would be 
no hell to them; but this is the sting of hell — “I deserve this!” 
You will see written in lines of fire — “You knew your duty, but 
you did it not!” And when you cry for mercy, this shall be God’s 
answer — “I called and you refused, I stretched out My hand 
and no man regarded it; I also will laugh at your calamity; I will 
mock when your fear comes.” Do I hear someone say, “Why, 
that is Arminianism!” Precisely so! But some people say the 
truth lies between Calvinism and Arminianism. It does not; 
there is nothing between them but a barren wilderness. If you 
are asked why a man is saved, the only Scriptural answer is — 
“sovereign grace.” Grace — unmoved by anything in the 
creature, flowing spontaneously from the mighty depths of the 
divine heart; but if you are asked why are men damned? Answer 
this — “It is their own sin ! Their own wicked, carnal, sensual, 
devilish nature — that they even dare to trample on the blood 
of Christ, to despise Jesus, and to turn aside from Him who 
speaks from heaven.” Never be frightened because one man 
says it is too high, or because another says it is too low. Take 
the truth of God as you find it; take it as it is in the Bible. “Well 
but,” I hear one say, “are the two things consistent? Can you 
reconcile them?” I do not need to reconcile them; they never 
fell out; they are good friends; they are both true, and truths 
never quarrel. “Well,” says one, “but I cannot see that they are 
quite straight.” Have you ever been rowing in a boat on the 


596 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


water, and remarked that your oars look bent? Are they bent? 
No. If you had an oar that was bent, and put it in a certain 
position it would look straight, but if it were a straight oar that 
you put in, and now that it should look bent is a mere optical 
illusion. Why is this? Well, we are told it is because the rays of 
light pass through two different mediums — through the air and 
through the waters; these mediums are of different density, and 
therefore the ray of light is refracted and the thing looks bent, 
though it really is not. 

Now part of the truth is divine — that part which has to do 
with divine sovereignty — and part of the truth is human — that 
which has to do with human responsibility. A great truth in 
passing through two such different media must look bent, and 
if it did not look bent, it would be strange, indeed. You may 
look at two lines; they are almost parallel, but not quite, and 
they do not meet anywhere that you and I can see, but they do 
meet somewhere that God can see. When we get to heaven we 
shall see where these two lines meet, and we shall find, perhaps, 
that where we thought they were the farthest apart, was just the 
place where they touched each other! Of this, however, I am 
absolutely sure, man’s conscience bears witness — it is one of 
the instinctive apprehensions of every enlightened man’s 
mind — that if he is saved, it is of God’s mercy; and that if he is 
lost, it is his own fault. I only want the witness of your own 
conscience to this point. In vain you drug conscience with 
nauseous doctrines; you may go and listen to something that is 
not pure gospel, but a spurious compound; you never can stifle 
the deep conviction, that if you rebel against God you perish as 
the result of your own act and deed. The worm that never dies 
would cease to gnaw at your vitals if you could lay your ruin at 
God’s door, and the fire that never can be quenched would 
have no meet fuel in your body and soul, if your own sins were 
not the cause of your own destruction! 


597 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


And what does all this lead to? Why, it comes to this, dear 
friends that I must close by dividing this house. Sometimes, in the 
House of Commons, you know, when a person has been 
speaking, and has been very prosy, and another man gets up to 
speak whom they do not want to hear, they will cry out, “Divide, 
divide.” Then the House divides and the “Ayes” go out on one 
side, and the “nays” on another. Well — I have not a convenient 
place here for some of you to go on one side of the house and 
some another — I do not suppose we could carry it out. But 
suppose this aisle now to represent the great division, and that 
the some who believe had to stand on this side, and the some 
who do not believe on that side. There would soon be a change 
of seats, I expect. But do you know, I am afraid there would be 
a great number of you who would say, “Well, I cannot go on 
this side; I dare not say I believe in Christ; and yet I cannot go 
to the other side; I dare not go there, it is such an awful thing 
to go with those who do not believe; let me stand here in the 
aisle.” No, no; there are only two places — heaven and hell — 
and there are only two sorts of people, the righteous and the 
wicked! The priests of Christian idolatry have been preaching 
about “purgatory” for hundreds of years, but we do not believe 
in that doctrine, except as a means of filling their coffers while 
they make merchandize of souls. We know that all the people 
who have died have either gone to hell because they did not 
believe, or have gone to heaven because they did! And we know 
that there has never been a crossbreed between a believer and 
an unbeliever. A man must be either dead or alive. There is no 
neutral ground. You must either be on one side with those who 
are alive, or on the other side with those who are dead and need 
to be quickened. Think not to halt between two opinions. For 
the most part those who are said to be halting between two 
opinions are really of one opinion — they do not intend to serve 


598 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


516 The Minister’s Stock-Talcing - 
Acts 28:24 


the Lord! They say in their hearts, “Who is the Lord that I 
should serve Him?” 

Now will you do me this favor? I asked it once, and it was 
blessed to the conversion of several, will you take a little time 
alone, perhaps this evening; take a paper and pencil, and after 
you have honestly and fairly thought on your own state, and 
weighed your own condition before the Lord, will you write 
down one of two words — if you feel that you are not a believer, 
write down this word — “Condemned. ” But if you are a believer 
in Jesus, and put your trust in Him, alone, write down the word, 
“Forgiven. ”Do it, even though you have to write down the word 
“condemned.” We lately received into Church fellowship a 
young man, who said — “Sir, I wrote down the word 
“condemned,” and I looked at it. There it was. I had written it 
myself — “Condemned. ” As he looked, the tears began to flow, 
and the heart began to break, and before long he fled to Christ, 
put the paper in the fire and wrote down, ‘Forgiven. ’’This young 
man was about the sixth who had been brought to the Lord in 
the same way. So I pray you try it, and God may bless it to you. 
Remember you are either one or the other — you are either 
condemned or forgiven! Do not stand between the two. Let it 
be decided, and remember, if you are condemned today, you 
are not yet in hell; there is still hope! Blessed be God, Christ is 
still lifted up, and whoever believes on Him shall not perish, 
but have everlasting life! The gate of heaven is not closed! The 
proclamation of mercy is not hushed! The Spirit of God still 
goes forth to open blind eyes and to unstop deaf ears! It is still 
preached to you, to every creature under heaven — “Whoever 
believes on the Son of God has everlasting life; he who believes 
and is baptized shall be saved; he who believes not shall be 
damned.” Believe! God help you to believe! Trust Jesus! Trust 
Him now; and may the Lord grant that your name may be 


599 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


written among the some who believe, and not among the some 
who believe not. 


600 



517 The Rainbow- Gen. 9:16 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, June 28th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, 
that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God 
and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.” - 
Genesis 9:16 

THE STORY OF Noah’s preservation in the ark is a 
suggestive representation of salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. 
It is, we think, especially intended to depict that part of our 
salvation which lies in the washing of regeneration. In the same 
way as baptism is the outward symbol of regeneration, so also 
is the ark, “Wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by 
water.” The ark was immersed in those dreadful rains and awful 
waterfalls which deluged the earth, and Noah’s family were 
buried in that ark to all the world; but by this burial, they were 
floated out of the old condemned world into the new world of 
life and divine grace! Death to the world, and burial in the ark 
were the means of their safety. “The like figure whereunto,” 
says the apostle Peter (1 Peter 3:21), “even baptism does also 
now save us, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but 
the answer of a good conscience toward God), by the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ.” baptism is a most significant 
picture of regeneration, but it is in no sense the cause of the new 
birth; and the blunder of the Puseyites lies in considering the 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


outward manifestation of an accomplished fact, as though it 
were the means of creating that fact. Baptism saves no one, 
except, as Peter says, in figure; but as a figure, it is eminently full 
of divine teaching, for it sets forth the great truth of God that 
the believer, standing today in the old world, is buried to that 
world, “buried with Jesus Christ by baptism into death.” And 
his rising from the liquid tomb is the figure of his resurrection 
in Christ, into a new world, as a new man, “That like as Christ 
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so 
we also should walk in newness of life” (Rom 6:4). Would to 
God that we thought more of being dead with Christ, buried 
with Him, and raised with Him! Brothers and sisters let Noah 
in his ark preach the work of righteousness within the heart to 
all of us this morning! 

Do you not think, dear friends, that the history of Noah, 
when he left the ark, in all its items, may be viewed as typical 
and instructive? Noah came out of the ark no longer cooped 
up and penned within its narrow limits, he walked abroad, and 
the whole world was before him where to choose. Was not that 
a picture of the freedom of the believer who has been “buried 
with Christ,” and enjoys the possession of God’s free Spirit? 
For him there is no spirit of bondage, he is free as a child in his 
father’s house; all things are his, by gift of God, to use and to 
enjoy! He has learned the liberty wherewith Christ makes men 
free, and if the Son make us free, we are free, indeed! When 
Noah slew the bullock and the other clean beasts, and offered 
them upon the altar, did he not show forth the believer’s 
employment? We also offer acceptable sacrifices of prayer and 
praise unto God, and we, ourselves, are living sacrifices unto 
God. Did he not as much say to all generations of saints, “You, 
being thus delivered from a death which you deserve, are to 
spend your lives as priests unto your God”? When the Lord 
was pleased on that day to bless Noah and his family, bidding 


602 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


them be fruitful, did He not therein set forth the fruitfulness 
which belongs unto believers, so that, abiding in Christ, they 
“bring forth much fruit”? May not that benediction teach us 
how earnesdy we should seek to be spiritually the parents of 
immortal souls, travailing in birth till Christ is formed in them? 
When the divine Father gave them dominion over the fowl of 
the air, and the fish of the sea, and over all catde, did not this 
portray the power which believers have over lust, and sin, and 
evil? And did it not prophesy the subjugation of all things by 
the power of their faith, so that they who become “priests,” in 
sacrifice, become also “kings,” by virtue of the charter of 
dominion which the heavenly Father bestows upon them? 
What do you think, brothers and sisters? When He enlarged the 
grant of food, and permitted them to eat flesh, did He not set 
forth that food on which true believers feed, who now eat His 
flesh, and drink His blood, which has become the spiritual food 
of our souls? Is it straining the allegory, is it carrying it too far, 
if I close this spiritualizing by observing that, the very same 
security which God then gave to Noah and his descendants, is 
that security under which we stand? He gave them a covenant — 
a covenant embellished with a divine symbol, and ratified with 
His own signature written out in all the colors of beauty! We, 
too, stand under a covenant which has its own faithful witness 
in heaven, more transcendendy illustrious and beautiful than 
the rainbow — the person of Christ Jesus our Lord! 

Leaving, however, all those points, which I have only 
started to excite thought among you, we come to this. We have 
Scriptural reason for asserting that this venerable covenant — 
that the world shall no more be destroyed by a flood — is typical 
of a yet more ancient compact which God made with Christ, 
that He would be unto His people a God, and they would be 
His chosen ones, world without end. In the 54th chapter of 
Isaiah, (w 8-10), we find such language as this — “In a little 


603 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


wrath I hid My face from you for a moment; but with 
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on you, says the Lord, 
your Redeemer, for this is as the waters of Noah unto Me; for 
as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go 
over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be angry with 
you, nor rebuke you. For the mountains shall depart and the 
hills be removed, but My kindness shall not depart from you; 
neither shall the covenant of My peace be removed, says the 
Lord who has mercy on you.” The covenant of Noah, then, is 
typical of the great everlasting covenant made with Christ on 
behalf of His people! And the rainbow, as the symbol of the 
covenant with Noah, is typical of our Lord Jesus, who is the 
Lord’s Witness to the people! You read in the 4th chapter of 
the Book of Revelation, in the third verse, “There was a 
rainbow round about the throne,” showing that the rainbow is 
not a temporary symbol for earth only, but is a symbol of 
everlasting and heavenly things! And in the 10th chapter of the 
Book of Revelation, if I mistake not, in the first verse, you will 
find that the mighty Angel with a litde book in his right hand, 
who shall put one foot upon the sea and another upon the land, 
is described as having His head crowned with a rainbow. In this 
place, our Lord Jesus Christ, in His mediatorial capacity, wears 
the symbol of the covenant about His brow; and in the other 
passage, our Lord, as King, is represented as sitting upon the 
throne, surrounded with the insignia of the covenant of grace 
which encompasses the throne, so that there are no goings 
forth of His majesty and His power and His grace, except in a 
covenant way, and after a covenant sort, since the rainbow 
must be passed, before the bright rays of His power and love 
can reach the sons of men. 

This brings us now into the center of our discourse. We 
have to talk of two things — first, the tenor of the covenant, and 
secondly, the token of it — running a parallel all the way through 


604 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


between the two covenants. The tenor of Noah’s covenant is 
the tenor of the covenant of grace (everlasting covenant) — just 
as the rainbow represents, and in some sense is, the token of 
the covenant of grace, also. 

I. First, then, the covenant itself — WHAT IS ITS TENOR? 

We reply that it is a covenant of pure grace. There was 
nothing in Noah why God should make a covenant with him. 
He was a sinner — and proved himself to be so in a most 
shocking manner within a few days. He needed a sacrifice, for he 
afterwards became drunk. He was one of the best of men, but 
the best of men are but men at the best, and can have no claim 
upon the favor of God! He was saved by faith as the rest of us 
must be — and faith, we all know, is inconsistent with any claim 
of merit. At least one of his sons we must set down as being an 
open and abandoned sinner, and in him, there could have been 
no ground why God should make a covenant with him. We 
have no reason to imagine that Noah ever sought this covenant. 
He did offer a sacrifice, but we do not know that he ventured 
to indulge the idea that God would enter into bonds with him 
not to destroy the earth. We imagine that the very first cloud 
which swept across the sky would excite the patriarch’s alarm; 
the first drop which fell would dampen Iris comfort. As a 
preacher of righteousness, he understood well enough that on 
grounds of justice he had no claim upon the Most Holy God, 
and he would not venture to plead any merit of his own. But 
out of pure favor — just as out of the mountain’s side, the 
sparkling fountain gushes freely without the labor of man, so 
this covenant of sparing mercy sprang spontaneously from the 
overflowing, ever bounteous, and loving heart of God! 
Certainly it is so with that greater covenant, whereof we strive 
to speak; for this was made with Christ, “before the earth was,” 
and as there were no men to supplicate, it could not have been 
possible that it was due to their intercession; as there were no 


605 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


men to merit anything, it could not be bought by their 
worthiness, and as divine foreknowledge well knew that man 
would be evil — “only evil, and that continually from his youth 
up,” so no foresight of human goodness could have suggested it! 
And yet, because He, “will have mercy on whom He will have 
mercy, and will have compassion on whom He will have 
compassion,” He, our gracious God, whose heart was swelling 
like the deep sea with floodtides of loving-kindness, was 
pleased to strike hands with Christ, our covenant and Federal 
Head, and from grace, and grace, alone, He entered into 
engagements with Christ on our account! 

The everlasting covenant, we note, in the next place, was 
all of promise. You will be struck, if you read these verses, how it 
runs over and over again, “I establish. ” “It shall come to pass.” 
“I will.” “It shall.” “I will.” He who knows the difference 
between, “you shall, ” and “I will, ” is a good theologian. The old 
covenant of works is, “you shall.” “You shall not commit 
adultery; you shall not kill; you shall not steal.” Death always 
comes to us by that covenant of command; but the new 
covenant is, “1 will, ” and life comes to us by its promises. The 
covenant of grace runs on this wise — “I will sprinkle clean 
water upon you, and you shall be clean; from all your iniquities 
will I save you.” If there is a, “you shall, ” it is not by way of 
command, but by way of promise! “I will, ” and “you shall’\ O dear 
friends, one’s heart rejoices to think of those potent shalls and 
wills — those immoveable pillars which death and hell cannot 
shake — the shalls and wills of a God who, “Speaks and it is done;” 
God who, “Commands and it stands fast.” I do not see an if, 
nor a but, nor the shadow of a perhaps in it! It is all, “1 will, I will, 

I will, ” from beginning to end. And so, when God covenanted 
with Christ, it was not, “I will save My people if they do this,” 
but, “l will, ” and, “they shall, ” from first to last — 


606 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


“It is like a living spring of waters, 
sweet and clear; 

There’s not an if to foul the stream 
nor a perhaps here. 

Grace is its fountainhead, 

the source from where it came — 

In wills and shalls of gospel grace, 
eternally the same.” 

The aposde Paul is very clear upon this. In that most 
blessed epistle to the Galatians, he calls this, “the covenant of 
promise,” and marks the difference between Ishmael, “the son 
of the bondwoman,” according to nature, and according to 
works, and Isaac, “who is the child of the promise, and the gift 
of God, above nature: not according to the efficacy and energy 
of the creature, but according to the will and power and 
truthfulness of the Most High.” You and 1 do not stand today 
under a covenant which demands anything of us! 
Unconditional favors, unlimited mercies made sure to all the 
seed by the oath and promise — the shall and will of God! 

Further, I would have you observe that this covenant has 
up to now been faithfully kept. It cheered my heart, when thinking 
this matter over, to remember that although I depend upon 
covenant faithfulness, I am not alone in that dependence, for 
every living thing upon the face of the earth lives by virtue of 
the everlasting covenant of God! Covenant engagements 
preserve the world from flood — were it not for that covenant, 
the tops of the mountains might be covered tomorrow. 
Covenant tenure is a very sure one, seeing that these thousands 
of years the world has never been destroyed by a flood. Go 
back to ancient histories and see whether from the deluge God 
has ever again swept away the race of man with water, and you 
shall not even dare to hint that such a thing has been! No, the 


607 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


earth standing in the water and out of the water, since the 
fathers fell asleep, according to the testimony of scoffers 
themselves, abides still the same; and so does the covenant of 
grace; it has never been removed or altered, nor have its 
promises been broken! O saint, you dwell in tabernacles which 
shall never be taken down! God has never failed His people, 
nor cast away His chosen; not one promise has lost its 
fulfillment or one word its faithfulness — 

“This covenant of grace all blessings secures; 

Believer, rejoice, for all things are yours, 

And God from His purpose shall never remove, 

But love you and bless you and rest in His love.” 

Beloved, there is this about Noah’s covenant, and about 
the covenant of grace — they do not depend in any degree at all upon 
man; for, if you will notice, the rainbow is put in the cloud, but 
it does not say, “And when you shall look upon the bow, and 
you shall remember My covenant, then I will not destroy the 
earth.” No, it is gloriously put, not upon our memory, which is 
fickle and frail, but upon God’s memory, which is infinite and 
immutable! “The bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon 
it, that / may remember the everlasting covenant.” Oh, it is not 
my remembering God — it is God’s remembering me! It is not 
my laying hold of His covenant, but His covenant laying hold 
on me! Glory be to God, the whole of the bulwarks are secured, 
and even the minor towers which we may fancy might have 
been left to man, are guarded by divine strength! Even the 
remembrance of the covenant is not left to our memories, for we 
might forget — but our Lord cannot , will not forget the saints — 
whom He has inscribed on the palms of His hands! It is with 
us today as it was with Israel in Egypt. The blood was upon the 
lintel and upon the two side posts; but God did not say, “When 


608 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


you see the blood I will pass over you.” No, no! “When / see 
the blood I will pass over you.” My looking to Jesus brings me 
joy and peace, but it is God’s looking to Jesus which secures my 
salvation, and that of all His elect! It is impossible for our God 
to look at Christ, our bleeding Surety, and then to be angry with 
us for sins already punished in Him. No, dear friends, it is not 
left with us even to be saved by remembering the covenant. 
There are no tricks here — not a single thread of the creature 
mars the fabric. Here, we have the pure gold, and not an atom 
of alloy. It is not of man, neither by man, but of the Lord alone! 
We should remember the covenant, and we shall do it, through 
divine grace; but the hinge of the matter does not lie there; it is 
God’s remembering us, not our remembering Him. 

And therefore, for all these reasons, it is an everlasting 
covenant. We know that as long as there is day and night, and 
summer and winter, and these shall be so long as the earth 
stands, the proud waves can never cover the earth. Forever has 
God established this covenant in heaven. Even so, the 
everlasting covenant is not intended to be fleeting and 
temporary. “Forever, O Lord, Your Word is setded in heaven.” 
“He has made with us an everlasting covenant, ordered in all 
things and sure.” “He will always be mindful of His covenant.” 
If it concerns you today, it is “the same yesterday, today, and 
forever.” If the covenant blesses you at this hour, it shall bless 
you in old age, in the time of death, at the resurrection, and 
throughout eternity! No time can change one of its stipulations. 
You may walk the centuries and fly adown the ages far into 
eternity, but you can never discover such a thing as the change 
or failure of one single article of the covenant of grace, its jots 
and titdes are sure to all the seed — 

“He loved the world of His elect, 

With love surpassing thought; 


609 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Nor will His mercy ever neglect 
The souls His Son has bought! 

The warm affections of His breast 
Towards His chosen burn, 

And in this love He’ll ever rest 
Nor from His oath return! 

Still to confirm His oath of old, 

See in the heavens His bow, 

No fierce rebukes, but love untold, 

Awaits His children now.” 

Would to God you and I studied more the doctrine of this 
everlasting covenant. Our old Puritan forefathers were 
accustomed to preach much about it. Those Scotch 
Theologians, who were a second band of Puritans, Erskine and 
the men of his day, were always dwelling upon the covenants. 
Good Witsius has left us a marvelously learned and potent 
treatise on the same, and Fisher’s Marrow of Theology is a valuable 
exposition of the matter. He who studies the doctrines of the 
covenants is not very likely to make a mingle-mangle of his 
ministry, or to preach a yes and no gospel. My dear friends, 
when you think of the covenant of law, and the covenant of 
grace, and remember that they are contrary the one to the other, 
and can never mingle, can never be united — so that the one can 
dilute the other — it must come out forcibly before you that we 
may address the gospel to the sinner as a sinner, without a 
fitness on his part! We may still believe in God’s love to the 
saint, even though he has sinned, and that notwithstanding all 
the misbehavior of any of the chosen people, since they are 
under the covenant of grace and not of works, their salvation 
is never in jeopardy, never at hazard, so far as God’s will and 
God’s power are concerned! He who vowed to save them, and 
loved them in Christ, and has given them faith, which is the 


610 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


token of His grace, will most assuredly save them and bring 
them to glory! The earth shall be destroyed, with water long 
before one of God’s elect shall be damned! It shall be destroyed 
with fire, we know, but when, “the mountains depart,” and “the 
hills are removed,” the covenant of His grace shall still stand, 
and He will be mindful of all who have an interest in it. 

So much, then, concerning the tenor of the everlasting 
covenant itself. My soul, search, and look, and see whether you 
have an interest in that covenant. Can you say from your heart — 

“My hope is fixed on nothing less 
Than Jesus’ blood and righteousness”? 

Then, my soul, that everlasting covenant is yours, and you 
are safe beyond risk of harm! 

II. Secondly, THE TOKEN OF THE COVENANT. The 

covenant needs no token, as far as God is concerned; tokens are 
given for us, because of our littleness of heart, our unbelief, our 
constant forgetfulness of God’s promises. The rainbow is the 
symbol of Noah’s covenant; and Jesus Christ, who is the 
covenant, is also the symbol of that covenant to us. He is the 
Faithful Witness in heaven. 

1. Briefly upon this part of the subject let us notice when we 
may expect to see the token of the everlasting covenant. The rainbow is 
only to be seen painted upon a cloud. Expect no tokens, except 
when you need them. The Lord Jesus, when He can, will trust 
us to our faith; for it is, on the whole, more healthy, more 
strengthening to us, to, “walk by faith and not by sight.” 
Tokens are helps for our childhood — they would be 
unnecessary to us were we men. Tokens, to men whose faith is 
in vigorous order, would be as crutches to a man who is not 
lame, or as glasses to those whose eyes are perfect. The Lord is 
pleased to give tokens when tokens are needed, I say; and 


611 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


therefore He gives them, as He gives rainbows, when there is a 
cloud. When the greatest cloud which ever gathered upon earth 
had covered Calvary with blackness, when the sun had suffered 
eclipse, when human sin and divine wrath had made a tempest 
so black and terrible that all the earth was frightened — then, on 
that black cloud was painted the rainbow — for Jesus was lifted 
up, and amidst that thick darkness He, the expiation and the 
atonement, offered up Himself, and poured forth His blood. 
When the sinner’s conscience is dark with clouds, when he 
remembers his past sins, when he mourns and laments before 
God, Jesus Christ is revealed to him as the covenant rainbow, 
speaking peace! And to the believer, when his trials surround 
him, when temptations beset him, when he suffers depression 
of spirits — then, how sweet it is to behold the person of our 
Lord Jesus Christ — to see Him bleeding for us, offered up for 
guilty men — God’s rainbow, hung over the cloud of all our sins, 
our sorrows and our woes! Look, believer, when you have a 
cloud — look for a token, and be not satisfied without it. The 
ancient Church said upon one occasion, “We see not our signs.” 
And you and I have sometimes to say the same; but let us 
hasten to the Rock of our salvation and beseech Him to bestow 
upon us a comfortable sight of Jesus, who shall will the 
covenant to our souls again! 

Nor does a cloud alone give a rainbow. There must be rain. 
There can be no rainbows, unless there are the crystal drops to 
reflect the light of the sun. So, beloved, our sorrows must not 
only threaten, but they must really fall upon us. There had been 
no Christ for us if the vengeance of God had been merely a 
threating cloud. It must fall in terrible drops upon Him. Christ, 
who sets forth to us the vengeance and the love of God at the 
same time, had not come to us unless there had been a real 
vengeance and a real punishment of sin — until there is a real 
anguish in the sinner’s conscience, there is no Christ for him! 


612 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


And until the chastisement which you feel becomes grievous to 
you — till the big drops bespatter you, and you feel it is not a 
threat, but a real infliction of sorrow upon you, you cannot 
expect to see Jesus Christ! Perhaps, dear brothers and sisters, 
some of us have but slight views of Christ, and few have visits 
from Him, because we have so few troubles; and the reason 
why most saints in these days do not live as near to Jesus as 
they were custom to do in the centuries gone by may be 
because we have not so many of those showers of persecution 
which fell at that season. Why, when, in the reign of Dioclesian, 
and in the preceding centuries, believers were stoned and 
dragged into the amphitheatre, or hacked to death with knives! 
They saw the glory of Jesus as the rainbow painted on the black 
cloud of persecution, while the raindrops fell upon them. It 
makes us even long to suffer as they suffered, that we may 
behold Jesus as they beheld Him. But the day is coming when 
the world shall, “hear of wars and rumors of wars.” The earth 
shall rock and reel, and the pillars of heaven shall be shaken; 
the stars shall fall, the moon shall be turned into a clot of blood, 
and the sun shall be black as sackcloth of hair. Ah, then, how 
glorious will that rainbow shine to all the people of God, when 
over the infernos of earth, and the destruction of men, and the 
melting of empires, and the blazing of earth, there shall be seen 
Christ the Mediator, securing all His people and ratifying, still, 
the everlasting covenant! There must be drops of rain, or else 
no rainbow; some fallings of vengeance, or else no sight of 
Christ. 

But then, there must be a sun; for clouds and drops of rain 
make not rainbows unless the sun shines, beloved, our God, 
who is as the sun to us, always shines, but we do not always see 
Him; clouds hide His face; but no matter what drops may be 
falling, or what clouds may be present, if He does but shine, 
there will be a rainbow at once! When the blessed Spirit, “sheds 


613 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


abroad the love of God in our hearts” — when we can say, 
“Abba, Father,” and a Father’s love and a Father’s peace are 
breathed upon us — then, we see Jesus Christ, beholding the 
Father in the person of His Son. 

It is said that when we see the rainbow, that particular 
shower is over. So, good Bishop Hall tells us in his, 
“Contemplations Certain it is, that when Christ comes, our 
troubles are over; when we behold Jesus, our sins are gone — 
our doubts and fears subside at His command! When He walks 
the waters of the sea, there will be calm. But others say that the 
rainbow is the showery arch and heralds bad weather. And 
probably this is quite as true. Certainly, whenever you get a love 
token from Christ, you may expect some trouble; for He brings 
His people into the banqueting house either before a batde, or 
after it. Melchizedek came to meet Abraham when the kings 
had all been slaughtered; but sometimes our Melchizedek 
brings the bread and wine just before the batde is to commence. 
We are not always to be living upon love-tokens; our beloved 
Jesus would rather make us live by simple faith, and therefore, 
we “walk in darkness and see no light.” Still, rainbows are 
delightful sights, and a vision of Jesus is rapturous and 
transporting, but we cannot expect to see Him, I say, unless it 
is when the storm is over or when another storm is coming on, 
or when the cloud is there, or the drops are falling, or the light 
of God’s countenance is especially shining upon you. 

We will say no more about when this token is seen, but we 
will now notice briefly, what this token is. 

2. What do we see in our Covenant Witness in heaven ? We see in 
Him what we see in the rainbow. In the rainbow, we see supreme 
glory and beauty. As one of the works of God, it is worthy to be 
sought out by them who have pleasure in them. One might 
stand and gaze on the rainbow with wonder and admiration 
and never be weary. I do not know whether you have noticed 


614 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


paintings of rainbows — did you ever see a good one? Will you 
ever see a good one? There are one or two in the Royal 
Academy this year — I am no judge of paintings, but I can judge 
that they are as much unlike rainbows as they well could be! 
Rainbows cannot be painted; the thing is impossible; there is 
such a melting and blending of colors, that human art shall 
never be able to rival the art of God! The Master Painter, with 
the black cloud for His palette, and the sun’s rays for His brush, 
paints so that no artist shall rival Him. If you could gather 
together a heap of all the glittering gems and jewels which 
adorn an Oriental prince, and build a glorious arch — you could 
not make such glitter and brightness of glory as in the 
rainbow — which is the simple work of a drop of rain and a ray 
of light. But shall I compare my Lord Jesus to the rainbow? I 
do Him an injustice — 

“All human beauties, all divine, 

in my beloved meet and shine.” 

You never saw a picture of His face which satisfied you, 
and you never will. You shall go all over the Continent and see 
some of the marvelous productions of the masters put up as 
altar pieces; and you will say when you see them, ‘That is not 
like Jesus Christ.” They can paint Judas; there are some fine 
heads of Peter — sweet guesses at John — John the Baptist to 
life — all but that little bit of a cockleshell in his hand — they can 
paint Mary Magdalene if you will, but never Jesus Christ! They 
can never paint Him; no artist who ever lived can catch His 
expression or countenance, much less put it on canvas. And as 
to the beauty of His character, must we not burst out with the 
spouse in the Canticles, “He is altogether lovely”? — 


615 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“The spacious earth, the swelling flood, 

Proclaim the wise and powerful God! 

And Your rich glories from afar, 

Sparkle in every rolling star. 

But in His looks a glory stands, 

The noblest labor of Your hands — 

God, in the person of His Son, 

Has all His mightiest works outdone.” 

The rainbow has been recognized by ancient poets and 
bards as an appointed messenger of God. Homer calls it the 
messenger of the gods and the old mythologies speak of it as 
the Iris, the messenger of Juno. They knew not who had sent 
it, nor what was errand it came. Still, they recognized it as a 
divine ambassador. And surely such is Christ, the messenger of 
the covenant whom we delight in; God’s great ambassador, 
who is, “our peace,” “the desire of all nations,” who shall yet 
come and shall be hailed as, “King of kings and Lord of lords.” 
O blessed rainbow, Jesus! When shall Your beauties be beheld 
by mortal eyes? When shall all kings fall down before You, and 
yield their scepters and their crowns to You? 

Again — in the rainbow and in Christ, I see vengeance satisfied. 
Is not the bow the symbol of the warrior’s power? With far- 
reaching arrows, he draws the string and woe unto his enemies; 
but when a hero hangs up his bow upon the wall, what means 
he but that warfare is over and peace is proclaimed? When he 
loosens the bow and leaves it without the string, and without 
an arrow, it means that he will no more go out to hunt his 
adversaries; his arrows shall be no more “drunk with the blood 
of the slain.” He lays the bow aside, hangs it up on high, and 
leaves it unstrung, without an arrow. Such is the rainbow. A 
bow, it is true, but a bow hung up — a bow without string or 
arrow. And such is Christ, God’s bow. ‘Your arrows are sharp 


616 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


in the heart of the king’s enemies, whereby the people fall under 
You.” When He takes the “rod of iron,” He breaks His enemies 
in pieces, “like a potter’s vessel.” “Who is this who comes from 
Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah, traveling in the 
greatness of His strength?” Jesus the arrow of God; the 
polished shaft in the quiver of the Most High; but there I see 
Him — a bow still — still mighty to destroy — but yet a bow 
without a string. He threw that away, when He came from 
heaven to earth, and lay slumbering in the manger. A bow 
without an arrow! — 

“No thunder clothes His brow, 

No bolts to drive our guilty souls 
To fiercer flames below.” 

Beloved, Christ is vengeance satisfied! Those wounds; 
those bright and burnished jewels of His hands signify that 
God demands no more of man! 

The rainbow, yet again, is a token that vengeance itself has 
become on our side. You see, it is an unbroken “bow.” He did 
not snap it across His knee. It is still a bow. Vengeance is there, 
justice is there; but which way is it pointed? It is turned upward; 
not to shoot arrows down on us, but for us, if we have faith 
enough to string it, and to make it our glorious bow — to draw 
it with all our might, to send our prayers, our praises, and our 
desires, up to the bright throne of God! Mighty is that man, 
omnipotent is his faith, who has power to bend that bow and 
draw it, and shoot his prayers to heaven. 

No, more. Inasmuch as it is a bow not black, nor blood- 
red, but a bow painted with the colors of holiday and delight, 
it seems to me as if heaven hangs out its streamers of joy, while 
angels sing, “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, 
goodwill towards men.” They pull the banners from the 


617 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


standards of glory, and they hang them out across the sky, as 
we do on our ships upon marriage days, heaven hangs out its 
glorious banners to show that God is so completely satisfied 
with Christ, and so at peace with man, that He joys in man’s 
joy, and rejoices in man’s rejoicing — “rests in His love, and 
rejoices in us with singing,” Look up, believer, to the person of 
Christ! Behold the joy of God, “the pleasure of the Lord,” 
prospering, “in His hands,” and your soul will be full of ecstasy 
and delight! 

Once again, in the rainbow we see the one color of light, 
which appears to us to be but white, broken up, refracted, 
distributed, blended, harmonized, and brought out in all its 
distinct elements. There is no doubt that there are more colors 
in light than our eyes have ever seen. The eyes can only 
compass a certain quantity of the colors; but beneath the lowest, 
and above the highest, there are others. There is infinitely more 
in God than you and I will ever be able to see. One of the best 
sights of light, as dissolved and analyzed, is to be had in the 
rainbow. There you see the colors arranged in their proper 
order, and you are able to mark the red melting into the orange, 
and the orange into the yellow, and the yellow yet again into 
the green, and the green into the blue, and the blue into the 
indigo and violet. They are all there — not one put out of place, 
not one left out. The character of God is one, like His essence; 
yet to us, that we may read it, it must be, as it were, broken up, 
but not thrown out of harmony. He who has seen Christ “has 
seen the Father.” He who sees the rainbow sees “Light.” He 
who sees Christ, sees the Father — God’s justice meeting and 
blending into His truth, God’s truth melting into His mercy, 
that mercy melting into His love, that love in contact with His 
faithfulness; and so every attribute standing side by side with 
its next of kin; the whole of them absolutely necessary to 
complete the glory of that arch, and every one of them 


618 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


necessarily to be put in its proper place also, to make the arch 
a harmony and a very music of colors. 

Beloved, such is Jesus Christ! If we could but understand 
Jesus Christ, we could not make mistakes about God. In Jesus, 
I see blood-red justice, justice as fierce as if there were no mercy; 
but what love I see also! What boundless love! As Watts puts 
it, we cannot tell — 

“Which of the letters best is writ, 

The power, the wisdom, or the grace.” 

They are all so clearly there. The whole of God written out 
in Christ! And yet, I warn you; we can never see the whole of 
God — in this life never. I do not know whether it is quite 
correct, but two or three of the older commentators, in glossing 
upon that passage, “There was a rainbow round about the 
throne,” say that it means entirely round it, and, therefore, there 
is a complete circle — that we only see one half of it, but that, 
in fact the covenant rainbow is a circle. Now, whatever you may 
think of that gloss, there certainly is one circular rainbow in the 
Bible, for that angel, in the 1 Oth of Revelation, had “a rainbow 
round His head.” He wore it as a crown round His head. We 
may, without straining a point, say the most we can ever see, 
even in Christ, as revealed to us, while we are here, is just a 
glorious semicircle of truth — an arch, like a divine ladder, by 
which we may mount to the very loftiness of God Himself. But 
there is another half which you and 1 have not seen, and we 
shall not see it till we get to the throne of God. Moreover, that 
rainbow that is in heaven differs from ours, for there it is, “like 
unto an emerald.” The green preponderates. The mild luster of 
the mercy of God, and His love, will seem to triumph over the 
fiery red and blues of His justice. 


619 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


3. How ought we to act, dear friends, with regard to this 
rainbow, and Jesus Christ as the symbol of the covenant? 

First, let us act like little children. Litde children run in 
clapping their hands with glee, “Father, there’s a rainbow!” Out 
they run to look at it, and they wonder whether they could find 
the end of it; they wish you would let them run till they could 
catch it; they look, and look, and look, and look, and when the 
shower begins to abate and it dies out, they are so sorrowful 
because they have lost the splendid vision! Beloved, let us be 
children. Whenever we think of Christ, let us be litde children 
and look, and look, and look again! And let us long to get at 
Him, for, unlike the rainbow, we can get at Him! Pliny, who, by 
the way, talks a deal of nonsense, declares that wherever the 
rainbow’s foot rests, the flowers are made much sweeter; and 
Aristode says the rainbow is a great breeder of honeydew. I do 
not know how that is, but I know that, wherever Jesus Christ 
is, He makes the perfume of His people very sweet. “His name 
is as ointment poured forth and I know He is, “a great breeder 
of honeydew.” There is sure to be much more loving-kindness 
in that man’s heart who has seen much of Jesus! I recommend 
you to follow that divine rainbow till you reach the foot of it 
and till you embrace it and say with Simeon, “Now let Your 
servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen Your salvation.” 
Play the child then. 

While we ga%e, ought we not praise and admire? One or two 
of the nations of antiquity had it as a part of their religion 
always to sing hymns when they saw the rainbow. Should not 
we, whenever we see Christ? Should it not be a red-letter day 
marked in our diary? “This day let us praise His name.” And as 
we ought always to see Him, I may improve upon this and bid 
you say — 


620 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


517 The Rainbow - Gen. 9:16 


“I will praise You every day; 

now Your anger’s passed away, 

Comfortable thoughts arise 
from the bleeding sacrifice.” 

And again, when we see Christ, we ought to confess our sins 
with humiliation. An old writer says that the Jews confess their 
sins when they see the rainbow. I am sure, whenever we see 
Christ, we ought to remember the deluge of wrath from which 
He has delivered us, the flames of hell from which He has saved 
us; and so, humbly bowing ourselves in the dust, let us love and 
praise and bless His name. 

To some of you there is nothing in this sermon, because 
you have never laid hold on the covenant. You have never 
believed in Jesus. Remember, that a simple faith in Christ is the 
evidence of your being in the covenant! If you believe in the 
Lord Jesus Christ with all your heart, then your name is written 
in the roll of the blessed; but if you will not believe in Him, 
however excellent your character, however good your works, 
you shall perish in your sins; for, “He who believes and is 
baptized shall be saved; he who believes not,” be he who he may 
or what he may, “shall be damned.” Believe, and believing you 
put yourself under the divine arch of the blessed covenant; you 
shall see its glorious colors with exultation and delight, and you 
shall be secure, whatever catastrophes shall shake the earth, 
whatever calamities shall trouble the race of man! 


621 



518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, July 5 th, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf 
fixed, so that they which would pass from here to you, cannot, 
neither can they pass to us, who would come from there.” - 
Luke 16:26 


For THE LAST FEW MONTHS I have been led to blow the 
silver trumpet, sounding forth the love and mercy of our God 
in Christ. Many times in your hearing 1 have preached a full 
Christ for empty sinners, and have set forth the freeness and 
graciousness of the divine proclamation which in the gospel is 
made to the chief of sinners. I have not, concerning that point, 
shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God, but 1 
feel that I must now blow a blast upon the rough ram’s horn — 
for sometimes our congregations need to be reminded of the 
law and terrors of God — and of the judgment to come. Our 
experience is that the preaching of judgment is gready blessed 
of God; we have remarked that a very large number of 
conversions have occurred under those sermons in which the 
declaration of God’s wrath against all iniquity has been the 
most plain and solemn! A thunderstorm clears the air; there are 
pestilences which would gather beneath the wings of calm 
which can only be purged away by the lightning flash. When 
God sends His servant with heavy tidings, His message of 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


alarm cleanses the spiritual atmosphere, and kills the sloth, 
pride, indifference, and lethargy, which otherwise might fall 
upon the people. As the sharp needle prepares the way for the 
thread, so the piercing law makes a way for the bright silver 
thread of divine grace. The knife is quite as necessary as the 
healing balm. The law is our teacher to bring us to Christ — like 
the old Greek teacher who led the boy to school — so the law 
leads us to Christ, who teaches and instructs us, and makes us 
wise unto salvation. Those who preached the law, as well as the 
gospel, in the Puritan times, were the most fruitful soul-winners. 
We find our blessed Lord and Master, whose heart was 
overflowing with compassion, and whose very nature was love, 
often dwelling upon the wrath to come; and indeed, His 
utterances are more telling and terrible than the most burning 
threat from the lips of thundering seers of old! God grant that 
this morning, the effect which I so anxiously desire may follow 
from that burden of the Lord which now weighs so heavily 
upon me! May the Master gather out this day a seed unto 
Himself, who shall be saved from the wrath to come, and be to 
all eternity the reward of the Redeemer’s travail! Lift up your 
hearts to God, you who know Him and have power with Him, 
and ask that now the divine Spirit may work mightily, that 
hearts may be broken, and sinners led to Jesus! 

“Beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf 
fixed.” Human ingenuity has done very much to bridge great 
gulfs. Scarcely has the world afforded a river so wide that its 
floods could not be leaped over; or a torrent so furious that it 
could not be made to pass under the yoke. High above the 
foam of Columbia’s glorious waterfall, man has hung aloft his 
slender, but substantial road of iron — and the shriek of the 
locomotive is heard above the roar of Niagara. This very week 
I saw the first chains which span the deep rift through which 
the Bristol Avon finds its way at Clifton — man has thrown his 


623 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


suspension bridge across the chasm, and men will soon travel 
where only that which has wings could a litde while ago have 
found a way! There is, however, one gulf which no human skill 
or engineering ever shall be able to bridge; there is one chasm 
which no wing shall ever be able to cross; it is the gulf which 
divides the world of joy in which the righteous triumph, from 
that land of sorrow in which the wicked feel the smart of 
Jehovah’s sword. Whatever other arguments there may be why 
the righteous should have no communion with the wicked in a 
future state, beside all these other things, any one of which is 
enough and sufficient of itself, there is a great gulf fixed, so that 
there can be no passage from the one world to the other. 

I. In trying to solemnly speak upon this matter, I shall 
commence with this — THERE IS NO PASSAGE FROM 
HEAVEN TO HELL. “They which would pass from here to you, 
cannot.” Glorified saints cannot visit the prison of lost sinners. 
Long enough were the righteous mingled with the wicked — 
sufficient was the evil time in which the wheat was choked with 
the tares; quite long enough was the period in which the chaff 
laid upon the same floor, side by side with the wheat. Patience 
had its perfect work. They did both grow together until the time 
of the harvest; it is not necessary, now that harvest has come, 
that they should lie together any longer. It were inconsistent 
with the perfect joy and the beatific state of the righteous, with 
its perfect calm and purity, that sin should be admitted into 
their midst, or that they should be permitted to find 
companionships in the abodes of evil. It were not glorious to 
the Lord Jesus Christ that they should cease from beholding 
His beauties and adoring His person, in order to succor His 
enemies, and comfort His desperate foes. Shall the courtiers of 
heaven become traitors to their King, that they may relieve His 
unappeasable adversaries? Shall the princes of the blood 
imperial, who wear eternal coronets, lay aside their robes of 


624 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


honor to become menial servants to the damned in hell, who 
would not, when Christ was preached to them, bow the knee 
and kiss the Son? This must not, and cannot be! Besides, the 
decree of God, like a great mountain of brass, has forever shut 
the righteous in with holiness, with happiness, with God; and 
they cannot; if they could, must not, cross the great gulf which 
divides them from the world of the wicked! 

It follows that the most earnest and diligent preacher must, then, 
renounce all hope of converting sinners. God has raised up 
some apostolic spirits whose presence in a nation is like the 
rising of the sun; darkness flies before them, and the light of 
salvation streams from them to tens of thousands! When they 
lift up their hands to preach, God gives them power to shake 
the gates of hell, and when they bend the knees to pray, they 
unlock the gates of heaven! Men like Baxter, with bursting 
hearts of love, or Joseph Alleine with glowing tongue, or 
Whitefield with seraph’s fire, or Wesley with cherub’s zeal — 
these are the men who bless their age — and are most truly great! 
These men can go to the borders of the earth if they will; their 
commission is co-extensive with the human race — “Go you 
into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.” “Lo, 
I am with you always, even unto the ends of the world.” These 
men are never as happy as when they are preaching. Woe unto 
them if they preach not the gospel, and when they preach it, 
and God helps them, they are like Elihu, refreshed by the effort! 
They were born to preach the gospel and to win sinners to 
Christ and they are never content unless they are fulfilling their 
high commission. But they must cease from their labors soon, 
for in heaven they are not needed — and from hell they are 
excluded! O sinner, even my voice, feeble though it is, may win 
you to Jesus now; but if you die impenitent, it can never woo 
you again to a Savior! Now is my time to preach to you, and set 
open mercy’s door before you, but then I can never warn you, 


625 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


nor invite you; never again depict the agonies of my Lord and 
Master, and endeavor to attract you by the story of His love, 
His dying, bleeding love. No, it will be all over then! “They rest 
from their labors; and their works do follow them.” They must 
bring their sheaves with them, for they cannot return into 
another field to sow — nor journey into other broad acres to 
reap. Burning as their hearts will still be with divine love, they 
will have to exercise it in another way. Their passionate 
longings for God’s glory will find other channels in which to 
flow. They will bow their heads and adore Him day and night, 
but they can no longer serve Him in gospel ministry. The 
ambassador rolls up his commission, for God has run up the 
black flag of damnation, and hangs out no more signals of 
peace! Poor sinner, gladly would I win you now, for it is now 
or never with you and me! 

The efforts of the most persistent visitor, the most earnest 
friend, must cease with death. Some of you have friends who 
can get nearer to your hearts than I can. You can afford, 
sometimes, to forget my poor words, and go your way to sin 
again; but you have a sister, and when she pleads with you, you 
do feel it; you have one loving friend, and when he speaks to 
you, you cannot be deaf. Your conscience has often been 
impressed by him, and sometimes through him the strivings of 
the Spirit have been very mighty with your soul. I love, my 
brothers and sisters, to see you earnest for the souls of others! 
God may give you some souls whom He will never give to me, 
and as long as they are saved, though I have a holy 
covetousness and earnestly desire to bring many to Christ, yet 
I will as unashamedly rejoice in their salvation by your 
instrumentality as if it had been accomplished by my own! Go 
and labor with all your might! Tell what Christ has done for 
you! With pleading, loving accents, beseech them to be 
reconciled to God. But oh, remember, you can only do that in 


626 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


this life, for when the gates are shut, you are shut in for your 
reward, and all the world is shut out from your efforts! O my 
hearer, do you hear this? Not only will there be no public 
congregations, no Sabbaths, no houses of prayer, but there 
shall be no private messengers, no earnest Christians who shall 
privately seek your soul’s good! What do you say to this? Does 
not this give an awful value to those tender words of persistent 
love? Turn at the gende rebuke, for otherwise you shall be 
suddenly destroyed, and that without remedy! 

Those who are nearest and dearest must be divided from 
you, if you perish in your sins! A mother can put her arms about 
her child’s neck and pray for it here; she may affectionately 
exhort her son to seek peace with God now; she may earnestly 
and incessantly follow him with her holy entreaties — but she 
can never come to him from the realms of glory if once he is 
lost. “They which would pass from us to you cannot.” Do you 
hear it, young man? Those glistening eyes of a mother’s love 
shall never weep again for you! That touching voice which 
sometimes awoke the echoes of your heart shall never plead 
again! O ungodly woman, you shall never see your godly child! 
Father, is it that daughter you are thinking of who loved and 
feared God in childhood, and was taken from you? Did she say 
to you when she was dying, “Follow me to heaven, my Father”? 
You have heard her voice for the last time; that child will never 
see her father again unless he turns from his evil ways! I think 
if she could be in heaven what she was on earth, she would 
fling her arms about your neck and seek to draw you to the 
glorious throne of the Most High, but oh, it cannot be! A just 
God condemns the impenitent sinner, and just men assent to 
the Divine sentence. See then, O you ungodly ones, who are 
present today! You often think our company a great nuisance, 
and perhaps while I am preaching, my alarming words annoy 
you. Ah, we shall not annoy you long! Does your mother tease 


627 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you when she bids you seek the Lord? She will not tease you 
long! When I bring home the judgment to come, is the subject 
obnoxious to you? I shall not ask your patience long; we shall 
be separated! If you go your way, and follow after sin and wrath, 
there will come a dividing time, and O, let me say to you — you 
would give worlds if you had them! You would give them if 
they were solid diamonds, to hear again the voice which now 
fatigues you — and to listen once more to those plaintive 
invitations which vex you, and spoil your mirth! Ah, how would 
you bless God if He would let you come back again, and have 
once more those Sabbaths which were so dull and dreary, and 
permit you to go up once more to the house of God which 
now, perhaps, is like a prison to your vain and frivolous spirits! 
O sirs, I say you may well have patience with us for a little time, 
and bear with our persistency, for we shall not plague you much 
longer. We beseech you to come to Jesus! We would pluck you 
by your garments and beseech you to flee from the wrath to 
come; forgive us for being thus in earnest, for even if we should 
fail with you, you will soon escape the persistency of our love. 
A few short months of mortal life, and then you will be far 
away from all religious discourses and all spiritual talk of things 
to come; you will be in your own company, but I warn you — 
this will yield you no contentment! 

Dear friends, how earnest this ought to make the people 
of God work while it is called today. If this is our only time for 
doing good, let us do good while we can. 1 hear people 
sometimes say, “Mr. So-and- So does too much; he works too 
hard.” Oh, we none of us do half enough! Do not talk about 
working too hard for Jesus Christ — the thing is impossible! Are 
souls perishing, and shall I sleep? My idle, lazy Flesh, shall you 
keep me still while men are dying and hell is filling? Brothers 
and sisters, let us be lukewarm no longer; if God makes us lights 
in the world, let us spend ourselves as a candle does, which 


628 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


consumes itself by shining. As the poor work girl, who has but 
one candle, works with desperate pace because that will soon 
be burned out, so let us be instant in season and out of 
season — watching, praying, laboring for the souls of men! We 
are not earnest enough about immortal souls. If we had but a 
view of the shortness of life, the fleeting character of time, and 
the terrors of eternal wrath; if we could but see lost souls, and 
understand their unutterable woe, we would shake ourselves 
from the dust, and go forth to work while it is called today! 

II. As we cannot go from heaven to hell, so the text assures 
us, “Neither can they pass to us who would come 

FROM THERE.” The lost spirits in hell are shut in forever. I see 
the angel standing at that iron door; I hear the awful key as it 
grates among the tremendous locks, and when that gate is 
closed, he hurls the key into the abyss of oblivion! The captives 
are fast imprisoned, bound in fetters which will never break, in 
chains which never rust. The sinner cannot come to heaven for 
a multitude of reasons. Among the rest, these; first, his own 
character forbids it. As a man lives and dies, so will he be 
throughout eternity. The drunk here will have all a drunk’s thirst 
there without the means of gratifying it; the swearer here will 
become a yet more ripe and proficient blasphemer. Death does 
not change but fixes character; it petrifies it. “He who is holy 
let him be holy still; he who is filthy let him be filthy still.” The 
lost man remains a sinner, and a growing sinner, and continues 
to rebel against God! Would you have such a man in heaven? 
Shall the thief prowl through the streets of the Newjerusalem? 
Shall the atmosphere of Paradise be polluted by an oath? Shall 
the songs of angels be disturbed by the vulgarity of licentious 
conversation? It cannot be! Heaven were not heaven if the 
sinner could be permitted to enter it. “Except a man be born- 
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God,” and as there is no 
hope of the finally lost ever being born-again, the kingdom of 


629 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


God they cannot see. sinner, if you are not fit for heaven now, 
have you any right to hope you ever will be? If you die without 
God, and without hope, where must your portion be? Without 
a God can you dwell in heaven — God’s own dominions? 
Without hope, can you enter where hope is consummated in 
full fruition? Never! The enemies of God shall never be 
permitted to insult Him to His face, and vent their blasphemies 
in His own palace; they must be driven from His presence, and 
driven from that presence forever! 

Moreover, not only does the man’s character shut him out, 
but also the sinner’s doom. What was it? “These shall go away into 
everlasting punishment.” If it is everlasting, how can they enter 
heaven? What does the Savior say, “Where their worm dies not, 
and their fire is not quenched.” If there is any truth in that 
metaphor, the lost are lost forever! The worm would die if they 
entered heaven, and the fire would be quenched if they 
obtained celestial seats. How does the Holy Spirit put it? Does 
He not describe the wrath to come as a bottomless pit? It were 
not such if they could get a handhold, and afterwards climb 
upward to the starry thrones of angels! Brothers and sisters, He 
who dooms men, He who has put it in the strong expression, 
“He who believes not shall be damned,” will certainly and 
literally carry out His own words! And if it is so, it shall never 
be possible for them to break their prison of fire, and enter the 
land of joy and peace. 

Moreover, sinner, you cannot go out of the prison because 
God’s character and God’s Word are against you. Shall God ever 
cease to be just? If He is just, He must never cease from 
punishing you when you are finally condemned. “Holy, Holy, 
Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth,” is the never ceasing cry of 
cherubim — and as long as He is, “Holy, Holy, Holy,” you can 
never be acceptable to Him. Shall God ever cease to be true? 
And remember, as long as He is true to His own threats, He 


630 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


must and will send His arrows through you, and make His 
fierce wrath to consume you! Then there stands His decree, 
“He who believes not shall be damned.” This is the great gulf 
that fixed chasm by which the impenitent sinner is fast as 
firmest destiny, bound, like Prometheus, to the rock forever, 
never to be loosed in time or in eternity. It must not — it shall 
not be — if God is God — if His decree is not a lie and a vanity, 
you will not come out of the place of your torment. 

No, there is more. Remember, sinner, there never was but 
one bridge between fallen man and a holy God. That bridge 
you reject. The person of the Mediator, His substitution, His 
righteousness, His painful death — these make the only road 
from sin to righteousness, from wrath to acceptance! But these 
you reject. If you should ever be lost you will have finally 
rejected Christ; and inasmuch as you are not, this morning, 
saved, O my poor fellow creature, you are now rejecting Christ! 
You are as good as saying, “Christ died, but not for me; Christ 
shed His blood to save men, but I will not be saved in His way! 
Let Him die; I count His death a trifle, and His blood a vanity; 
1 had sooner perish than be saved by Him.” This is what you 
in effect are saying. I know the words make you shudder; you 
would not venture to utter them, but that is your feeling! You will 
not have this man to reign over you; You will not bow the knee 
and kiss the Son; you will still be an adversary to God, and 
sooner be destroyed than be saved through the atonement of 
Christ. Well, now, if you reject the only way, what wonder if 
having rejected that, there remains no hope? 

Besides, remember there is no other sacrifice for sin; 
Scripture expressly tells us that there remains no more sacrifice 
for sin. Do you think that Jesus will come a second time to die? 
Shall those divine hands be stretched again to the wood? You 
reject Him now. If He died again, you would reject Him! Shall 
the head again be pierced with thorns? Shall the side again be 


631 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


rent with the spear? Why, sinner, if you refuse to have Him 
now, you would refuse Him could He die a second time. But 
that cannot be! He has offered atonement once and for all, and 
now He forever sits down at the right hand of the Majesty on 
High. No second atonement — no second redemption shall 
ever be offered for the sins of men! Besides, remember, there 
is no Holy Spirit in the pit of hell! The blessed Spirit is here 
today, and often has He striven with some of you. Do you 
remember when you trembled like Felix? Do you not 
remember the time when, like Agrippa, you were almost 
persuaded? But still all this was put away — conscience was 
hushed; the Spirit of God was quenched. Well, that Spirit can 
strive with you again, and if He comes forth in His irresistible 
strength, even if your heart is like a flint, He can break it; and 
if like iron, He can melt it. But once in the pit of hell, the Holy 
Spirit never comes there! That blessed dove shuns the place of 
wrath, and over souls given up to destruction, never will His 
life-giving wings be known to brood. If so, then you cannot be 
born-again and cannot enter heaven; you cannot be sanctified, 
and unsanctified spirits cannot have a portion in the skies. So 
then, it is clear enough you cannot possibly pass from hell to 
heaven. Ah, this will be a judgment upon you, a solemn 
judgment upon you for many things. You do not like the house 
of God; you shall be shut out of it. You do not love Sunday; 
you are shut out from the eternal Sunday. The voice of sacred 
song had no charm in it for you; you shall not join it. The face 
of God you never loved; you shall never see it. The name of 
Jesus Christ was never melodious in your ears; you shall never 
hear it. Jesus Christ was preached to you, but you rejected 
Him — His blood you trod beneath your feet. The way to 
heaven was freely set open before you, but you would not come 
to Him that you might have life. There is a road from earth to 
heaven — sinner, though you have gone into the depths of sin, 


632 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


if you have been the most infamous and most outrageous of 
offenders, there is still a road for you to heaven! The harlot, the 
thief, the profane, the drunk may yet find mercy through the 
divine grace of Jesus, but — 

“There are no acts of pardon passed 
In that cold grave to which we hasten; 

Only darkness, death and long despair 
Reign in eternal silence there.” 

God bless the solemn remarks we make, and He shall have 
the glory! 

III. But now, once again to change the subject for a few 
minutes, I have to notice in the third place, that while no 
persons can pass that bridgeless chasm, so NO THINGS CAN. 
Nothing can come from hell to heaven. Rejoice, you saints in 
light, triumph in your God for this — no temptation of Satan 
can ever vex you when once you are landed on the golden 
strand! You are beyond bowshot of the archenemy; he may 
howl and bite his iron bands, but his howling cannot terrify, 
and his biting cannot disturb! No longer shall you be vexed 
with the filthy conversation of the ungodly. Lot shall never hear 
another foul word. You shall not have to say, “Woe is me, that 
I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar.” — 

“No light discourse shall reach your heart, 

Nor trifles vex your ear.” 

You shall be shut out from everything that belongs to hell. 
And, remember, you shall be in heaven! You will be so secure, 
that the wrath of God which makes hell, shall never light on 
you. Your Savior carried it for you; not a drop of it shall fall 
upon you. No present pains shall be in heaven, they are for the 


633 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


lost. No pains of body, no distractions of mind. You shall have 
no sin — sin cannot pass from them to you. You shall be 
perfect — like your Lord, without spot or wrinkle, or any such 
thing — 

‘Your inward foes shall all be slain, 

Nor Satan vex your peace again.” 

You shall have no fears for the future. You shall know that 
your bliss is eternal. This shall always be the honey of your 
honeycomb — that it lasts forever! Millions of years you shall 
gaze into the face of your beloved; throughout endless ages you 
shall bask in the sunlight of His smile. This is joy, I say, to the 
Christian! If he will but think it over, it will reconcile him to the 
hardest strokes of temporary tribulation, and make him rejoice 
in the hardest toil of this mortal struggle. Courage, brothers and 
sisters, it is but a day or two of wrestling and then the immortal 
crown — an hour or two of fighting and then the everlasting rest! 
I think I see today the angels leaning from the batdements of 
the celestial palace, and as they mark you, like armed men 
cutting your way to the gates thereof, they cry to you — 

“Come in, come in, 

Eternal glory you shall win.” 

Will you sheathe your swords? Will you stop the conflict? 
No! Press on and let your true Jerusalem blades cut through 
soul and spirit, and divide joint and marrow till you reach the 
summit and the eternal glory shall be yours! 

IV. Again, we change the strain for a fourth point and this 
a terrible one. As nothing can come from hell to heaven, so 
nothing heavenly can ever come to hell. There are rivers of life 
at God’s right hand — those streams can never leap in blessed 


634 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


waterfalls to the lost. No, Lazarus is not permitted to dip the 
tip of his finger in water to administer the cooling drop to the 
fire -tormented tongue. Not a drop of heavenly water can ever 
cross that chasm! See then, sinner, heaven is rest, perfect rest — 
but there is no rest in hell! It is labor in the fire, and no ease, no 
peace, no sleep, no calm, no quiet — everlasting storm — eternal 
hurricane — unceasing tempest! In the worst disease, there are 
some respites — spasms of agony, but then pauses of repose. There 
is no pause in hell’s torments! The dreadful music of the eternal 
lamentation has not so much as a single stop in it; it is on, on, 
on, with crash of battle, and dust, and blood, and fire, and 
vapor of smoke. 

Heaven, too, is a place of joy. There, happy fingers sweep 
celestial chords; there, joyous spirits sing Hosannas day without 
night; but there is no joy in hell; for music there is the groan; 
for joy there is the pang; for sweet fellowship there is the 
binding up in bundles; for everything that is blissful there is 
everything that is sorrowful. No, I do not exaggerate, that were 
impossible; I cannot come up to the doleful facts, therefore I 
leave them. Nothing of the joy of heaven can ever come to hell. 

Heaven is the place of sweet communion with God — 

“There they behold His face, 

And never, never sin. 

There from the rivers of His grace, 

Drink endless pleasures in.” 

There is no communion with God in hell. There are 
prayers, but they are unheard; there are tears, but they are 
unaccepted; there are cries for pity, but they are all an 
abomination unto the Lord! God wills not the death of any; He 
had rather that he should turn unto Him and live, but if that 
divine grace is refused — 


635 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“The Lord, in vengeance dressed 
Shall lift His hand and swear, 

You who despised My promised rest 
Shall have no portion there!” 

Tell me what heaven is, if you will, and I must say of any 
description that you give of its joys, that there is none of them 
in Tophet, for heaven’s blessings cannot cross from the 
celestial regions to the infernal prison! No, it is sorrow without 
relief, misery without hope — and here is the pang of it — it is 
death without end! There is only one thing that I know of in 
which heaven is like hell — it is eternal. “The wrath to come, the 
wrath to come, the wrath to come, ” forever and forever spending 
itself, and yet never being spent! 

And now, would to God, I could speak with you as my 
heart desires; for this is my only opportunity, since, as I have 
already said, I can do this no more if I am saved and if you are 
lost. Spare me, then, two or three minutes while I close this 
poor discourse of mine by trying to reason with those of you 
who are unconverted. I have had little to say to God’s people 
this morning; I may comfort them in the evening, but this 
morning I have to deal with you who fear not God. Many of 
you now present are unconverted. I will never flatter you by 
preaching to you as though you were all Christians. The Lord 
my God knows there is many a heart here that never was 
broken; there is many a spirit here that never trembled before 
the majesty of infinite justice, and never kissed the outstretched 
scepter of a crucified Redeemer. You know this, some of you; 
you know you are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of 
iniquity. I do not mean you, alone, who live in open sin, but I 
mean you who are amiable, excellent, and admirable in your 
carriage and deportment — but yet the love of God is not in you. 


636 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


There is no fault to be found with your outward character, 
perhaps, but you have not been born-again; you have never 
passed from death unto life; and remember, sirs, there is the 
same hell for the most excellent as for the most abominable, 
unless you fly to Christ — “For other foundation can no man 
lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.” And if you believe 
not in Him, you shall die in your sins, “for there is none other 
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be 
saved.” Come, then, let me plead with you, and I will ask you a 
question — do you believe all this? Do you believe that there is 
a hell? Do you believe that there is a heaven to be lost? If you 
profess that you do not so believe, I have done with you! God 
bring you to a better mind. But what did you come here for? 
Why do you profess to be a Christian if you reject the 
Christian’s inspired Book? Become an infidel and be honest! 
For my part, modern infidelity never gives me any alarm; I had 
as soon see you outwardly infidels, as to hear you pretend to be 
Christians, and yet disbelieve what this Book teaches. I like 
honesty, and it seems to me that when a man honestly says, “I 
shall not make a profession of believing what I do not believe,” 
that there is at least one virtue in him, and we may hope that 
others may find soil to grow in. But you who profess to be 
religious, and attend your church or your chapel, and yet do not 
believe the revelation of God, what can I say to you, but that 
your damnation will be most just! I think I hear many of you 
say, “Believe it, sir, oh, we never doubted it! We learned it in 
our earliest childhood; we have heard it always, and we never 
ventured to doubt.” Ah, well then, 1 ask you: are you in your 
sober senses to believe that there is a hell and not seek to escape 
from it? Do you believe there is a wrath to come, and that it 
may fall upon you in the next minute, for you may be dead, and 
never leave this house of prayer — and yet do you sit easy in 
your pews; or, are you mad? Has sin so besotted you with its 


637 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


foul intoxication that you cannot think? For if you can think, 
and there is an angry God who will punish with the awful force 
of His omnipotence, how is it that you can be at ease in Zion? 

Let me ask you another question — if these things are so, 
have you used your senses in giving a preference to the 
pleasures of this life beyond the joys of heaven — in following 
the pleasures of today, when you know they will be followed 
with the miseries of eternity? Do not be mistaken, I do not 
mean to say that a Christian is without pleasures — we have the 
highest and purest pleasure that mortal or immortal can know! 
We have not the pleasures of sin, but we have higher, more 
delightful and deeper pleasures. But this is what I mean — will 
you spend yourselves in sinful pleasure? Will you occupy your 
time with lust, or drunkenness, or with the frivolities of 
fashionable life, and do you think that these are worth the 
expense that they will cause? “Oh,” said one to me, who holds 
a high position in society, as I talked with him a long time after 
having preached earnesdy the gospel — he took me by the 
button and he said, “it does seem to me to be an awful thing, 
that I, knowing as I do what will be my lot if I live and die as I 
am, should still act as I do! When you are with me,” he said, 
“and I listen to a solemn address, I think there shall come a 
change over me; I will serve God, but, O sir, you do not know 
the temptations of my life! You do not know how it is when I 
get into the midst of pomp and vanities, and perhaps mingle 
with men who ridicule all thoughts of religion, it all goes — and 
I am such a fool that I sell my soul — sell my soul for it!” Oh, 
there are such fools here today — who sell their souls for a little 
sin — one or two whirls in the world’s mad dance, and then the 
devil is your partner, and your mirth is over. I ask you to use 
your reason and judge whether it is worth your while to gain 
the whole world and lose your own soul. 


638 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


518 The Bridgeless Gulf - Luke 16:26 


I shall put it to you in another way. How is it that you do 
not lay hold of Christ, since this is the only time when there is 
a probability that Christ can be laid hold of? I will tell you why 
it is. You do not love Christ; you love sin. Or else you are too 
proud to come to Christ; you think yourselves good enough, 
and you think that Christ is not for such as you are, but only 
for great sinners and the lowest of the low! O sirs, is your pride 
such a fine thing that you will be damned in order to maintain 
its dignity? Throw your pride away! Come as a sinner must 
come, and lay hold of Jesus Christ. Or if it is your sin which 
hinders, may God the Holy Spirit help you to pluck out the 
right eye, and cast off a right arm sooner than having two eyes 
and two arms to be cast into hell fire! 

“But,” says one, “how may I lay hold on Christ?” May the 
blessed Spirit enable you to do it. Here it is — trust Jesus Christ, 
and you shall be saved. Conscious that you deserve His wrath, 
trembling because of His terrible law, look to Jesus! There 
hangs a bleeding Savior. I think these eyes can see Him 
bleeding there; God eternal, He by whom the heaven of 
heavens were made, and the earth and the fullness thereof, 
takes upon Himself the form of man and hangs upon the tree 
of the curse — 

“See from His head, His hands, His feet, 

Sorrow and love flow mingled down! 

Did ever such love and sorrow meet, 

Or thorns compose so rich a crown?” 

There is life in a look at that crucified One, there is life at 
this moment for you! Will you glance at Him with a tearful eye? 
“Jesus slaughtered, martyred, murdered for my sake, I do 
believe in You; here at Your feet I throw myself, all guilty, 
polluted, foul; let Your blood drop on me; turn Your eyes upon 


639 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


me; say to me, ‘I have loved you with an everlasting love, 
therefore with the bands of My kindness have I drawn you.’ 
Come and welcome, sinner — come.” I have but preached the 
law to you out of love. God knows how these hard things, as 1 
speak them, make my heart bleed blood. O that you would 
believe in Jesus! He is freely preached to you — accept Him! 
May the Spirit of God lead you now to accept Him! These are 
no hard terms, no stern conditions of a bloodthirsty tyrant; He 
does but say, “Bow the knee and kiss the Son. Come and 
welcome, sinner — come.” Young man, will you be saved or not? 
You, sinner yonder, with your gray head, nearing the approach 
of death, will you believe in Christ or not? It may be this is your 
last time — you shall never hear the gospel faithfully and 
affectionately pressed home upon you again! Will you have 
Jesus to be yours? Spirit of God, lead that heart to say, ‘Yes, 
Lord, I will.” And as the acceptance is heard on earth, may it 
be registered in heaven — and may salvation come to that man’s 
heart this day! The Lord bless you all, every one of you; and 
when He gathers His people together, may I and you, every one 
of us, by His grace, be found at His right hand, to see His 
smiling face! Amen. 


640 



519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 10:10 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, July 12th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and 
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” - Romans 
10:10 

EVERY STAR in heaven yields its ray of light to cheer the 
mariner upon the watery waste, but there are leaders among 
that sparkling host — stars of the first magnitude — whose 
golden lamps are so dexterously hung, and trimmed with such 
excessive care, that they offer way-marks to the wanderer by 
which he may be able to steer his vessel to the desired haven. 
So all the promises of Scripture are full of comfort! In their 
sphere, they glow and glisten with the warmth and light of love; 
but there are “bright particular stars,” even among these — 
promises, conspicuous as Orion, brilliant as the Pleiades, fixed 
as Arcturus with his sons. Brothers and sisters, you know those 
soul-saving texts to which I refer, which are radiant with 
comfort, and have in them such a blessed combination of 
simple words and comforting sentences, that they guide 
multitudes of sinners to the port of peace in Jesus Christ! My 
text, I think, is one of these. At least, the doctrine which it 
teaches — that of salvation by faith — is the very polestar of the 
gospel; and he who steers by it shall find the heavenly shore! 
Be not at all displeased that such a truth of God should again 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


be proclaimed in your hearing. The physician who is about to 
go abroad, and knows that he shall not be able to procure more 
drugs, lays in a store of all the valued medicines in pharmacy, 
but he buys the largest stock of remedies for the more common 
diseases of the body; and so, my brothers and sisters, we are 
bound in our ministry to preach upon all sorts of subjects; we 
ought not to bring out things old and old, but things new and 
old; yet the preacher must dwell most upon that doctrine which 
is the most required, and is most likely to heal the sin-sick soul. 
We believe that for every one converted under another doctrine, 
there have been 10 brought to Christ by the simple preaching 
of salvation by faith. Although every truth in Scripture is like a 
mesh of the great gospel net, the great truth of justification by 
faith makes up so many meshes that it constitutes the major 
part of the net, and holds within its influence great multitudes 
of fishes. 

God help us to cast this net today on the right side of the 
ship! While I let down the great dragnet, you take your share in 
the gospel fishery, and pray that God may send the fishes into 
it, and may His name be praised this day both in heaven and 
on earth! 

The text very simply divides itself into two parts. Faith and 
confession. The two are joined together. Let no man put them 
asunder. “With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and 
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” 

Three things on each of these topics. First, upon faith. We 
have here set before us, either in the text, or in the context, the 
object of faith, the nature of faith, and its result. 

I. THE OBJECT OF FAITH is clearly mentioned in the 
context. 

The preceding verse runs thus — “That if you shall confess 
with your mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in your heart 
that God has raised Him from the dead, you shall be saved.” It 


642 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


is evident, then, that Jesus Christ, dead and risen, is the 
foundation of faith! The object of faith is probably the most 
important subject of our contemplation. I believe there are 
many who think too much of their faith and too litde of the 
object of it. For many a weary month, they are questioning 
whether they have the right sort of faith — whereas, they would 
do a great deal better if they looked to see whether their faith 
rested upon the right Foundation; for after all, while faith is 
important, the foundation of that faith is all-important, and we 
must look most to Flim. Now, soul-saving faith rests, according 
to a thousand places in Scripture, upon Christ — upon Christ in 
all His characters, works, and offices. Faith, first of all, rests 
upon Christ, as incarnate. What was sung by angels becomes the 
song of the poor depressed spirit. Jesus, the Son of God, was 
born in Bethlehem’s manger — God was made flesh and dwelt 
among us. Faith believes this great mystery of godliness — God 
manifest in the flesh — believes that He, by whom the heavens 
were framed, and without whom was not anything made that 
was made, did for us men and for our salvation, come down 
from heaven to tabernacle in the virgin’s womb. Faith so 
believes this as to draw comfort from it, for, says faith, “If God 
thus became man that He might come into nearness with our 
nature, this deed of love attracts me, gives me confidence 
toward God, and bids me approach the Lord with boldness, 
inasmuch as God comes to me.” — 

“Till God in human flesh I see, 

My thoughts no comfort find; 

The holy, just and sacred 
Three Are terrors to my mind. 

But if Immanuel’s face appears, 

My hope, my joy, begins — 


643 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


His name forbids my slavish fear, 

His grace removes my sins.” 

Faith next sees Christ in His life. She perceives that He is 
perfect; in obedience, sanctified wholly to His work, and 
although, “Tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin.” 
faith delights to admire and adore Him in His complete 
obedience to the law of God; and she perceives with rapture, 
that in every jot and tittle, He has fulfilled it, magnified it, and 
made it honorable. Faith, with holy boldness, cries, “This 
righteousness shall be mine, Christ has kept the law for me. 
Evidendy He was under no necessity to do this of Himself; but 
being found in fashion as a man for my salvation, He with the 
same end and objective kept that law.” faith looks to that 
righteousness of Christ and, like the aposde, she learns to say, 
“Yes doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency 
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have 
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that 
I may win Christ and be found in Him, not having my own 
righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through 
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.” 
But, chiefly, faith looks to Christ as offering up Himself upon 
the tree. She stands at the foot of the cross, watching that 
mysterious, that matchless spectacle — God made flesh, 
bleeding, dying — the Son of God wasted with pangs, torn with 
agonies and unutterable throes — obedient, even unto death! 
She watches Him with the expectancy of hope, and the 
emotion of gratitude, both of which bring the tears streaming 
down her cheeks. She hears the expiring sin-bearer cry with a 
loud voice, “It is finished!” She adds a glad, “Amen! It is 
finished!” My soul believes that there is enough in those 
wounds to wash away my sins — enough to avert the thunders 
of an angry God — enough in that righteousness to cover me 


644 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


from head to foot, and win for me the smile of infinite justice. 
O blessed Jesus, You are the one pillar of our consolation! Faith 
builds her all on this chief cornerstone. 

But beloved, faith has never done with Jesus, where He 
goes, she follows hard after Him. Her eyes track the body of 
the Savior to the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea. She beholds 
that body, on the third day, instinct with life, rolling away the 
stone and bursting its grave clothes. “Jesus lives,” says faith — 
and inasmuch as Christ was put into the prison of the tomb as 
a hostage and bail for His people, faith knows that He never 
could have come out again if God had not been completely 
satisfied with His substitutionary work — 

“If Jesus never had paid the debt, 

He never had been at freedom set.” 

Faith, therefore, perceives that if Christ is risen, the soul is 
justified! God has accepted Christ on my behalf — His 
resurrection proves it; and I stand accepted in the beloved, 
because Jesus Christ has risen! If you believe in this sense in 
your heart — that God raised Him from the dead — you shall be 
saved! Borne aloft as on eagle’s wings, Faith is not afraid to 
pursue her Redeemer up to His Father’s throne; her illuminated 
eyes behold Him in His session at the right hand of God, sees 
Him pleading as the great High Priest before the mighty 
Father’s throne; and expecting until His enemies are made His 
footstool, faith builds upon His intercession and dominion, as 
well as upon His death and resurrection. He is able also to save 
them to the uttermost who come unto God by Him, seeing He 
ever lives to make intercession for them. 

Mark, my dear brothers and sisters, the whole foundation 
upon which faith rests is Christ living'm the flesh, Christ dying'm 
that flesh, Christ rising from the dead, Christ pleadingva glory on 


645 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


behalf of sinners. Not so much as a hair’s breadth of faith’s 
foundation is to be found out of Christ Jesus! Faith does not 
build on its own experience; it rests on no graces, raptures, 
melting, communing, fights, or prayers; its chief cornerstone is 
Christ Jesus. Faith never builds on any knowledge which it has 
obtained by research — on no merit which it fancies it has 
procured by long and ardent service. It looks altogether beyond 
self, and out of self. Christ Jesus, and Christ Jesus alone, is the 
object of its confidence! Sinner, what do you say to this? There 
is nothing in you, but there needs be nothing. Can you trust 
Jesus? Jesus, the Son of God, becomes your brother, bone of 
your bone, and flesh of your flesh. Can you not trust His love? 
Jesus, the Son of God, dies on the cross. Can you not trust that 
blood, that agony, that death? Look, sinner! From head, and 
hands, and feet, the blood is streaming! It is a Divine Being 
who thus suffers; it is none other than God over all, blessed 
forever, who is nailed to that tree! Can you not believe that 
there is merit enough in agonies like these to stand in the place 
of your sufferings in hell? Do you not believe that justice gets 
an ampler recompense from the wounds of Christ than it ever 
could find in alljwrwounds, even if you had been beaten from 
the soles of your feet to the crown of your head, until you had 
been nothing but wounds and putrefying sores? I think you will 
reply, “I believe that upon Calvary, God received a greater 
glorification of His law than in all the agonies of all the damned 
in hell, though they suffer eternally the infinite anger of God.” 
I ask you, sinner, can you not believe that Christ’s perfect 
righteousness is enough for you? Can you see a flaw in it? Is it 
not fair white linen? Is there a spot? Is it not made of such 
precious material, the divine work of a divine Savior, that 
nothing can match it? If you had it, sinner, do you not think 
you would stand before God without so much as a spot or 
wrinkle? And I ask you, sinner, do you not believe that if Jesus 


646 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


pleads for you, you will be saved? Can He stretch out His hands 
and say, “Father, save that sinner,” and will God refuse to hear 
His prayer? If you give Him your cause to plead, do you think 
He will be an unsuccessful advocate? Why, man, with all the 
unbelief that is in your heart, I hope you will believe that if 
Jesus, who was the very heart of God, shall espouse your cause, 
He cannot plead in vain! 

I think I hear you answer, “Oh, yes, we believe all this; we 
believe that this is ground for the fullest confidence to saints, 
but may we rest upon it? Are we to understand that if we trust 
in Jesus Christ, because He was a man, and because He lived, 
and died, and rose again, and pleads, we are saved?” Soul, this 
is just what I would have you understand! If you have no good 
thoughts or feelings; if up to now, you have been the most 
damnable of rebels against God; if up to this moment your hard 
and impenitent heart has been at enmity against God and 
against Christ; yet if now, this very day, you will believe Christ 
incarnate, Christ died, Christ risen, Christ pleading can save 
you — and if you will rest your soul upon that fact — you shall 
be saved! God, the infinitely loving Father, is willing to receive 
you just as you are. He asks nothing of you. O prodigal, you 
may come back in your rags and filthiness, notwithstanding that 
you have spent your living with harlots; notwithstanding that 
the swine have been your companions, and you would gladly 
have filled your belly with their husks; you may come back 
without upbraiding, or so much as a word of anger, because 
your Father’s only begotten Son has stood in your place! And 
in your place He has suffered all that your many sins deserved! 
If you will now trust in Jesus, the Lord, who loved you with 
unspeakable love, you shall be this very day received into joy 
and peace with a Father’s arms about your neck, accepted and 
beloved; with your rags stripped from off you, clothed in the 
best robe — with the ring upon your finger, and the shoes upon 


647 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


your feet, listening to music and dancing — because your soul 
which was lost is found, your heart which was dead has been 
made alive! 

This, then, is the object of faith — our one and only Savior, 
doing all, for all who trust Him. 

II. Next, we have in the text, the NATURE OF FAITH. This 
is obvious. We are told that, ‘With the heart man believes unto 
righteousness.” This is not introduced by way of making a 
subtle distinction. Sometimes ministers make so many 
distinctions about faith, that true seekers are much perplexed. 

I am very jealous of myself this morning, lest I should do the 
same. I have read sermons upon natural faith, and upon 
spiritual faith; and I have been persuaded that what the 
preacher called natural faith was as much spiritual as that which 
he distinguished as the faith of God’s elect! The less distinction 
we try to make here, I think, the better, when Jesus Christ has 
broadly put it, “He who believes and is baptized shall be saved.” 
Where He makes few distinctions, but openly puts it, “Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved,” we ought not 
to be making and multiplying theological points of differences. 
Still, dear brothers and sisters, the text does say, With the heart 
man believes.” And this is somewhat strange, because we 
generally attribute the act of faith to the mind, to the 
understanding. The understanding believes certain facts, which 
appear to it to be worthy of credence, but our text puts saving 
faith upon the heart, and makes it to be a work of the affections 
rather than of the understanding. I take it this is done for this 
reason — first, in order merely to state that faith — saving 
faith — must be sincere. We must not merely say, “I see the thing 
is so,” but we must heartily believe it; it must not be a notional 
faith which a man professes, because his mother was of the 
same persuasion, or because living in a Christian land he would 
be somewhat singular if he were to set up to be an infidel. Our 


648 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


faith must be a hearty, honest, sincere persuasion of the truths 
of God which we profess to believe. If I say to myself, “Well, 
I have no doubt the Christian religion is true; I dare say it is” — 
but if I do not in my heart feel and know it to be true, then my 
faith will not save me. 

Doubdess, the word “heart” is put in here to make a 
distinction between doctrinal faith and the faith which accepts 
Christ. Why, I have the misfortune to know scores who are well 
read in divinity; they can get on excellently in all the scholastic 
parts of theology; they are orthodox — yes, orthodox to the last 
turn of the scale — and they fight like lions and tigers for but 
one hair of the head of a creed; and yet, they will never be saved 
by their faith, because their belief is merely a belief of certain 
abstract propositions which never affected their nature; which, 
to speak honestly, they do not believe after all! Those dogmas 
which they accept as truths of God have no relationship to 
them; their unregenerate hearts cannot perceive the true 
bearing of those doctrines upon themselves, consequently, they 
receive them as lies! If you put a truth of God out of its proper 
place, you make it either marvelously like a lie, or else really a lie. 
And if I hold certain doctrines merely as having respect to some 
particular persons, but not as having any reference to me, and if 
I hold them so that they do not in any degree influence my 
character and touch my heart — then I hold them falsely — I 
turn the truth of God into a lie, and my faith can never save my 
soul! True religion is more than notion, something must be 
known and felt; and faith is something more than acceptance 
of a sound creed — it is believing with the heart. 

But now, I hope I shall not darken counsel by words 
without knowledge. Let me try, if I can, to explain what I think 
believing with the heart is. 

Beloved, you know very well that the first work of God the 
Holy Spirit in man is not to teach him doctrines, but to make 


649 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


him feel a great hungering and thirsting, a great emptiness 
within himself; he is vexed with an uneasiness, a perpetual 
pining, and longing, and groaning after a something, he scarcely 
knows what. Now, that is his heart set in motion by the Spirit! 
His heart, like the needle touched with the magnet, cannot rest, 
because it has not found its pole; it has been mysteriously 
touched, it does not know how or why; but this it knows — it 
has a restlessness in it, and trembles after a setded and abiding 
peace. It is the heart, you know, which is thus sorely troubled. 
Now, when the Lord Jesus Christ is set forth in our hearing as 
being a perfect and complete Savior, able at this very moment 
to pardon all sins, and to give a perfect righteousness — to give 
us this day a salvation which is complete — and which will be 
complete when time shall be no more, then the heart says, 
“Why, that is just what I have been wanting.” Just as the flowers 
which have been shut up all night, as soon as ever the sun is up, 
open their cups as if they felt — “There! That is what we were 
wanting! Hail, glorious sun!” So the breaking, yearning, longing, 
thirsting heart, says, “Ah, that is what I need! You, O Christ, are 
all I need — more than all in You I find.” Then, that heart says, 
“Come to me, Jesus, come to me. Be mine, I would entertain 
You; if You would but come under my roof, I would have my 
poor humble heart made happy as the gates of heaven.” The 
heart stretches out its arms to Christ, and Christ comes into 
that heart; and the heart presses Him close to itself. That is 
believing with the heart. It is the heart’s own conviction that 
Jesus Christ is just what it needs. 

Many of you have a true faith in Christ, and yet you have 
never read “Paley’s Evidences,” nor “Butler’s Analogy.” It 
would not hurt you if you did; but you never did study such 
books, and perhaps you never will. You hardly know upon 
what ground the Bible is accepted as true, and therefore, 
cunning infidels give you a good shaking when they get hold of 


650 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 

you upon that point! But there is one thing upon which you can 
never be shaken — you feel the gospel must be true, because it 
just suits the needs of your heart! If any man should say to you 
when you are thirsty, “Water is not good.” You would say, 
“Give me more of it; I have a thirst in here that makes me desire 
it.” By an irresistible process stronger than logic, you can prove 
to yourself that water is good because it quenches your thirst. 
Just so with bread — when you are hungry, if you come to the 
table and a philosopher should say to you, “You do not 
understand the ground upon which bread nourishes the human 
frame; you do not know anything about the process of 
digestion, and the method of assimilation, and how the bones 
are nourished by the phosphorus, and by the lime, and by the 
silica contained in the flour!” You would say, “I do not know; 
I do not particularly care to know; but one thing I know, I am 
sure bread is good to eat if I am hungry, and I will show you.” 
And you seize the loaf and begin to cut and eat. So it is with 
the believing heart. The heart is hungry, therefore, the heart 
feeds upon Jesus; the heart is thirsty, therefore, the heart drinks 
the living water, and so the heart believes unto righteousness. 

Again, there is another explanation. Is it not, dear friends, 
man’s heart, renewed by Divine grace, which is led to perceive 
the difficulty of reconciling the apparendy discordant attributes 
of God? Do you not remember well that day when your heart 
said, “God is just; it is right He should be”? And your heart 
seemed as if it would kiss the hilt of the sharp sword justice. 
You said, “Lord, though it is my own damnation, yet I would 
adore You, because You are holy, holy, holy.” Your heart said, 
“Lord, I know You are merciful, for You have told me so; I see 
in the lovely works of Your hands, in the bountiful cornfields 
laden with the yellow grain, in this fair sunshine ripening all the 
fruits — I see proof that You are a good and gracious God. But, 
Lord, I cannot understand how You can be gracious, and yet 


651 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


be just, for if You are just, You are sworn to punish, and if You 
are gracious, then you will forgive! How can You do both? 
How can you punish and yet forgive? How can You smite and 
yet receive with tokens of affection?” You came up to the 
sanctuary one day when your heart was just in that state — in a 
quandary. Your heart was like the city of Shushan, it was 
perplexed; but you heard the preacher show clearly that Christ 
became the substitute for man, and paid to the last drachma all 
that mighty debt which man owed to God. You saw the 
wounds of Jesus, and you understood how an angry God had 
all His justice satisfied in the agonies of His beloved Son, and 
your heart said, “There, that is the very answer I have been 
wanting. I perplexed myself, vexed myself; I had a jealousy for 
the justice of God; my conscience made me jealous for it; I had 
a longing toward the mercy of God, my heart made me long 
for it. Now, I see how righteousness and peace have kissed each 
other, how justice and mercy fall about each other’s neck, and 
are reconciled forever.” And your heart says, “This is the thing! 
Here is the master key which unlocks all the doors of doubt; 
the divine finger which draws back the bolts.” Oh, the joy and 
gladness with which your heart laid hold upon a crucified 
Redeemer, saying, “It is enough; I am satisfied, I am content, 
my trouble is removed.” So you see it is not difficult to 
understand how the belief can be a belief of the heart. 

But I want you to notice yet further, that believing with the 
heart implies a love to the plan of salvation. I will suppose that 
one of you, today, troubled with thoughts of sin, shall go home, 
and you shall reach your chamber, and sit down and think over 
the great plan of salvation. You see God choosing His people 
from before the foundation of the world, and choosing them 
though He knew that they would be lost in the fall of Adam. 
You see the Son entering upon a covenant relationship towards 
them, and engaging to be their surety to redeem them from 


652 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


Wrath. You see Jesus Christ in the fullness of time coming 
forth as that surety, and fulfilling all His engagements. You see 
the Spirit of God working to teach man his need, influencing 
him to accept the plan of salvation. You see the sinner washed 
and cleansed; you mark him kept and preserved, and sanctified 
and perfected — and at last brought home to glory. While you 
are thinking over this work of the Lord, you say to yourself, 
“Well, I do not know that I have any interest in it, but what a 
blessed plan it is! How sublime! How condescending! How 
admirably suited to the needs of man! And how excellently 
adapted to bring out and glorify every attribute of God!” As 
you are thinking it over, there is a tear in your eye, and 
something whispers, “Why, such a plan as that must be true.” 
Then, the sweet promise flashes across your mind, “Whoever 
believes on Him shall not be ashamed.” And your heart says, 
“Then, I will believe on Him; that plan is worthy of my 
credence; that system, so magnificent in its generosity, is 
worthy of my loving acceptance.” You go down on your knees 
and say, “Lord, by Your grace, I have seen the beauty of Your 
great work of grace, and my soul is in love with it. I have no 
quarrel against it; I submit myself to it; let me be a partaker in 
it. Jesus, let the virtue of Your precious blood stream on me; 
let the power of the cleansing water, which flowed with the 
blood, come and kill the power of sin within me. ‘Lord, I 
believe! Help You my unbelief!’” That is believing with the heart! 
It is believing because the heart is led to see that this must be 
true, and therefore, by a process of logic that is more subtle and 
more mighty in its magic influence than the logic of the brain, 
the soul, the whole mind, the whole powers of the man are 
compelled, blessedly compelled by the grace of God, to yield 
obedience to it! 

What is true, dear friends, of us when we commence our 
spiritual career, is true all our lives long. Soul-saving faith is 


653 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


always the belief of the heart, as well in the full grown Christian, 
as in the new-born babe! Let me appeal to some of you who 
have been years in Christ. What, my dear brothers and sisters, 
is your testimony today to the truth as it is in Jesus? Does your 
heart believe it? I think I see some grayheaded man rise up, and 
leaning upon his staff, he says, “In my young days I gave my 
heart to Christ, and I had a peace and joy such as I had never 
known before, though I had tried the pomp and vanities, the 
pleasures and allurements of sin. My heart can bear its witness 
to the peace and pleasantness which I found in religion’s ways. 
Since that time, this brow has been furrowed with many cares, 
and as you see, this head has become bleached with many 
winter’s snows, but the Lord has been my heart’s stay and 
confidence. I have rested on Christ, and He has never failed me! 
When trouble has come in upon me, I have never been bowed 
down under it, by God’s grace; I have been able to sustain it. I 
have had bereavements,” — and he points to the many graves 
he has left behind him in the wilderness — “But I have been 
helped to bury wife and children, and faith has enabled me to 
say with bursting heart, ‘The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken 
away; blessed be the name of the Lord.’ I have had many 
conflicts, but I have always overcome through the blood of the 
Lamb. I have been slandered, as all men must be, but I have 
taken that with all my other crosses upon my shoulders — and I 
have found it light when I have carried it by faith. I can say that 
such is the hallowed serenity and calm which the religion of 
Jesus gives to my heart at all times, and all seasons, that I do 
believe it, not as a matter of head, but as a matter of heart. My 
heart is itself experimentally convicted that this cannot but be 
the religion of God, seeing that it works such wonders for me.” 

Remember, dearly beloved, this is the right way to believe 
in Jesus, because this is the way in which you can believe in 
Him when you come to die. You have heard of the renowned 


654 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


bishop, a true servant of our Lord and Master. On his dying 
bed, memory reeled. He had grown old and forgotten 
everything. His friends said to him, “Do you not know us?” 
There was a shake of the head. He had taken sweet counsel 
with them, walked to the house of God in their company, but 
he had forgotten them all! Next, the children clustered round 
the hoary father, and they begged him to remember them. But 
he shakes his head, he had forgotten them all! Last came his 
wife, and she thought, was it possible that she should be 
forgotten? Yes, he had forgotten her, and shook his head again. 
At last, one said in his ear, “Do you know the Lord Jesus 
Christ?” The response was instantaneous! That charming name, 
Lord, brought back consciousness from its innermost retreat to 
the more outward temple of the mind! “Know Him?” he said, 
‘Yes, He is all my salvation and all my desire.” You see it was 
the heart that knew Jesus, and though the heart may know the 
wife and the child, yet never can the heart know the dearest 
earthly object as it knows Christ! The letters of earthly names 
may be larger than the name of Christ, but the name of Christ 
is cut deeper. All other names may be cut deep through many 
skins of the soul, if I may use so strange a metaphor, but that 
name is cut into the core, right into the core of the soul! He 
who believes with his heart, has Christ in him, not on him — 
Christ in him, the hope of glory! 

My dear hearers, you who have not believed in Jesus, I have 
tried not to puzzle you with refinements, but to talk in simple 
style. I think it is a very blessed thing that the text says, ‘With 
the heart man believes,” because some of you might say, “I have 
not head enough to be a Christian.” If you had not any head at 
all, if you had a loving heart, you could believe in Jesus! You 
may say, “Why, I never had any very great natural parts.” No 
great natural parts are needed! You may say, “I never had any 
education,” and by the way, I do like to see smock frocks here, 


655 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I would to God that more would come — “I never had any 
education; I went to a national school, and they taught me many 
things; but I do not remember them.” Well, suppose you do 
not remember them; you have a heart, and some of you have 
bigger hearts than many who have let their brains swell while 
their hearts have shriveled; you can believe with your heart! 
Your heart can see that Christ is such a Christ as you need — 
that pardon and mercy are just what you require — and your 
heart can say, and may God the Holy Spirit make it say, “I 
accept Christ; I trust in Christ; I take Christ to be my all in all.” 
This precious word, “With the heart man believes,” sets the 
gate of heaven wide open to those who are of the least capacity, 
who seem to be on the very verge of idiocy, if there should be 
such persons here. Even those who write themselves down as 
being the biggest fools that ever lived, such fools as these may 
still believe! “The wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not err 
therein.” 

III. Now, I must conclude, intending to take the second 
half of the text next Sunday morning, if God spares our lives. I 
take the most necessary first. You may go to heaven without 
confessing — you cannot go to heaven without believing. So we 
have the believing first, and the other can come next. I have to 
close by noticing THE RESULT of faith. “With the heart man 
believes UNTO RIGHTEOUSNESS.” The text means that the 
man who believes in Christ is righteous — he is righteous at 
once, in a moment; he is righteous in the germ. When God 
makes up the account, He has two books. The one is the black 
book in which He writes down the name of the ungodly, the 
unrighteous. You may look all through that and though that 
man has been a thief, a whoremonger and adulterer; though he 
has been the biggest sinner that ever-defiled society and 
polluted God’s air, you may look that book through, if that man 
has been led to believe with his heart — his name is not there 


656 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


519 Believing with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


among the unrighteous! You cannot find it there; it is not in 
that book. You must get the other. You look into the Book of 
Life, and there is the name of Noah, Daniel and Ezekiel, John 
the Baptist, and so on. You say, ‘You do not expect to find 
that man’s name there, do you?” I do. If that man believed in 
Jesus Christ with his heart, he has believed unto righteousness, 
and his name is there among the righteous men; for he is 
righteous, first of all, in the germ. God has put into him an 
unquenchable spark of righteousness; He has dropped into that 
man’s heart a vitalizing force which never, by any possibility, 
can die! It has made him righteous in part, already, and which 
will go on until it has sanctified him, spirit, soul, and body — 
and made him completely righteous — in the real sense of the term 
righteous — righteous in the sense of holiness through the 
sanctification of the Spirit! 

But there is another sense. The moment the man believes 
in Jesus Christ, he is in the righteousness of Christ — perfectly 
righteous; He has put upon him the Savior’s garments. You 
heard Mr. Weaver say on this platform — I thought it was a 
good illustration — that one day he met with a very poor man 
who was in rags. This man, being a Christian, he wished to 
befriend him; he told him if he would go home with him, he 
would give him a suit of clothes. “So,” said Richard, “I went 
upstairs and took off my second best, and put on my Sunday 
best, for I did not want to give him my best. I sent the man 
upstairs, and told him he would find a suit which he could put 
on, it was my second best. So after he had put on the clothes, 
and left his rags behind, he came down and said, ‘Well, Mr. 
Weaver, what do you think of me?’ ‘Well,’ I said, ‘I think you 
look very respectable.’ ‘Oh, yes, but, Mr. Weaver, it is not me; 
I am not respectable, it is your clothes that are respectable.’ And 
so,” added Mr. Weaver, “so is it with the Lord Jesus Christ. He 
meets us covered with the rags and filth of sin, and He tells us 


657 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


to go and put on not His second best, but the best robe of His 
perfect righteousness. And when we come down with that on, 
we say, ‘Lord, what do You think of me?’ And He says, ‘Why, 
you are all fair, My love. There is no spot in you.’ We answer, 
‘No, it is not I, it is Your righteousness; I am comely because 
You are comely. I am beautiful because You are beautiful.’” 

So we may conclude by saying with Watts — 

“Strangely, my soul, are you arrayed 
By the great sacred Three! 

In sweetest harmony of praise 
Let all your powers agree.” 

All this is by believing — nothing but believing! After believing 
will come the confessing and the doing; but the saving — the 
righteousness — rests in the believing and in nothing else — 

“Nothing, sinner, do, 

Nothing great or small; 

Jesus did it all, 

Long, long ago.” 

Come to Him as He is! Take Him as your complete 
righteousness, and you will have believed with your heart unto 
righteousness. God add His own blessing, for Jesus’ sake. 
Amen. 


658 



520 Confession with the Heart - 
Rom. 10:10 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, July 19 th, 1863 , 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and 
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” - Romans 
10:10 

THIS MORNING, according to my promise, I will discourse 
upon the second part of this verse — “With the mouth 
confession is made unto salvation.” I feel a measure of regret 
that all my hearers of this morning were not present last Sunday, 
since you may wrongly imagine that I exaggerate the 
importance of outward confession, whereas had you been 
present when we were considering the first sentence, you 
would have seen that I magnified the “believing with the heart.” 
[Sermon #519] I declared it to be the all-important, the essential 
thing without which confession with the mouth would be a sin, 
a lie, and a grievous insult to the Most High. One circumstance 
greatly mitigates my fears — you may all read both sermons at 
your leisure, and so see for yourselves how earnestly I have 
labored to put the two duties in their proper place, not unduly 
exalting the less, nor depreciating the greater. 

“With the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” 
There must be no confession with the mouth where there is 
not a believing with the heart. To profess a faith which you 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


have not is to make yourself a deceptive trader who pretends 
to be carrying on a very large business, while he has no stock, 
no capital, and is only obtaining credit on false pretences, and 
so, is a thief! To make a profession, without having a 
possession, is to be a cloud without rain — a riverbed choked 
up with dry stones — utterly without water; it is to be a mere 
play-actor, strutting about for an hour with the name and 
garments of a king, to be exchanged, behind the scenes, for the 
garb of poverty, and the character of shame. Without believing 
with the heart, confession is as a rotten tree, green on the 
outside, but inwardly, as John Bunyan pithily puts it, “only fit 
to be tinder for the devil’s tinder box.” Be you warned against 
fair pretensions where there is nothing to back them up! Above 
all things avoid hypocrisy; stand aside from all mere pretense. 
Profess not to be what you are not, lest in that day when God 
comes to search the secrets of all hearts, you shall be 
condemned as reprobate silver, and consumed like dross! 

True faith, wherever it exists, produces works; and, among 
the rest, a bold, constant, consistent confession of Christ! That 
man has no faith at all who is not led to confess with his mouth 
unto salvation, in the sense intended in the text. Faith without 
works is a dead root, sending forth no bud and yielding no fruit; 
it is a well yielding no water, but filled with deadly vapor; it is a 
tree twice dead, plucked up by the roots — like some of those 
forest monsters which block up the navigation of the 
Mississippi, and form dangerous snags upon which many a 
goodly vessel has been wrecked. Faith, without works is one of 
the most damnable things out of hell! Flee from it, for 
remember if you profess to have a faith in Christ, and your 
conduct is not holy, you bring disgrace upon the Church of 
Christ! You crucify the Lord of glory afresh! You turn the truth 
of God into a lie, and you do, as far as lies in your power, make 
God the panderer to your lusts! As you are to flee from 


660 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


profession without faith, so equally flee from a faith which does 
not bring forth a good profession which may be manifested 
before many witnesses! 

I believe that the confession mentioned in the text 
embraces the whole of Christian life. I do not think it means 
the mere saying, “I am a disciple of Christ,” or submission to 
the God-ordained rite of baptism. The aposde includes, under 
the term, confession with the mouth, the whole life of the 
Christian — which is, in fact, the working out of that which God 
has worked /»/ It is the confession, both by act, deed and word, 
of that divine grace which God, by His Holy Spirit, has put into 
the soul. We say, in a common proverb, that, “One swallow 
does not make a summer.” So the merely confessing Christ 
once with the mouth does not make the confession here 
intended. One tree is not a forest, and one avowal of Christ is 
not the confession of Christ unto salvation! There is something 
more intended than one act, however distinct, or however 
excellent it may be considered in itself. 

I shall endeavor this morning, if God shall help me, to 
illustrate the meaning of confessing with the mouth unto salvation. And 
then I shall occupy a few minutes in enforcing this confession — 
urging those who love the Lord, and have believed with their 
heart, to see to it that they confess with their mouths. 

I. To CONFESS Christ with THE MOUTH, I have said, 
embraces the whole lifework of the Christian. I think you will 
see this before 1 have done. Different cases demand of men 
different forms of confession. Some may have to confess the 
Lord in one way — some in another. Every Christian is called 
upon to confess Him with his mouth according to that way 
which his own state, abilities, and position in providence may 
demand at his hands. 

1. First, then, one of the simplest and earliest forms of 
confessing Christ with the mouth is to be found in uniting in acts 


661 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of public worship. Early — as soon as the two distinct parties of the 
seed of the woman and of the serpent were discernible, we read, 
“Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.” Those 
who feared not God went away to their various occupations — 
while the righteous — on the seventh day, gathered themselves 
together for prayer and praise, and sacrifice; anyone joining the 
ranks of the men who called upon the name of the Lord would 
at once be discovered, by that act, to be a servant of the Most 
High. Throughout the whole stream of history we find the 
righteous identified by assembling themselves together, 
unitedly, to send up their prayers and thanksgivings to the Most 
High. Public worship became an acceptable form of confession 
when the seed of the serpent was able to persecute. In the times 
when Jeroboam set up the calves at Bethel, when any Israelite 
wended Iris weary way to Jerusalem under fear of being 
persecuted by his king, then the act of standing with the 
multitude that kept holyday around the courts of the temple, 
was at once a distinct confession of his allegiance to Jehovah, 
and his abhorrence of all idols. In the apostolic times those who 
believed were constant in the aposde’s doctrine, in breaking of 
bread, and in prayer. Where two or three were met together, 
and especially where the greater numbers gathered to listen to 
the preaching of the Word, or for the purpose of breaking 
bread, the admission of any person to that assembly became a 
confession of his faith in the Lord Jesus, in whose name they 
were assembled. 

In the early Christian days, you may see a picture 
something like this, if I know how to paint it — there is a low 
arch — it is foul and dark, like the opening of a sewer. Over it 
grows the briar, and from its base springs up the netde and the 
deadly nightshade. Yonder comes a maiden, and creeping low, 
she stoops beneath the arch; in the thick darkness she gropes 
her way for several yards. No one has noticed her entrance. Did 


662 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


you observe how she looked around, lest any sentinel might 
perceive her? She hears a voice in the distant passages; that 
voice guides her. She emerges into a vault; it is one of the 
catacombs beneath the city of Rome. A torch renders darkness 
visible. No sooner does she approach the assembly than some 
watchful brother observes her; he asks for the password. It is 
one of Caesar’s household, a noble maiden who has heard the 
gospel from her Jewish slave who waited upon her, and she has 
come to join in those secret rites which are performed by 
believers in dens and caves of the earth. Her being there proves 
her a Christian. She would not have been there to worship God 
among those hunted ones, whom the upper earth, and the pure 
air might not receive, if she had not loved the Lord. She would 
not have degraded herself, to mingle with these pariahs of 
society — those only fit to be like beasts of prey for the 
bloodhounds of Nero — if she had not loved the Lord! Her 
coming there to join that simple hymn to one Christus, to bow 
her knees solemnly in that silent prayer to Jehovah and to His 
adorable Son — she had not been in that assembly — if she had 
not loved the Lord! 

Very much so was it in later times. If a man went to hear 
Luther, you might have hope of him that he was a Christian; 
and especially in England, when the Lollard preached to the 
handful in some remote farmhouse, with a watcher outside, lest 
the monks should come; you might have been pretty clear that 
those who worshipped thus, when death ms the penalty, were true 
disciples of the Lord. Again, in the days of the glorious 
Covenant, when Cargill and Campbell opened the Bible and 
read by the lightning’s flash, while the dragoons of Claverhouse 
were scenting out their prey, you might be sure, whether it was 
yonder shepherd with his dog, or yonder heritor leaning upon 
his gun, or yonder ladies sitting on the grass and listening with 
tearful eye to the fiery words of the Covenanting leader — you 


663 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


might be sure that they were for the Lord of Hosts, and for His 
covenant, and for the truth as it is in Jesus, or else they had not 
met there among the saints of the living God at peril of their 
lives! 

Today it is so to a very few. There are some who, perhaps, 
have come into this house this morning whose husband’s last 
words were, “If you go there, you will never enter my house 
again.” Or, perhaps, it was the brother’s word, as he cursed his 
sister for a love of the truth of God; or the father’s deep, 
damning curse upon his child for venturing to believe in Christ. 
Your being here today is a distinct confession with your mouth 
of the Lord Jesus! But it is not so with most of you; it is not so 
with 999 out of a thousand! Many come, because it is the 
custom and more, I hope, because being Christians it is their 
delight always to come; they do not recognize any distinct 
profession of religion in the mere act of being here. For we 
mingle together, saint and sinner, godly and ungodly. And if 
this were the only profession of religion that we have made, it 
would not fulfill the intention of my text. In persecuting times 
it would — in the dark, black, bloody days it would — but not 
today, for now it is little or no confession to most of us to sit 
comfortably in our seats and listen to the preacher, and then 
walk down the stone steps and go our way. 

2. The confession of Christ which is here intended is still 
better to be carried out by a dutiful attention to those two ordinances 
which are intended by Christ to be the distinctive badge of believers. Under 
the old Mosaic dispensation, ordinances were only for Israelites. 
Circumcision and the passover were not for Philistines, nor for 
Egyptians — but for the seed of Abraham, and for the seed of 
Abraham and proselytes alone. It is even so under the Christian 
dispensation. We have no ordinances for aliens — we have no 
ordinances for strangers and foreigners. They are both 
intended for the commonwealth of Israel. You will remember 


664 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


how very carefully the ancient believers kept up these 
ordinances; you will find that the Ethiopian eunuch traveled all 
the way from the realm of Candace in order that he might be 
present at the temple worship — because that was the 
distinctive worship of the Jew, and of the proselyte to the 
Jewish faith. He would not be away. You remember how 
carefully and anxiously the heads of the Jewish householders 
saw to it that they and all their children were present at the 
celebration of the passover; not one of them would neglect that 
which was distinctive of themselves as a separated people. Now 
baptism is the mark of distinction between the Church and the 
world. It very beautifully sets forth the death of the baptized 
person to the world. Professedly, he is no longer of the world; 
he is buried to it, and he rises again to a new life. No symbol 
could be more significant! In the immersion of believers there 
seems to me to be a wondrous setting forth of the burial of the 
believer to the entire world in the burial of Christ Jesus. It is 
the crossing of the Rubicon. If Caesar crossed the Rubicon, 
there would never be peace between him and the senate again. 
He draws his sword and he throws away his scabbard. Such is 
the act of baptism to the believer. It is the crossing of the 
Rubicon — it is as much as to say, “I cannot come back again to 
you; I am dead to you; and to prove I am, I am absolutely buried 
to you; I have nothing more to do with the world; I am Christ’s 
and Christ’s forever.” 

Then, the Lord’s Supper — how beautifully that ordinance 
sets forth the distinction of the believer from the world in Inis 
life, and that by which his life is nourished. He eats the flesh of 
Christ, and drinks His blood. I marvel at some of you who love 
my Lord that you should keep away from His table. It is His 
dying will — “This do you in remembrance of Me.” It is so kind 
of Him to institute such an ordinance at all; to let us, who were 
as the dogs, sit at the children’s table and eat bread such as 


665 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


angels never knew! I understand not, my dear brother, my dear 
sister, what sort of love yours can be if you hear Jesus say, “If 
you love Me, keep My commandments,” and yet you neglect 
His ordinances. You will say they are non-essential, and I will 
reply to you, most true, they are non-essential for your salvation, 
but they are not non-essential for your comfort. Nor are they 
non-essential for your obedience. It is for a child to do what his 
parent bids him. If, my loving friend, my dear Redeemer had 
bid me do something hurtful to myself, I would do it out of 
love to Him! How much more, then, when He says to me, 
“This do in remembrance of Me”? 

Both these ordinances bring a cross with them to some 
degree, especially the first. I was noting, when reading yesterday, 
the life of good Andrew Fuller, after he had been baptized, 
some of the young men in the village were custom to mock him, 
asking him how he liked being dipped — and such like questions 
which are common enough nowadays. I could but notice that 
the scoff of a hundred years ago is still the scoff of today! But, 
brothers and sisters, you are not afraid, I trust, to be pointed at 
as a baptized believer, are you? You believe that these are His 
commands. I charge you, therefore, before God, and the elect 
angels before whom you shall be judged at the last great day — 
if you, with your hearts have believed, with your mouths make 
the confession which these ordinances imply — and God shall 
surely give you a sweet reward therein! 

3. In order to confess Christ with the mouth aright, there 
should be an association with the Lord's people. It was so in the 
olden times. Moses is an Israelite, but he may, if he wills, live 
in the court of Pharaoh, in the midst of luxury and ease. What 
is his choice? He goes forth to his brothers and sisters, and he 
looks upon their burdens; he espouses their cause, counting the 
reproaches of Christ greater riches than all the treasures of 
Egypt! Moses, the reputed son of Pharaoh’s daughter, 


666 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


associates with the poor despised slaves who make bricks for 
the king! What a very touching picture we have of following 
the people of God, in the history of Ruth. One is charmed to 
hear that godly woman saying to her mother- in-law, “Where 
you go, I will go; and where you lodge, I will lodge: your people 
shall be my people, and your God my God.” There was a 
confession of the God of Israel, when Ruth clave unto Naomi, 
with all her heart. Now, we find in the early times of the 
Christian Church, that as soon as a man became a Christian, he 
went to his own company. He associated with the saints. When 
you asked, “Where are the believers?” they were found together. 
You may find other creatures wandering separately on the 
mountains, but sheep love to be in flocks. Paul was not content 
with being baptized, but after his baptism he proceeded to join 
himself unto the Church; and we find that wherever there were 
people of God, they were always formed into a Church — 
whether it was at Philippi, or at Ephesus, or Pergamos, or 
Thyatira — or Rome itself, Paul everywhere formed Churches! 
And as he went from place to place, it was upon the Church 
that he looked as the pillar and ground of the truth of God. 

I very greatly delight in the preaching in theatres. You 
know how heartily I rejoice in the preaching of Christ anywhere, 
but there is a lack in all this labor. The corn is sown, but there 
is nobody to see to it afterwards, nobody to gather it in. The 
way in which all this ought to be carried on is not by our 
Associations, but by the Church! The Church of God is the 
true mother of converts; it is from her womb that they must be 
born, and at her breast they must suck, and on her knees must 
they be pampered. Those who go about and speak lighdy of 
Church fellowship, and would have all Christians maintain 
themselves in separateness from the Churches, do mischief and 
are unwittingly the agents of evil; for the Church is, under God, 
a great blessing to the world; and union with the Church is 


667 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


intended to be a method of confession which is not to be 
neglected. Suppose for a moment, brothers and sisters, instead 
of the compact body of believers of this one Church, we were 
broken into individual Christians and had no association with 
one another? I do not hesitate to say that some of the warmest- 
hearted among you would grow cold, for your associating with 
one another promotes your zeal and kindles your enthusiasm. 
The litde ones among us would be subjected to I know not 
what of dangerous heresy and of false doctrine. Even the 
strongest brother or sister here would feel it to be a most 
solemn bereavement if they had to lose association with the 
brothers and sisters in Christ who now comfort and strengthen 
them. 

4 . To some, confession with the mouth will involve the 
taking up of the cross in the family. I know of no form in which this 
confession is more delightful to God, and at the same time 
more arduous to men — to take up the cross in the family. It 
may be you are the first one converted in it, and you frequent 
the house of God while the rest take their pleasure on God’s 
Day. You pray — the moment you kneel down in that chamber 
there is a ringing laugh within the walls. You talk of Christ and 
things divine, and father and mother open their eyes, and 
brothers and sisters all have some jest and jeer for you! You ask 
me, what are you to do? Persevere! Stand fast! Be steadfast! For 
now it is that you are to make confession with your mouth unto 
salvation. I will not believe that your faith can save you unless 
you do now unhesitatingly, at all costs, though it were at the 
risk of losing father’s love, and mother’s care, at once say, “I 
cannot help it — I am sorry to give you any vexation, but I 
cannot love father or mother more than Christ, least I should 
not be worthy of Him.” You must be willing to give up all that 
is near and dear to you, whoever it may be — though loved as 
your own self and precious as your own life — you must give all 


668 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


up if these stand in the way of your following Christ Jesus the 
Lord! “Ah, well,” says one, “this is hard!” Yes, but remember 
for whom you do it! It is your Redeemer — who left His 
Father’s court and became flesh — that He might be one with 
you. It is He who stretched His hands on the cross and gave 
His side to the spear. Surely, all you can give up is but a trifle 
compared with what He gave up for you! Do it cheerfully — do 
it at once! 

Young man, be not frightened and alarmed at the family 
trials you have to endure! Ask God to make you like one of the 
ironclad vessels, so that though they shoot their fiercest bolts, 
and hurl them with the most tremendous force, yet still they 
will only bounce off of you, not hurting you because you are 
ironclad with invincible courage and determined faith. The 
kingdom of heaven is to you like the old city which had been 
long besieged, and there was no hope of relieving the 
inhabitants of the town unless some ship should enter the 
harbor. But there was a great chain stretched across the harbor! 
You remember how the captain, when the wind was fair and 
the tide was high, dashed against the chain, broke it, and sailed 
into port. You must break the chain which threatens to keep 
you out of heaven! Pray to God to give you much divine 
grace — that shall be like the flood tide; much of the Holy 
Spirit — that shall be like a fair wind; and if you dash against the 
chain, it will break before your courage and determination! 
Family trials are hard to bear. A living cross is often more 
severe to carry than a dead one, but you must do it, for, “with 
the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” 

5. This confession will be very acceptable if it is made in 
the time of temptation. Young Joseph has his garment seized by 
his wanton mistress — his answer is, “How can I do this great 
wickedness and sin against God?” The woman might have 
answered, “God? What do I know of Him? I know Isis; I 


669 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


understand the golden calf, but I know nothing of Jehovah — 
who is He?” Here was a bold, distinct confession of Joseph’s 
allegiance to Jehovah as a reason why he could not sin. The 
case of Nehemiah is equally to the point. When they invite him 
to a secret conference in the temple, he says, “Can such a man 
as I flee?” He avows his confidence in his God as a reason why 
he cannot for a moment act dishonorably! Now Christian, here 
it is that you are to make confession with the mouth. Some 
dirty trick in business, which has become so common that 
nobody thinks any harm of it, comes in your way. Now, play 
the man, and say, “I would rather starve than do it; I cannot, 
and I will not live by robbery, even though it should be half 
legalized by society.” Now is your opportunity, young man. 
When the Sunday morning comes round, and you are pulled by 
the sleeve by a dozen to go with them to waste its holy hours, 
you can say, “No,” and give the reason, “I cannot do it; I am a 
Christian.” Or, it may be you have come up from the country 
and your friend — ah, your friend proposes to take you to a den 
of infamy, just to show you life. Tell him he does not 
understand how to cater to your appetite, for you are a 
Christian. For some ends I would prefer the declaration of 
one’s faith in Jesus in the time of temptation to any other form 
of confession, since there surely can be no hypocrisy in it! Take 
care, brothers and sisters that you never fail to acknowledge 
your Lord in the time of temptation. “Ah,” says one, “I know 
I never shall.” Do not talk too positively. Peter denied his Lord 
before a silly maid — mind you do not fall in like manner. It is 
easy to say, “I am a good sailor,” when you are on shore; you 
walk the quarter-deck all right enough when the ship is in dock; 
you do not know what the storm is, how the ship rocks and the 
waves wash her decks. You had better hold your boasting till 
you have been to sea! Boast not yourself of anythingj/o# will do, 
but rather say, “Hold You me up, and I shall be safe.” 


670 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


6. Confession with the mouth should be carried out with 
double earnestness whenever m are called into trial for Christ’s 
sake — when the avowing of Christ will bring loss upon us, or 
when the denial of His name may secure us temporary 
prosperity. You know in the olden time, how the three holy 
children refused to bow to the image which Nebuchadnezzar 
had set up; they could die, but they could not deny their God; 
they could burn, but they could not turn. And so, into the 
furnace they were cast, because they could not cast away their 
trust in God! Look at Daniel, yonder, with his open window, 
seven times a day worshipping towards Jerusalem, as he had 
done aforetime. It is bravely done. It was a bold answer of Peter 
and John, when the Scribes and Pharisees bade them speak no 
more in that name, “Whether it is right to obey God rather than 
man, you judge.” I have noticed that whenever persecution 
rages and men are likely to lose anything for Christ that the 
most timid persons who are sincere, generally come out at that 
time! There is Joseph of Arimathea. You do not hear of him 
while Jesus lives, but when Jesus Christ’s body is on the cross, 
who shall go into the lion’s den? Who shall see Pilate? Joseph 
of Arimathea begs for the body of Jesus; he finds the sepulcher; 
and who shall help to wrap Him in spices? Why, Nicodemus, 
who came to Jesus Christ by night — another coward — they 
both advance and are cowardly no longer when it comes to the 
pinch! The stag takes to its heels and flies before the hounds, 
but when it comes to bay, fights with the bravery of desperation; 
so those who are timid, trembling Christians in ordinary 
times — when it comes to the point, come forward — and are as 
bold as the most heroic of believers! I would give nothing for 
your religion if it does not come out in persecution! Some of 
you would hide your heads if it came to persecution, burning, 
and death. Erasmus used to say he was not made of the right 
stuff to be a martyr. So, I believe, the Papists picture Erasmus 


671 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


as hanging somewhere between heaven and hell; and the 
Protestants need not quarrel with the portrait. He had some 
sort of knowledge of the truth of God, but he had not the 
courage to openly acknowledge it, and he stood shivering while 
his friend Luther went straight forward and smote the triple 
crown upon the Pope’s brow! Never let us be like Erasmus. “If 
the Lord is God, follow Him: but if Baal, then follow him.” If 
the world and sin are worth living for, live for them with all 
your heart and soul and strength — but if God is God, do not 
stand questioning and halting between two opinions, but 
decidedly, boldly, positively, say, “I am on the Lord’s side.” 
There is no time like the time of loss and trial for the making 
of this confession! 

7. I believe, my brothers and sisters that a Christian can 
hardly carry out this confession with his mouth, unless he goes 
a little out of his way at times to bear testimony. “Who is on the 
Lord’s side? Let him come unto me,” said Moses, when he 
came down from the mountain and broke the golden calf. 
“And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto 
him; and he said unto them, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, 
Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from 
gate to gate throughout the camp and slay every man his 
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his 
neighbor.” Every now and then we shall not be able to confess 
Christ unless we do something which shall seem harsh and 
strange — but which must be done for God and for the truth’s 
sake! Surely, God’s Elijahs cannot be silent! While thousands 
of Baal’s priests are kindling their fires, and calling to Baal, they 
must stand forth. “Are not you servants of Baal, and I the 
servant of the living God?” We shall find it necessary to intrude 
upon the dainties of etiquette and trample under our feet the 
formalities which dignified society would set up; and like the 


672 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


Prophet who came to Bethel, we shall have to cry against altars 
at which others pay their vows. 

I have admired — and here I take up my cross with a good 
brother — I have gready admired a testimony lately borne in the 
assembly of the Free Kirk of Scotland, by my brother Candlish, 
against the inscription that has been placed upon the memorial 
erected in memory of the excellent Prince Albert. I have 
admired him for his boldness in stating what he thought and 
felt. I believe instead of a howl of indignation, he should have 
received a gift of honor. Litde cares he whether he is praised or 
censured, but justice ought to be done to his courage and 
fidelity. He has pointed out the popish character of the 
inscription, of which I will venture to say that the Prince 
himself would abhor, could his peaceful spirit visit the 
memorial. If I remember righdy, Mr. Baptist Noel told us that 
the Prince exclaimed on his dying bed — 

“Nothing in my hand I bring, 

Simply to Your cross I cling.” 

He died a Christian, humbly clinging to the cross of Jesus. 
Why is his monument to be dishonored by an inscription fitted 
for a popish saint, but not for one who loved the Lord Jesus 
Christ? There is no disloyalty in our expressing our opinion 
frankly — nor do we intend to intrude upon the liberty of others. 
A large license should be given to affection, and sorrow should 
have its own choice of words, but it is a mistake, if not a sin, to 
use a papist eulogy where a Christian epitaph had been far more 
in keeping! I take up my cross with Candlish; and I were not 
true to God if I did not, for I believe that he who confesses 
Christ sometimes against the popular run and the popular 
current, is the only man who can expect to receive a reward 
from his Master for having acted faithfully in all things. 


673 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Sometimes you will have to do this, but not always — perhaps 
not often; go not out of your way to testify, but when the 
burden of the Lord is upon you, testify — and let none make 
you afraid! 

8. Again, to confess Christ with the mouth is not possible 
unless we are willing to use our position as a method of confession. 
Joshua is the head of a household. He uses that position — “As 
for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.” I will not believe 
in your faith if you do not see to it that in your household God 
is recognized! Let the family altar be reared; let the sacrifice 
smoke upon it. If it cannot be twice, let it be once in the day, 
but see to it that you pay your vows unto the Most High in that 
position, or else you have not made a confession unto salvation. 
Or it may be you have influence where you can help Christ’s 
Church. Mind that you do it! Esther is the queen of Ahasuerus; 
if she refuses to declare herself a Jewess — if she does not make 
the quarrel of Israel against Harnan, her own quarrel — then she 
shall be safe. She has come to the kingdom for such a time as 
this. Some of you are large employers, or you may happen to 
be members of Parliament, or you are in spheres where you 
have power very much to influence the minds of other men. 
See that you do it for God; for all that influence is so much 
money given to you to put out to interest for your Lord and 
Master, and if you bury it in a napkin, or only use it for yourself, 
in the last great day He will say to you, “You wicked and 
slothful servant, you shall be cast away to the tormentors.” 

9. Once more. There are some men who never will confess 
the Lord Jesus with their mouths as they ought to do unless 
they become preachers. David said he had preached the Word 
before the great congregation, and he makes it his boast that he 
had not shunned to declare it before kings. Now there are some 
of you who have ability to speak, but you never do. All the 
whole length of London streets await you as a pulpit! The 


674 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


whole population of London is ready to be your audience — 
why do you not begin to speak? You can talk on politics; the 
other evening, at the literary institution, I understand you read 
a capital paper upon some astronomical subject. If you love the 
Lord Jesus, are you going to give all your attention to these 
inferior themes? No, at least sometimes give it to Him who 
bought you with His blood! ‘You are not your own, for you 
are bought with a price.” Mind, then, that your speech be as 
much Christ’s as any other thing which you possess; speak for 
your Lord and Master. You tell me you are nervous; never mind 
your nervousness. Try once. If you break down half a dozen 
times, try again; you shall find your talents increase. It is 
amazing how those breakdowns do more good than our 
keeping on. Just deliver your soul of what is in it. Get your heart 
red hot, and then like some volcano that is heaving in its inner 
heart, let the hot lava of your speech run streaming down. You 
need not care for the graces of oratory, nor for the refinements 
of eloquence, but speak what you know! Show them your 
Savior’s wounds — bid His sorrow speak to them — and it shall 
be marvelous how your stammering tongue shall be all the 
better an instrument because it does stammer! For God “has 
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things 
which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things 
which are despised, has God chosen, yes, and things which are 
not, to bring to nothing things that are.” 

You see, brothers and sisters, this confession of Christ with 
the mouth is a lifework. The Christian is to be something like a 
physician. You know we call a physician a professional. Well, 
how does he profess? There is a large brass plate on his door, 
and a big bell, and everybody knows what the brass plate and 
the bell mean! That is part of his profession. What else? How 
does he profess to be a physician? He goes into company and 
his dress is like anybody else’s; you do not see a box of knives 


675 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


hanging at his side; you do not observe that he is dressed in any 
peculiar costume; he is a physician, and he is always a physician, 
but his profession is carried on by his practice. This is how a 
Christian’s profession is to be carried on — by his practice! The 
man is a physician, professionally, because he really does heal 
people and write prescriptions, and attend to their needs. I am 
to be a Christian in my actions, my deeds, my thoughts, my 
words. Therefore, if anybody wants a Christian, I should be 
known by my words and my acts. When we used to go to 
school, we would draw houses, and horses, and trees on our 
slates, and we remember how we used to write “house” under 
the house, and “horse” under the horse, for some persons 
might have thought the horse was a house! So there are some 
people who need to wear a label round their necks to show that 
they are Christians at all, or else we might mistake them for 
sinners, their actions are so alike. Avoid that! Let your 
profession be manifest by your practice. Be so clearly a piece 
of divine painting that the moment a man puts his eyes upon 
you, he says, “Yes, that is the work of God; that is a Christian, 
the noble work of God.” 

II. I have only one or two minutes to give a few words of 
exhortation. Dear friends, see that you confess Christ with your 
mouth. Do not make excuses, for NO EXCUSE YOU CAN 
M AKE WILL BE VALID. 

You will lose your business, you say! Lose it and gain your 
soul! You will be unfashionable! What is it to be fashionable? You 
will be despised by those who love you! Do you love husband 
or wife more than Christ? If so, you are not worthy of Him! 
But you are so timid! Mind you are not so timid as to be lost at 
last, for the fearful and unbelieving shall have their portion in 
the lake that burns — not those who fear and sometimes doubt 
their interest in Christ — but those who are afraid to confess 
Christ before men! You know that in the silence of the sick or 


676 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


dying hour, no excuse, however specious it may appear today, 
will answer your conscience; and if it will not answer your 
conscience, depend upon it, it will not satisfy God! In the next 
place, remember how dishonorable it is in you to say you believe 
with the heart, and yet not to make confession. You are like a 
rat behind the paneling, coming out just now and then when 
nobody is looking, and then running behind again. “What a 
degrading metaphor,” you say! I meant to degrade you by it, so 
as to drive you out of your cowardice! What? Is Christ to be 
treated like this, as if the name of Christ were a thing to be 
avowed in skulking holes and corners? No, in the face of the 
sun let it be said, “I love Jesus, who gave Himself for me.” It is 
not a thing to be said alone, nor to be hidden from the ears of 
men; He died in the face of the sun, with mockers round about 
Him! And with mockers round about us let us declare our faith 
in Jesus Christ, the Lord! 

How honorable, on the other hand, will the confession be to 
you. If I had to join an army, and I found on the muster roll a 
list of ragamuffins and the scrapings of the street, I do not think 
I would like to be a soldier. But if, on the other hand, I found 
my colonel a great conqueror, and that I had for companions 
and comrades men who had some glorious names upon their 
banners, I would feel honored by being allowed to be a 
drummer boy in such a regiment. So when I read the list and 
find Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Daniel, Isaiah — 
Jesus Christ Himself — the aposdes, Luther, Calvin, and men 
whose names have become household words in every Christian 
family, I count it an honor if my name shall be found written 
with theirs, as the most humble and feeblest soldier in the 
whole army! It is an honorable thing; therefore, cast in your lot 
with us and be prepared to be despised as a follower of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. I urge this upon you, because it will make 
you useful. What is the good of a secret Christian? He is a candle 


677 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


under a bushel. He is a light shut up in a dark lantern. Let your 
light shine! What is the good of a secret Christian? He is salt 
without savor; and what is he fit for but to be trampled under 
foot of men? Come, let the savor of your salt be felt throughout 
the world! Grace is sufficient. That is another argument for you. 
You think you will have fresh responsibilities and dangers if 
you make a confession. Grace is sufficient. If divine grace puts 
you upon a pinnacle of the temple, depend upon it, divine grace 
will keep you there! If you get off the pinnacle and come down 
on the hard ground, you will be unsafe there. But if God puts 
you on the pinnacle, let all the devils in hell come to push you 
down, you shall stand fast! Be not disobedient and choose your 
own way — take God’s way and you are safe in it. 

Lasdy, the reward is splendid. “He who confesses Me before 
men, him will 1 confess before My Father which is in heaven.” 
There was a Prince of right royal blood who once upon a time 
left his father’s palace, and journeyed into a distant part of the 
king’s dominions where he was little known and cared for. He 
was a true Prince, and he had about his face those princely 
marks — that strange divinity which does hedge a king that 
might have made the onlooker know that he was right royal. 
But when he came into the place, the people said, “This is the 
heir to the throne; let us insult him; let us hoot him!” Others 
said he was no heir at all; and so they agreed to set him in the 
stocks. As he stood there, every man did pelt him with all kinds 
of filth and used all manner of hard words towards him. And 
they said, “Who dares acknowledge him for a Prince? Who dares stand 
by him?” There stood up one from the crowd and said, “I dare!” 
They set him up in the stocks side by side with the Prince; and 
when they threw their filth on the Prince, it fell on him, and 
when they spoke hard words of the Prince, they spoke hard 
words of him. He stood there, smiling and received it all. Now 
and then a tear stole down his cheek, but that was for them, 


678 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


520 Confession with the Heart - Rom. 

10:10 


that they should thus ill-treat their sovereign. Years went by, 
the king came into those dominions and subdued them; and 
there came a day of triumph over the conquered city — 
streamers hung from every window, and the streets were 
strewn with roses. There came the king’s troops dressed in 
burnished armor of gold, with plumes upon their glittering 
helmets. The music rang right sweedy, for all the trumpets of 
glory sounded. It was from heaven they had come! The Prince 
rode through the streets in His glorious chariot; and when He 
came to the gates of the city, there were the traitors all bound 
in chains. They stood before him trembling. He singled out 
from among the crowd one man only, who stood free and 
unfettered, and he said to the traitors, “Know you this man? 
He stood with Me in that day when you treated me with scorn 
and indignation; he shall stand with Me in the day of My glory. 
Come up here!” He said. And amidst the sounding of trumpets, 
and the voice of acclamation, the poor, despised and rejected 
citizen of that rebellious city rode through the streets in 
triumph, side by side with his King, who clothed him in purple, 
and set a crown of pure gold upon his head! 

There is the parable! By the grace of God live it out! Amen. 


679 



52i The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 7:12 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, July 26th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“But Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods.” - Exodus 7:12 

WE SHALL NOT attempt to discuss the question as to 
whether these magicians actually did turn their rods into 
serpents or not; it is probable that they, by dexterous sleight of 
hand, substituted living serpents for dry rods, and so deceived 
the eyes of Pharaoh; on the other hand, it is possible that God 
was pleased to permit the devil to aid their enchantments, and 
so the old serpent produced a brood. But into that question, 1 
say, I shall not enter. It is of no importance which opinion we 
may hold. Curious questions must, this morning, give way to 
important truths of God. I call your attention to the fact that 
Aaron’s rod proved its heaven-given superiority, and silenced 
all the boastings of Jannes and Jambres by readily swallowing 
up all their rods! This incident is an instructive emblem of the 
sure victory of the divine handiwork over all the opposition of 
men. Whenever a divine thing is cast into the heart, or thrown 
upon the earth, it swallows up everything else; and though the 
devil may fashion a counterfeit, and produce swarms of 
opponents, as sure as ever God is in the work, it will swallow 
up all its foes! “Aaron’s rod swallowed up all their rods.” 

Without any preface, let me ask you, first of all, to observe 
this fact. When we have duly considered it, let us, in the second 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


place, draw an inference from it. And then, in closing, let me 
endeavor to show some reasons why it is right that it should be so. 

I. Let us turn aside to see this great sight — the divine 
triumphant over the diabolical — the spiritual subduing the 
natural — AARON’S ROD SWALLOWING ALL ITS RIVALS. 

1. Let us take the case of the awakened sinner. That man 
was, a few days ago, as worldly, as carnal, as impassive as he 
well could be. If anyone should propose to make that man 
heavenly-minded, to lead him to set his affection upon things 
above, and not on things on the earth, the common observer 
would say, “Impossible! The man has no thought above what 
he shall eat, and what he shall drink, and how he shall be 
clothed — his heart is buried in a grave of cares; he rises early; 
he sits up late; he eats the bread of carefulness; he is glued and 
cemented to the world — as in old Roman walls, the cement has 
become so strong that the stone is no longer a separate piece, 
but has become a part of the wall itself — so this man is 
cemented to the world, he cannot be separated from it. You 
must break him in pieces with the hammer of death; you cannot 
separate him in any other way from the cares of life. Ah, but 
Aaron’s rod shall swallow up this rod! The man listens to the 
Word; the truth of God comes with power into his soul; the 
Holy Spirit has entered him; and the next day, though he goes 
to his business, he finds no true contentment in it, for he pants 
after the living God! Though he still will buy and sell and gain, 
yet there is a craving within — an awful hunger, an 
unquenchable thirst — which above the din and clamor of the 
world’s traffic, will be heard crying, “Seek you first the kingdom 
of God, and His righteousness.” Now his spirit pleads its needs, 
and outstrips the body in the contest for his warmest love — he 
spurns the trifles of a day — he seeks the jewels of eternity! The 
groveling swine which wallowed in worldliness is transformed 
into an eagle; the man who lived for this shadowing earth has 


681 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


now an eye for the upper spheres, and a wing to mount into 
celestial heights! Divine grace has won the day, and the 
worldling seeks the world to come! 

It may be that the man is immersed in pleasure. He is at 
this theater and at that. You shall find him at every horserace 
and fighting ring — ah, and worse still, you may track him to 
dens of licentiousness, and learn that he is diving deeper than 
others in the turbid streams of vice! What power can make this 
sinner become a saint? As well ask over a moldering grave, 
“Can these dry bones live?” — how shall he find joy in the praise 
of God, or interest in waiting upon the worship of the Most 
High? “Absurd!” cries Unbelief, while Worldliness shouts, 
“Ridiculous!” The man is too far gone for regeneration! He is 
married to pleasure, and he wears the ring upon his finger! Yes, 
but Aaron’s rod can swallow up this rod! For we have seen such 
a man loathe the very joys he loved till there was no charm in 
the music of sin — no mirth in the society of folly. He fled away 
to hide himself; he sought seclusion that he might weep alone. 
Where are now the sweetness of your bowls and the melody of 
your viols? Where now the charms of the earth’s harlotry? 
Where now the giddy delights of chambering and wantonness? 
They are gone, for Aaron’s rod has swallowed up these rods of 
the magicians, and the mad sinner is sitting yonder — a penitent 
at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind! His 
companions follow him; with many weighty reasons, as they 
seem to think, they invite his return; they plead with him not to 
make a fool of himself by joining those melancholy fanatics; 
they point out the faults of many professors; they remark that 
hypocrisies are common; they describe the inconsistencies of 
good men, and they say, “What? Will you throw away the 
joviality of youth, the bloom and flush of life, to be united with 
a miserable band of enthusiasts and deceivers like these?” Then 
they insinuate cunning doubts; they thrust into the man’s way 


682 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


certain strange things, of which he had never heard before, 
which starde him like thunder, and almost drive him from his 
purpose. If God’s grace is in him, the world’s best magicians 
may throw down all their rods — and every rod may be as 
cunning and as poisonous as a serpent — but Aaron’s rod will 
swallow up their rods! The sweet attractions of the cross will 
woo and win the man’s heart. The blessed arguments, fetched 
from the bleeding wounds of Jesus, will answer all the 
blandishments of Madam Wanton and the reasons of her sister, 
Madam Bubble. Everything shall be set aside when true religion 
comes in! The man shall have a longing so intense that he 
cannot stop it, nor can he stop himself from obedience to it — 
a longing after pardon by blood, and salvation by divine grace! 

Oh, have you not seen the trembling penitent, when under 
conviction of sin, apparently oblivious to everything else? How 
changed the man! The furrows of that brow prophesy a harvest 
of hope; tears, those jewels of repentance, redden his eyes. He 
is dressed in the sackcloth and ashes which are the court robes 
of those blessed mourners who shall be comforted. For a 
season even righteous joys yield him no solace; the comforts of 
his household, and the enjoyments of the fireside fail to reach 
his case; there is no balm in Gilead for him — heaven alone can 
supply him a fit physician! His cry has become, “These can 
never satisfy! Give me Christ, or else I die.” You have marked 
the stag when it is let down for a royal hunt. Away it flies. The 
dogs are behind it. It flies over flowery meads, but it does not 
pause to smell the fragrance of the dale. It dashes along the 
woods, but it waits not for shelter beneath yon shady oak! It 
scatters the sparkling waters of the brook, but it scarcely has 
time to bathe its limbs. Onward, up the hill, the scenery is grand, 
but those wild eyes, starting from its head, are solaced by no 
sight of beauty. The birds are singing sweedy in yonder thicket, 
but those starded ears are not comforted. The bay of the dog 


683 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


is all the noble victim hears; the wrath of the hunter is all it 
dreads. On — on — on it flies, panting for life. Such is the soul 
hunted by the dogs of conscience. Such is the awakened spirit, 
when the wrath of God is let loose upon it; no comforts can 
charm it; no joys can delight it. It flies on — on — on — never 
resting until it finds a shelter and deliverance in the clefts of the 
Rock of Ages! It is in vain that Satan tries to attract it from the 
one master thought; the divine Life must and will have its 
course. As some lofty mountain casts its shadow all along the 
valley, so a sense of condemnation throws its dark influence 
over the whole life; then follows a longing for mercy, which, 
like a swollen torrent, bears all before it. To use another 
illustration — the man has found the pearl of great price, and 
for joy thereof, he parts with all to buy it. No matter how dear 
the old ancestral homestead, it must be sold; the favorite horse; 
the faithful dog — all must go. He will sell Inis dearest joys, and 
his most prized luxuries of sin, that he may buy this priceless, 
peerless pearl! Aaron’s rod swallows up all other rods, and 
serpents, too! 

2. Beloved, the same fact, with equal distinctness, is to be 
observed in the individual when he becomes a believer in Jesus 
Christ — his faith destroys all other confidences. Once that man 
could trust in his self-righteousness; he was rich and increased 
in goods, and had need of nothing; he was honest. Who could 
say that he ever fraudulently failed in business, or robbed a 
creditor? For integrity, he boasted that none could say he lacked 
the highest. He was, moreover, kind and charitable — amiable 
in his deportment, and tender in heart towards the poor. He 
trusted that if any man went to heaven by his merits, he should. 
But where is that rod now? Lo, Aaron’s rod has swallowed it 
up! For now that man can say with the aposde Paul, “But what 
things were gains to me, those I counted loss for Christ. Yes 
doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellence of 


684 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have 
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that 
I may win Christ. And be found in Him, not having my own 
righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through 
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.” 
The man once could rely upon ceremonies. Was he not 
sprinkled in infancy in the customary manner? Was he not 
confirmed afterwards by Episcopal hands? Did he not receive 
the blessed sacrament of the Lord’s Supper? What more was 
needed? He was regular at his church, or punctual at his chapel. 
He paid the contribution expected of him, and perhaps a litde 
more. He had family prayers, and went through a private form 
at his bedside. What more did he need? But Aaron’s rod 
swallows this up, too; for all our righteousnesses are but as 
filthy rags. This is the cry of the man now — “God forbid that 
I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.” My 
hearers, you are not Christians unless your faith in Christ has 
devoured every other confidence — unless you can say — 

“On Christ, the solid rock I stand! 

All other ground is sinking sand.” 

It is not to trust Christ, and to trust self; to rely on Jesus 
somewhat, and then upon our prayers, and our works to some 
degree. Jesus ONLY must be your watchword! Christ will never 
have a partner. He trod the winepress alone, and He will save 
you alone; He stretched His hands on the cross, and none but 
He could bear the burden of sin — nor will He divide the work 
of salvation, lest, at the last, He should have to divide the crown. 
The rod of the one only High Priest must swallow up all other 
rods. 

My dear friends, what multitudes of foes has our faith had 
to meet with! But how it has swallowed them all up! There were 


685 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


our old sins. The devil threw them down before us, and they 
turned to serpents. What hosts of them! What multitudes! How 
they hiss in the air! How they intertwine their many coils. How 
horrible are their deadly fangs, the gaping jaws, their forked 
tongues! Ah, but the cross of Jesus, like the rod of Amram’s 
son, destroys them all! Faith in Christ makes short work of all 
our sins, for it is written, “The blood of Jesus Christ His Son 
cleanses us from all sin.” Then the devil stirs up another 
generation of vipers, and shows us our inbred corruptions, our 
neglect of duty, our slackness in prayer, our unbelief, our 
backslidings, and our wanderings of heart; and sometimes, you 
and I get so tormented by these reptiles that we grow alarmed, 
and are half inclined to flee. Do not run, brother, but throw 
down Aaron’s rod, and it will swallow up all these serpents, 
even though they were poisonous as the cobra, fierce as the 
ratdesnake, or huge as the python! You shall overcome through 
the blood of the Lamb! “Jesus is able to save to the uttermost 
them who come unto God by Him.” The batde is the Lord’s, 
and He will deliver them into your hands. The old enemy will 
throw down another host of serpents in the form of worldly 
trials, diabolical suggestions, temptations to blasphemy, ill 
thoughts of God, hard thoughts of His providence, rash 
thoughts of His promises, and such like till you will be almost 
distracted. You will wonder how you can meet such a host as 
this! Remember to stand fast and throw down Aaron’s rod — 
your simple trust and faith in Jesus Christ — and it must, and 
shall, swallow up all these rods. There is not one doubt which 
the craft of hell can insinuate — there is not one difficulty which 
the infernal wisdom of Diabolus can suggest — but simple faith 
in Christ can disarm, tread under foot, and utterly destroy! 

On a certain railroad there is a viaduct, the arches are of 
considerable height, wooden centers, of course, were used for 
the building of these arches, and they remain there till this day 


686 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


because there is some suspicion that if the wooden centers were 
knocked out, the brick arches might not be strong enough and 
might come tumbling down. Now, there are some professors 
whose faith is of that kind — it is supported by wooden centers 
of human persuasion, reasoning, or excitement — which they 
cannot afford to lose. But the Christian can say that, if by 
providence all the earthly props of his confidence should fail; 
if feelings, graces, and excitements were all gone — still the cross, 
alone, is an all-sufficient dependence — and faith could bear the 
most terrible strain which earth or hell could put upon it! I 
would to God we were more and more possessed of that faith 
which leans on God, and God, alone; for remember, the faith 
which is supported by anything except the word and promise 
of God is no faith at all! It is a bastard faith which has the cross 
for a buttress, but finds its foundation elsewhere; the cross 
must be the foundation, cornerstone, and buttress, too. None 
but Jesus! None but Jesus! We need to have a faith which can 
endure every form of trial, and as long as life lasts. One day last 
week, when I was preaching, it began to rain; a gentleman asked 
why the largest chapel in the neighborhood could not be used 
for the occasion. The reply was, “Why, the galleries are not safe.” 
I thought, “What was the good of galleries into which they were 
afraid to let the people?” Pull them down and get new ones! So 
there are some people who have a faith like that good-for- 
nothing gallery; it is not safe; it will not sustain a crowd of 
afflictions and temptations, difficulties, and troubles; it would 
all come down with a crash in the day of trial, and great would 
be the fall of it. Brothers and sisters, if you have such a faith as 
I have described, pray God to take it away! It is worthless and 
dangerous; for remember, in the hour of death, if it cannot 
stand the tramp of the eternal feet, it will give way — and your 
everlasting ruin will be the result! Have a faith which is built 
upon God, which will bear whatever comes. But mind you, mix 


687 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


not with it wood, hay, and stubble of your own gathering! Let 
Aaron’s rod swallow up all other rods. Let your faith in Christ 
overturn every refuge of lies! 

3. The same fact is very manifest after faith in all who truly 
love the Savior. It will be found, I am sure, every true lover of 
Jesus has an all-consuming love — coals of junipers — which 
have a most vehement flame. They, who love Christ aright, love 
no one in comparison with Him. The husband is dear; the 
father is cherished; the children are precious; but after all, Jesus 
Christ is better than all kin. We can look upon all and say, “Yes, 
it were a bitter pang to lose you, but we would sooner lose you 
all 1 0 times over than once lose our Savior; for, oh, if we lose 
Him, we have lost all, even if all else remained. But if all is gone 
and we still have our Savior, we have all in Him.” The Christian, 
as he loves nothing in comparison, so he loves nothing in 
contradiction to Christ. Whatever comes between him and his 
Savior, the true lover of Jesus abhors and rejects in a moment! 
He holds no deliberation or debate about the matter. He counts 
that vile, which, precious in itself, becomes evil through 
interposing between him and his Lord — 

“The dearest idol I have known, 

Whatever that idol may be” — 

though it is a golden idol — though it is myself — whatever 
that idol is — 

“Help me to tear it from its throne, 

And worship only Thee!” 

The Christian’s love to Christ is of such a kind that he 
would forego honor and think it honor to be dishonored for 
Christ. Persecution’s flame cannot, by any means, consume 


688 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


bands of union which unite his soul and his Lord. Through fire 
and through water this love can march; for “many waters 
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it.” That is 
not true love to Jesus which governs only one part of the man 
out of twenty. It must be all the passions bound into one. This 
is the reason why our aposde does not say, “Set your affections 
on things above,” but “Set your affection on things above.” Tie 
up the affections in one bundle. There is not to be a host of 
them; they are to be made into one. Bind them into a bundle 
of camphor, and then offer them to your Best Beloved. Oh, if 
I pretend to love Christ, and have other lovers, too — He cares 
not for such a heart as mine — it must be an undivided heart! 
“Their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty,” said 
Hosea. “Unite my heart to fear Your name,” cried the Psalmist, 
and let each of us pray so, too. “My beloved is mine and I am 
His.” Let that be without any sort of reserve. Let the giving up 
of ourselves to Christ and the taking of Christ to ourselves be 
done heartily and earnesdy, with all the powers of the soul! 

This love to Christ reminds me of the fire which fell of old 
upon Elijah’s sacrifice — there stood the altar made of 12 rough 
stones; on it lay the bullock and the wood — and over all the 
prophet had poured water, until it saturated the bullock, and 
stood in the trenches. But when the fire came down from 
heaven, it devoured not only the wood, and the sacrifice, but 
the very stones of the altar — and licked up the water from the 
trenches! So when this heavenly fire of love comes down upon 
our hearts in very deed and truth, it not only burns the sacrifice 
and the wood — our own true intentions and our renewed 
heart — but the stones, the very flesh that seemed as dull and 
cold as a stone! Yes, and those old corruptions which seemed 
to quench the fire of divine grace like water — this love licks the 
whole up, and the whole man goes up to heaven — a living 
sacrifice unto God. “My heart and my flesh” said the Psalmist, 


689 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“cry out for the living God.” I used to wonder however he 
made his flesh to do it, for the flesh lusts against the Spirit; but 
there are times when Aaron’s rod does swallow up all other 
rods, and even the heart and the flesh cry out for the living God! 
Our love to Jesus should be like the love of David to Jonathan, 
and of Jonathan to David. As Jonathan was ready to take off 
both his sword, and his bow, and his belt, and give them to 
David, so should we make no reserve — our selfishness being 
swallowed up, giving to Jesus all that we are, and all that we 
have evermore. 

I have heard of one good man who carried out to the letter 
this love to Christ. He was rich. He prospered much in business. 
A very sincere friend who might take great liberties called upon 
him and said, “My dear brother, you are so prosperous that I 
am afraid lest your heart should depart from God.” The other 
replied, “No, my brother, I thank you for the warning, but 1 am 
not in that danger, for I enjoy God in everything.” Years went 
on — riches took to themselves wings and fled away. The rich 
man was brought to the depths of poverty; he even knew what 
it was to need bread. The same friend came to see him, and he 
said, “My dear brother, you remember what I said to you in 
your prosperity? Now, I am afraid, lest in your adversity, you 
should grow unbelieving, and so dishonor your Lord.” But the 
other said, “Dear brother, I thank you for your warning as I 
said before, but I am not in danger, for before I enjoyed God 
in everything, and now I enjoy everything in God.” Oh, this is 
a sweet way of living, when our love to Christ is such that we 
find Christ in everything! We see the marks of His pierced 
hands on our daily bread, and see the blood mark upon the 
garments which we wear. It is good, too, when suffering and 
needing times shall come, to find we are rich because we have 
Christ and can sing — 


690 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


“You, at all times, will I bless; 

Having You, I all possess; 

How can I bereaved be, 

Since I cannot part with Thee?” 

4 . Brethren, you will notice this in the man who makes his 
delight in the Lord Jesus. He who makes his delight in Christ 
after a true sort will discover that this delight swallows up all 
other delights. There is none equal to this. The Christian enjoys 
himself as others do. He is not denied the sweets of this life any 
more than another man. But to him, all these things are brown 
bread. He has eaten manna from heaven! His mouth has tasted 
angels’ food, and he feels that the choicest mirth and delight 
his soul can know in all the bounties of God’s rich providences 
are mere ashes compared with what he finds in Christ! His 
delight in Christ is of such a kind that nothing can stop it. In 
disease, he still rejoices in his God, who makes his bed in his 
sickness. When he comes to die, that last of foes cannot 
interrupt the music of his soul. “My soul shall make her boast 
in the Lord,” he has said, and he carries out his vow. He has 
little to delight in besides; but he has more delights than those 
who have the entire world. Though he were rich as Solomon, 
and had singing men, and singing women, and gardens, and 
houses, and chariots, and all manner of delights, he would not 
be so contented as he is with Christ, and with his Christ, alone! 
I speak experientially — I who am but a babe in Christ, even / 
know that there is such joy to be found in Jesus, such rapture, 
such ecstasy — what shall I say? — such heaven to be found in 
His dear name, and in communion with Him, that if I could 
have but five minutes of my Lord’s company, I would sooner 
have it than a whole year of the society of princes rolling in 
wealth and exalted in fame! One glance of His eyes outshines 
the sun. The beauties of His face are fairer than all flowers. 


691 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


There is no such fragrance as in the breath of His mouth. “Let 
Him kiss me with the kisses of His mouth: for Your love is 
better than wine.” 

5. Yet more is it so in a man who is devoted to God’s 
service. The service of God swallows up everything else when 
the man is truly God’s servant. When a man gets fully possessed 
with an enthusiastic love for Jesus, and there is no other love 
worth a moment’s care, difficulties to him become only things 
to be surmounted, dangers become honors, sacrifices pleasures, 
sufferings delights, weariness rest. Life he looks upon but as a 
loan, and gives it back to Jesus Christ with interest. Look in the 
olden times, how the martyrs despised death. Aaron’s rod 
swallowed up the terrors of fire, and stake, and rack, and 
dungeon. Poverty, nakedness, peril, sword — the love of Christ 
made short work of these. In later days, in the Reformer’s times, 
to meet the score of the multitude, and the wrath of princes, 
was of an everyday thing. They laughed at all sufferings for the 
love of Jesus! Today, some of our missionary brothers and 
sisters prove the same fact. Williams staining Eromanga with 
his blood; Knibb spending a weary life in the midst of his 
swarthy brothers and sisters; Moffat, at this hour, cut off from 
contact with those whom he holds dear, pressing on in the 
work of saving the Bechuana and the Bushman — these men 
and men like them of whom the world is not worthy, prove 
that the love of Jesus will swallow up everything else! I hope 
there are some in this church in whom the service of Christ has 
become the main objective of their lives. If you stand up and 
preach in the streets, and you are mocked at, Aaron’s rod will 
swallow up all the vulgarity of scoffers! You can bear all that, 
and rejoice in it! If you go home and find persecutors there, 
you can patiendy endure their cruel mockery — Aaron’s rod will 
swallow up that rod very speedily! Perhaps you have to lose 
customers by closing your shop on Sunday; perhaps friends 


692 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


forsake you because of your godly walk; perhaps adversaries 
gather round you, and say spiteful things of you because Jesus 
is yours. Aaron’s rod will swallow up those rods! I would to 
God there were more Christians, however, in whom all their 
business cares, and their worldly pursuits were subjugated and 
subservient to their devotion to their Master. For he is not a 
Christian of any standing who lives for anything but to extend 
the name of Christ, and to spread His kingdom among the sons 
of men! 

Brothers and sisters, we are waiting for the time in which 
my text shall have a more splendid significance than I can give 
it just now. In every neighborhood, wherever Christ’s truth is 
preached, like Aaron’s rod, it swallows up all the serpents of 
sin. Go to the dark alleys in London, take Jesus Christ there, 
and Aaron’s rod shall swallow up the rods of ignorance, vice, 
and ungodliness! Go to popish countries — spread the Bible — 
let the name of Jesus Christ be proclaimed, and there is no lie 
of the Pope which the cross cannot overcome! Go to the 
heathen land, where Juggernaut sits in bloody contentment on 
his throne, or to the islands of the South Seas, or to Africa’s 
wondrous plains; wherever you go, cast down Aaron’s rod, and 
whatever the form of superstition or error, it shall swallow all 
up! Wait yet a little while, when from eastern coast to western, 
one song shall be heard, the Hallelujah to the Lord — when 
Jesus’ name shall be exalted, and every knee shall bow, and 
every tongue shall confess that He is Lord! Then, admiring 
angels looking from the battlements of heaven, or flying down 
and mingling with the sons of earth, shall rejoice to see that 
Jannes and Jambres, who withstood Moses, were not more totally 
defeated than the foes of Christ shall be when Aaron’s rod shall 
swallow up their rods, and the chorus shall be heard, 
“Hallelujah, Hallelujah, the Lord God omnipotent reigns!” 


693 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


II. We now draw an inference. 

If it is so, that wherever true religion — the finger of God — 
comes into a man, it becomes a consuming passion till the zeal 
of God’s house eats the man up — then, there are many persons 
who profess religion who cannot have found the right thing! I 
will picture you one or two of them. There are some who sit 
and listen to the gospel, and who somewhat delight in its 
Doctrines. They feel an attachment to the truth, and find some 
degree of comfort in it. But the one thing they think of is how 
they shall scrape together money — how they shall, by some 
means or other, fill their bank account! As for God’s house, 
though it has many claims, it is looked upon as a nuisance when 
it once entrenches upon their pocket. They give — -well, what 
per cent do they give of their incomes? So small is the fraction 
that we will not waste our time in calculating it. I dare say they 
give as much as their religion is worth. We have heard of one 
who said that his religion did not cost him above a quarter of a 
dollar a year; and somebody said he thought it was very dear at 
that price. I dare say most people are pretty good judges of 
what their religion is worth and their payment for its support 
may be taken as a fair estimate. Those who are mean, miserly 
and miserable in the cause of Christ — whose only expenditure 
is upon self — and whose main objective is gain, what can we 
say of them? Why, that they look upon religion as some great 
farmers do upon their little off-hand farms. They think it is well 
to have a little religion; they can turn to it for amusement 
sometimes, just to ease them a litde of their cares; besides, it 
may be very well, after having had all in this world, to try to get 
something in the next. They are not honest people; serving the 
devil all their lives, the devil has a sort of deferred interest in 
them, and will no doubt see to his claims; but, instead of doing 
justice, they want to cheat him at the last. No doubt, in the end, 
they will have their due. There are many of these in our 


694 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


churches with whom we can find no fault in other respects. 
They are moral and decent in all ways; they can pray very nicely 
in prayer meetings, yet, they never dream of consecrating their 
secular employments unto God! Aaron’s rod, in their case, has 
never swallowed up their rods. 

I heard of a minister, who, having needed to have a chapel 
built, told the collector to call upon a certain person. The 
collector said, “Oh, he will not give anything; he never gives 
anything.” “Well,” said the minister, “if he gives as he prays, I 
should think he would give all he has!” So the collector called. 
“Well,” the gentleman replied, “really, he had so many calls.” 
You know all the fibs which are customary on such occasions; 
he would give nothing; so the collector said, “Sir, our minister 
said if you were to give as you pray, he thought you would give 
a large amount.” Well, that touched his conscience. “Our 
minister said, he thought when you prayed, you would give 
yourself away.” There are many who say that, who are a long 
way from meaning to carry it out practically. But give me the 
man who, with all worldly discretion, feels that it is as much his 
business to get money for God, as it is mine to preach for God! 
He sells his calicoes, his slabs of meat, his earthenware, or his 
groceries, for Christ, as truly as I come upon this platform to 
speak for Christ! He sanctifies his ordinary calling to the cause 
of Christ, and makes himself the Lord’s servant in everything, 
saying, “Here, Lord, I give myself to You. It is all that I can do.” 
I am afraid the inference I am to draw from what 1 have already 
said, is that those who love the world have a religion they had 
better get rid of. 

There are other persons who profess to be Christians, but 
who spend all the week without ever brushing against their 
religion. They expect it to call upon them as the postman does, 
at regular hours; it may wake them up on Sunday morning, but 
it must mind it does not intrude upon the Monday! What are 


695 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the books they read? Those yellow volumes of one shilling or 
two shilling trash which abound at the railway bookstalls? What 
is their talk about? Well, anything you like, except what it 
should be. What do they do during the week? Oh, they do 20 
things. But what do they attempt for Christ? Do for Christ, sir, ? 
With what surprise they look at you, when you ask them that 
question! What did they do all the week? Well, let us see — 
beginning with Monday and going on to Saturday — hear it all — 
and what is its sum total? As far as the Church or the world is 
concerned, these people might just as well have been in bed 
and asleep all the time — they do nothing whatever — they have 
a name to live, and practically they are dead. If a young man 
joins a rifle corps, there he is; he stands in the rank; he learns 
his practice and drill; he tries to get a prize by hitting the target. 
But when a man joins the Christian Church, where is he? I do 
not know where he is! You may find his name seven hundred 
and something in the attendance book. He is there, but what is 
he? You find him at chapel on Sunday, but where is he, and 
what is he doing for the cause of Christ during the week? The 
smallest scrap of paper would be too large to record his deeds 
of faith. He thinks he adorns his profession; but what kind of 
adornment is it, or whoever sees that adornment, I cannot tell. 
I believe that the man who does not make his religion his first 
and last thought, who does not subject all his actions, his eating 
and drinking, too, to the cause of Christ, has not the work of 
God in his soul! “Whether therefore you eat, or drink, or 
whatever you do, do all to the glory of God.” The man who 
has not consecrated the lap stone — who has not dedicated the 
counter to God — who has not made the desk and the pen 
holiness unto the Lord has yet to learn what the Christian 
religion is! It is not a uniform to be worn one day, and cast away 
the next; it ought to be a part of the woof and warp of your 
being; it ought to run in your blood, penetrate the marrow of 


696 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


your bones, work in the arms, gaze from the eyes, and speak 
from the tongue. O to be baptized, saturated, immersed in the 
Spirit of God and so, wherever we go, to say to men who put 
our Lord at the bottom of the scale, “For us to live is Christ”! 
Only such, I say, will ever be able to add, “For me to die is gain.” 

I hope this may come home to some of you; and if it does, 
may it produce from this day forth a more thorough love to 
Jesus — a more practical way of showing a more entire 
devotedness to that great cause which is either an awful 
imposition, or else deserves to have our whole heart, our whole 
spirit, soul and body devoted to it. 

III. Now, I will close, by trying to GIVE SOME REASONS 
WHY I PUT THE SERVICE OF GOD SO PROMINENT, AND 
THINK THAT AARON’S ROD OUGHT TO SWALLOW UP ALL 
OTHER RODS. 

What does the great gospel revelation disclose to us? Does 
it not show us an awful danger, and only one way of escape 
from it? Yonder is the place where the wrath of God burns 
without abatement, where souls suffer indescribable pangs. 
“Tophet is ordained of old; yes, for the king it is prepared; He 
has made it deep and large: the pile there is fire and much wood; 
the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle 
it.” Horrors, past imagination, are revealed to us by the words 
of Jesus when He speaks of the worm that dies not, and of the 
fire that never shall be quenched! If we could once, but for an 
instant, have an idea of the wrath to come; if but for a moment 
the scathing lightning of God could flash before our vision — 
if we could taste, but for an instant, the bitterness of that cup 
of trembling, the dregs of which the wicked earth must drink — 

I am sure we would feel that the religion which teaches us how 
to escape from it must be worthy of a man’s most solemn 
consideration, and we should give to it all the strength of our 
mind! To escape from hell — O sirs — if you do but manage this , 


697 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


though you die in an attic, you will have done well! Oh, if you 
have but escaped from the wrath to come, you will have been 
wise; though you have lived as paupers here, wiser far than he 
who has piled — like the tower of Babel — wealth on wealth, 
only to find his way to despair at last! 

Does not our religion also reveal to us the joyous reward 
of another world? It opens to us yonder pearly gates, and bids 
us gaze on angels and glorified spirits. It tells us of celestial 
glories, of immortality, the crown of life which fades not away. 
It brings to our ears the melody of heavenly harps, and bids our 
eyes look upon the splendors of the Son of God upon the 
throne. Heaven — if there is a heaven, and we, by calling 
ourselves Christians, accept it as truth — should it not, then, be 
our first and last thought, the Alpha and Omega of man’s 
existence, to seek and find it — so that we may not be shut out 
like the foolish virgins, but may enter with the wise into the 
marriage supper? By hell and by heaven, therefore, I do entreat 
you, let Aaron’s rod swallow up all other rods; and let love and 
faith in Jesus be the master passion of your soul! 

Moreover, do we not learn in our holy faith of an 
unexampled love? Where was love such as that which brought 
the Prince of Glory down to the gates of death, and made Him 
pass the portals amid shame and scoffing? Oh, matchless love 
which draws the Prince of Life down to the shades of death; 
that takes the crown from His lofty brow, removes His purple 
robe from His shoulders, loosens His glittering garment, and 
strips His fingers of their golden rings; that wraps Him in clay, 
clothes Him in rags, houses Him nowhere, gives Him no place 
to lay His head; that makes Him eat the bread of poverty and 
drink the water of affliction! Shall such a love as this have half 
our hearts? Shall it have a cold love in return? Shall Jesus sit at 
the end of the table? Shall we stow Him away in some back 
chamber of the heart? Shall we treat Him to cold meats, to dogs’ 


698 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


521 The Power of Aaron’s Rod - Ex. 

7:12 


meat? God forbid! Let us make Him King of kings within our 
hearts, as He is today King of kings in the highest heavens! If 
Christ is anything, He must be everything; if He deserves not 
to be everything, He deserves to be less than nothing. 

But, my brothers and sisters, does not the grace of God 
create in us a new and noble nature? And if new and noble, 
should it not predominate? He is accursed who lets his body 
rule his mind who lets his eating and drinking chain the 
immortal spirit! And he is equally accursed who shall let his 
mind rule his new-born spirit! No, let that nature which feeds 
on Christ, which breathes Christ, and which ascends to 
Christ — as flame ascends up to the central source of fire — the 
sun — let that nature always have its full liberty. Let it be ruling 
in us! Though the law in our members strives against it, yet let 
it rule and reign — like the rod of Aaron — let it swallow up all 
other rods. And since, dear brothers and sisters, since God has 
been pleased to ennoble us by giving us the high dignity of 
being His children, shall we make our being a son of man a 
greater thing than being a son of God? Shall men, as they look 
at me, say of me first, “He is a tradesman”? O let me live so 
that the first thing they may say shall be — “He is a Christian!” 

I heard of one, speaking of a certain earnest man’s religion, 
as riding his horse. I knew that the person who so spoke of him 
knew nothing about it, for this is a steed which you may ride all 
day and all night long. It is a very Pegasus which will bear you 
up to heaven and carry you aloft up to the starry spheres. Never 
dismount, Christian — having been once set upon Christ’s own 
beast — continue to ride till He brings you safely home. 
Whatever others may be with their religion, let yours be of a 
sort which you cannot lay aside; you must hold it, you must speak 
about it! 

The Brahmins and the Hindus practice caste. A Hindu one 
day asked our missionaries whether they had caste in England. 


699 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


The missionary replied, “No, all men might eat and drink 
together.” The Brahmin said this was very disorderly and even 
immoral. But the missionary said, “Well, but upon your great 
feast day — for instance, the great feast of Juggernaut — the 
Sudra eats with the Brahmin.” “Oh,” he said, “that is because 
we are in the presence of our god.” “So,” said the missionary, 
“that is the reason why we have no caste in England, because 
we are always in the presence of our God.” I would that we 
thought of this; and being always in the presence of our God, 
let us live every day as the idolater does some days; as the 
Romanist does now and then. Talk of holy days! Why, every 
day ought to be to you a holy day! Speak of keeping the Sunday 
holy! Every day should be kept holy! Only the Sunday is a day 
of rest unto us more than the others. Write upon the bells of 
the horses, “HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD,” and let the 
pots in your own house be like the bowls before the altar. 

I shall not say any more upon this subject. Only pray that 
the Lord may give to this Church a larger number of 
consecrated men and women — and ask of you, for I make a 
point of it — to remember that this must always be a labor of 
love if it is to be acceptable! No man ever does anything for the 
Lord acceptably which he would rather not do — no man ever 
gives to the Lord acceptably that which he would rather 
withhold. The service of Christ is perfect freedom — to serve 
Him day and night is to enjoy perpetual liberty! Only try it, dear 
brothers and sisters! You who are low in divine grace, and weak 
in your faith, doubting and unbelieving, do more for Christ! 
Make your consecration more perfect; and your light shall 
come forth as brightness, and the glory of your soul as a lamp 
that burns! 

May the Lord now add His blessing. Amen. 


700 



522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, August 2 nd, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come here and eat of 
the bread and dip your morsel in the vinegar. So she sat beside 
the reapers, and he passed her parched corn, and she did eat 
and was satisfied, and left.” - Ruth 2:14 

IF WE LIVED in the country, it would not be necessary for 
me to remind you that the time of harvest has again happily 
come upon us. I saw, one day last week, a fine sample of the 
new wheat, part of a considerable quantity which had just been 
sold; and in many places I have observed the fields yielding 
their sheaves to the reapers’ sickle. Let us loudly lift our praises 
to God for the abundance which loads the land. An unusually 
heavy crop has been given in many quarters, and scarcely 
anywhere is there any deficiency. While there is so much of 
distress abroad — while the great factories of our country are 
standing still — we should be grateful that God is pleased to 
alleviate the sufferings of the poor by an unusually bountiful 
harvest! And we must not forget to pray that during the next 
few weeks the Lord would be pleased to give suitable weather 
so that the corn may be safely gathered into the garner; that 
there may be abundance of bread, and no complaining in our 
streets. I always feel it necessary, just at this season, to give 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


these hints, because God’s natural remembrances cannot reach 
us — we hear not the lark teaching us how to praise, nor do the 
green fields of grass, and the yellow ears of corn preach to us 
of the Lord’s bounty! Litde is there to be learned from these 
long corridors of dreary cells which we call streets and houses. 
I see dull brown or dirty-white bricks everywhere — enough to 
make one earthly — however much we may pant for heavenly 
things. We see neither the green blade nor the full corn in the 
ear, and we are so apt to forget that we all depend upon the 
labor of the field. Let us unite with the peasant and his 
employer, in blessing and praising the God of providence, who 
first covered the fields with grass for the catde, and now with 
herbs for the food of man! 

This morning we are going to the corn fields, as we did last 
year, not however, so much to glean, as to rest with the reapers 
and the gleaners, when under some wide-spreading oak they sit 
down to take refreshment. We hope there will be found some 
timid gleaners here who will accept our invitation to come and 
eat with us, and who will find confidence enough to dip their 
morsel in the vinegar. May they have courage to feast to the full 
on their own account, and then to carry home a portion to their 
needy friends at home! 

I. Our first point this morning is this — THAT GOD’S 
REAPERS HAVE THEIR MEALTIMES. 

Those who work for God will find Him a good Master. He 
cares for oxen, and has commanded His Israel, “You shall not 
muzzle the ox when he treads out the corn.” Much more does 
He care for His servants who serve Him. “He has given meat 
unto them who fear Him: He will ever be mindful of His 
covenant.” The reapers in Jesus’ fields shall not only receive a 
blessed reward at the last, but they shall have plenteous 
comforts by the way. He is pleased to pay His servants twice — 
first in the labor itself — and a second time in the labor’s sweet 


702 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


results! He gives them such joy and consolation in the service 
of their Master, that it is sweet work, and they cry, “We delight 
to do Your will, O Lord.” As heaven is made up of serving God 
day and night, so to true workers, their constandy serving God 
on earth brings with it a rich foretaste of heaven! 

God has ordained certain mealtimes for His reapers; and 
He has appointed that one of these shall be when they come together 
to listen to the Word preached. If God is with our ministers, they 
act as the disciples did of old, for they received the barley loaves 
and fishes from Christ, and handed them to the people as He 
multiplied them. We, of ourselves, cannot feed one soul, much 
less thousands; but when the Lord is with us, we can keep as 
good a table as Solomon himself, with all his fine flour, fat, 
roebucks, and small deer. When the Lord blesses the provisions 
of His house, no matter how many thousands there may be, all 
His poor shall be filled with bread! I hope, beloved, you know 
what it is to sit under the shadow of the Word with great delight, 
and find the fruit sweet to your taste. Where the doctrines of 
grace are boldly and plainly delivered to you in connection with 
the other truths of revelation; where Jesus Christ upon His 
cross is always lifted up; where the work of the Spirit is not 
forgotten; where the glorious purpose of the Father is never 
despised — there is sure to be food for the children of God! We 
have learned not to feed upon oratorical flourishes or 
philosophical fineries; we leave these fine things, these twelfth- 
cake ornaments, to be eaten by those litde children who can 
find delight in such unhealthy dainties — we prefer to hear the 
truth of God, even when roughly spoken — to the fine 
garnishing of eloquence without the truth of God. We care little 
about how the table is served, or of what ware the dishes are 
made, as long as the covenant bread and water, and the 
promised oil and wine are given to us. Certain grumblers 
among the Lord’s reapers do not feed under the preached 


703 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Word because they do not intend to feed; they come to the 
house of bread on purpose to find fault, and therefore they go 
away empty. My verdict is, “It serves them right.” Little care I 
to please such hearers. I would as soon feed bears and jackals, 
as attempt to supply the needs of grumbling professors. How 
much mischief is done by observations made upon the 
preacher! How often do we censure where our God approves. 
We have heard of a high doctrinal deacon who said to a young 
minister who was supplying the pulpit on probation, “I would 
have enjoyed your sermon very much, sir, if it had not been for 
that last appeal to the sinner. I do not think that dead sinners 
should be exhorted to believe in Jesus.” When that deacon 
reached home, he found his own daughter in tears. She became 
converted to God, and united with the church of which that 
young man ultimately became the minister. How was she 
converted, do you think? By that address at the close of the 
sermon, which her father did not like! Take heed of railing at 
that by which the Holy Spirit saves souls! There may be much 
in the sermon which may not suit you, or me, but then we are 
not the only persons to be considered. There is a wide variety 
of characters and all our hearers must have “their portion of 
meat in due season.” Is it not selfishness, very unlike the spirit 
of a Christian, which would make me find fault with the 
provisions, because I cannot eat them all? There should be the 
unadulterated milk for the babe in grace, as well as the strong 
substantial meat for the full grown believer, beloved, I know 
that murmurers may call our manna, “Light bread,” yet our 
gracious God does, “in this mountain make unto all people a 
feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full 
of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.” 

Often, too, our gracious Lord appoints us mealtimes in our 
private readings and meditations. Here it is that His “paths drop 
fatness.” Nothing can be more fattening to the soul of the 


704 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


believer than feeding upon the Word and digesting it by 
frequent meditations! No wonder that some grow so little, 
when they meditate so little! Cattle must chew the cud; it is not 
what they crop with their teeth, but that which is masticated, 
and afterwards digested by rumination that nourishes them. We 
must take the truth of God, and roll it over and over again in 
the inward parts of our spirit, and so we shall extract divine 
nourishment from it. Have you not, my brothers and sisters, 
frequently found a Benjamin’s mess prepared for you in a 
choice promise of your God? Is not meditation the land of 
Goshen to you? If men once said, “There is corn in Egypt,” 
may they not always say that the finest of the grain is to be 
found in secret prayer? Private devotion is a land which flows 
with milk and honey — a paradise yielding all manner of fruits — 
a banqueting house of choice wines! Ahasuerus might make a 
great feast, but all his 120 provinces could not furnish such 
dainties as the closet offers to the spiritual mind! Where can we 
feed and lie down in green pastures in so sweet a sense as we 
do in our musings on the Word? Meditation distils the 
quintessence from the Scriptures, and gladdens our mouth with 
a sweetness which exceeds the virgin honey dropping from the 
honeycomb! Your retired seasons and occasions of prayer, 
should be to you regal entertainments, or at least refreshing 
seasons, in which, like the reapers at noonday, you sit with Boaz 
and eat of your Master’s generous provisions. “The Shepherd of 
Salisbury Plain ” — you who have read that excellent book will 
remember — was known to say, that “when he was lonely and 
when his wallet was empty, his Bible was to him meat, and 
drink, and company, too.” He is not the only man who has 
found fullness in the Word when there is need without. During 
the battle of Waterloo, a godly soldier, mortally wounded, was 
carried by his comrade into the rear, and being placed with his 
back propped up against a tree, he asked his friend to open his 


705 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


knapsack, and take out the Bible which he had carried in it. 
“Read to me,” he said, “one verse, before I close my eyes in 
death.” His comrade read him that verse — “Peace I leave with 
you, My peace I give unto you: not as the world gives, give I 
unto you.” And there, fresh from the whisding of the bullets, 
the roll of the drum, and the tempest of human conflict, that 
believing spirit enjoyed such holy calm that before he fell asleep 
in the arms of Jesus, he said, “Yes, I have a peace with God 
which passes all understanding, which keeps my heart and mind 
through Jesus Christ.” Saints most surely have their mealtimes 
when they are alone in meditation! 

Let us not forget, that there is one specially ordained 
mealtime which ought to occur more often, but which, even 
monthly, is very refreshing to us. I mean the Supper of the Lord. 
There you have literally, as well as spiritually, a meal. The table 
is richly spread; it has upon it both meat and drink; there is the 
bread and the wine, and looking at what these symbolize, we 
have before us a table richer than that which kings could 
furnish! There we have the flesh and the blood of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, of which if a man eats, he shall never hunger and 
never thirst, for that bread shall be unto him everlasting life. 
Oh, the sweet seasons we have known at the Lord’s Supper! If 
some of you really did understand the enjoyment of feeding 
upon Christ in that ordinance, you would chide yourselves for 
not having united with the church in fellowship! In keeping the 
Master’s commandments there is a “great reward,” and 
consequently, in neglecting them there is a great loss of reward! 
Christ is not so tied to the Sacramental table as to be always 
found of those who partake there, but still it is in the way that 
we may expect the Lord to meet with us. “If you love Me, keep 
My commandments” — it is a sentence of touching power! 
“And His commandments are not grievous,” is the confession 
of all obedient sons and daughters. Sitting at this table, our soul 


706 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


has mounted up from the emblem to the reality; we have eaten 
bread in the kingdom of God, and have leaned our head upon 
Jesus’ bosom. “He brought me to the banqueting house, and 
His banner over me was love.” On these occasions we may 
compare ourselves to poor Mephibosheth, who though lame 
and despicable in his own esteem, yet was made to sit at King 
David’s table; or we may liken ourselves to the litde ewe lamb 
in the parable which did eat of its master’s bread, and drink 
from his cup, and slept in his bosom. The prodigal, who once 
fed upon husks, sits down to eat the bread of children; we, who 
were worthy to be esteemed as dogs, are here permitted to take 
the place of adopted sons and daughters! 

Besides these regular mealtimes, there are others which 
God gives us, at seasons when perhaps we little expect them. You have 
been walking the street, and suddenly you have felt a holy 
flowing out of your soul toward God; or, in the middle of 
business your heart has been melted with love, and made to 
leap for joy even as the brooks which have been bound with 
winter’s ice leap to feel the touch of spring! You have been 
groaning, dull and earth-bound; but the sweet love of Jesus has 
embraced you when you scarcely thought of it, and your spirit, 
all free and all on fire, has rejoiced to dance before the Lord 
with tambourines and high-sounding cymbals, like Miriam of 
old! I have had times occasionally in preaching when I would 
gladly have kept on far beyond the appointed hour, for my 
happy soul was like a vessel needing vent. Seasons, too, you 
have had on your sick-beds when you would have been content 
to always be sick, if you could have your bed so well made, and 
your head so softly pillowed — 

“These are the joys He lets us know 
In fields and villages below — 

Gives us a relish of His love, 


707 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


But keeps His noble feast above.” 

Our blessed Redeemer sometimes comes to us in the 
morning, and wakes us up, with such sweet thoughts upon our 
soul; we know not how they came; and when the dew is visiting 
the flowers in the cool eventide, sometimes a few drops of 
heaven’s dew falls upon us, too. And as we have gone to our 
beds, our meditation of Him has been sweet. And in the night 
watches, when we tossed to and fro and could not sleep, He 
has been pleased to become our song in the night — 

“He is the spring of all my joys, 

The life of my delights! 

The glory of my brightest days, 

And comfort of my nights!” 

God’s reapers find it hard work to reap; but they find a 
blessed solace when they sit down and eat of their Master’s rich 
provisions; then, with renewed strength they go with sharpened 
sickles to reap again in the noontide heat! 

Let me observe, that while these mealtimes come, even 
though we know not exactly when, there are certain seasons when 
we may expect them. The Eastern reapers generally sit down under 
the shelter of a tree, or a booth, to take refreshment during the 
heat of the day. And I am certain that when trouble, affliction, 
persecution, and bereavement become the most painful to us, 
it is then that the Lord hands out to us the sweetest comforts. 
As we said last Thursday night, some promises are written in 
sympathetic ink, and can only have their meaning brought out 
by holding them before the fire of affliction. Some verses of 
Scripture must be held to the fire till they are scorched, before 
the glorious meaning will stand forth, in clear letters, before our 
eyes. We must work till the hot sun forces the sweat from our 


708 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


face; we must bear the burden and heat of the day before we 
can expect to be invited to those choice meals which the Lord 
prepares for those who are diligent in His work. When your day 
of trouble is the hottest, then the love of Jesus shall be sweetest; 
when your night of trial is the darkest, then will His candle 
shine most brighdy about you; when your head aches most 
severely — when your heart palpitates most terribly — when 
heart and flesh fail you, then He will be the strength of your 
life, and your portion forever! 

Again, these mealtimes frequendy occur before a trial. Elijah 
must be entertained beneath a juniper tree, for he is to go a 
forty days’ journey in the strength of that meat. You may 
suspect some danger near when your delights are overflowing. 
If you see a ship taking in great quantities of provision, it is 
bound for a distant port. And when God gives you 
extraordinary seasons of communion with Jesus, you may look 
for long leagues of tempestuous sea. Sweet cordials prepare us 
for stern conflicts. Times of refreshing also occur after trouble 
or arduous service. Christ was tempted by the devil, and 
afterwards angels came and ministered unto Him. Jacob wresded 
with God, and then afterwards, at Mahanaim, hosts of angels 
met him; Abraham wars with the kings, and returns from their 
slaughter; then is it that Melchizedek refreshes him with bread 
and wine. After conflict, content — after batde, banquet; when 
you have waited on your Lord, then you shall sit down, and 
your Master will gird Himself and wait upon you. Yes, let the 
worldling say what he will about the difficulty of religion, we 
do not find it so! We do confess that reaping is no child’s 
play — that toiling for Christ has its difficulties and its troubles; 
but still the bread which we eat is very sweet, and the wine which 
we drink is crushed from celestial clusters — 


709 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“I would not change my blessed estate 
For all the world calls good or great! 

And while my faith can keep her hold, 

1 envy not the sinner’s gold.” 

II. Follow me while we turn to a second point. To THESE 
MEALS THE GLEANER IS AFFECTIONATELY INVITED. That 
is to say, the poor trembling stranger who has not strength 
enough to reap — who has no right to be in the field, except the 
right of charity — the poor trembling sinner, conscious of his 
own demerit, and feeling but little hope and little joy. To the 
meals of the strong-handed, fully-assured reaper, the gleaner is 
invited. 

The gleaner is invited, in the text, to come. “At mealtime 
come here.” We have known some who felt ashamed to come 
to the house of God; but we trust you will, none of you, be kept 
away from the place of feasting by any shame on account of 
your dress, or your personal character, or your poverty — no, 
nor even on account of your physical infirmities. “At mealtime 
come here.” I have heard of a deaf woman who could never 
hear a sound, and yet she was always in the house of God, and 
when asked why, her reply was, “Because a friend found her 
the text, and then God was pleased to give her many a sweet 
thought upon the text while she sat in His house. Besides,” she 
said, “she felt that as a believer, she ought to honor God by her 
presence in His courts, and recognize her union with His people, 
and, better still, she always liked to be in the best of company, 
and as the presence of God was there, and the holy angels, and 
the saints of the Most High — whether she could hear or not — 
she would go.” There is a brother whose face I seldom miss 
from this house. He, I believe, has never in his life heard a 
sound, and cannot make an articulate utterance, yet he is a 
joyful believer, and loves the place where God’s honor dwells! 


710 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


Well, now, I think if such persons find pleasure in coming, we 
who can hear, though we feel our unworthiness — though we 
are conscious that we are not fit to come — should be desirous 
to be laid in the house of God, as the sick were at the pool of 
Bethesda, hoping that the waters may be stirred, and that we 
may step in and be healed. Trembling soul, never let the 
temptations of the devil keep you from God’s house. “At 
mealtime come here.” 

Moreover, she was bid not only to come, but to eat. Now, 
whatever there is sweet and comfortable in the Word of God, 
you who are of a broken and contrite spirit, are invited to 
partake of it. “Jesus Christ came into the world to save 
sinners ” — sinners such as you are. “In due time Christ died for 
the ungodly ” — for such ungodly ones as you feel yourselves to 
be. You are desiring, this morning, to be Christ’s. Well, you map 
be Christ’s! You are saying in your heart, “O that I could eat 
the children’s bread!” You may eat it! You say, “I have no right.” 
But He gives you the invitation! Come without any other right 
than the right of His invitation! I know you will say how 
unworthy you are — 

“Let not conscience make you linger, 

Nor of fitness fondly dream.” 

But since Christ bids you, “come,” take Him at His word; 
and if there is a promise, believe it; if there is rich consolation, 
drink it; if there is an encouraging word, accept it, and let the 
sweetness of it be yours. 

Note further, that she was not only invited to eat the bread, 
but to dip her morsel in the vinegar. We must not look upon this as 
being some sour stuff. No doubt, there are crabbed souls in the 
church, who always dip their morsel in the sourest imaginable 
vinegar, and with a grim liberality, invite others to share a litde 


711 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


comfortable misery with them; but the vinegar in my text is 
altogether another thing! This was either a compound of 
various sweets extracted from fruits, or else it was that weak 
kind of wine mingled with water which is still commonly used 
in the harvest fields of Italy, and the warmer parts of the 
world — a drink not exceedingly strong, but excellendy cooling, 
and good enough to impart a relish to the reapers’ food. It was, 
to use the only word which will give the meaning, a sauce which 
the Orientals used with their bread. As we use butter, or as they 
on other occasions used oil, so in the harvest field, believing it 
to have cooling properties, they used what is here called vinegar. 
Beloved, the Lord’s reapers have sauce with their bread; they 
have sweet consolations; they have not merely doctrines, but 
the holy unction which is the essence of doctrines; they have 
not merely the truths of God, but a hallowed and ravishing 
delight accompanies the truths! Take, for instance, the doctrine 
of election, which is like the bread; there is a sauce to dip that 
in. When I can say, “He loved me before the foundations of the 
world,” the personal application, the personal enjoyment of my 
interest in the truth of God becomes a sauce into which I dip 
my morsel! And you, poor gleaner, are invited to dip your 
morsel in it, too! I used to hear people sing that hymn of 
Toplady’s, which begins — 

“A debtor to mercy alone, 

Of covenant mercy I sing; 

Nor fear with Your righteousness on, 

My person and offerings to bring.” 

And rises to its climax — 

‘Yes, I to the end shall endure, 

As sure as the earnest is given; 


712 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


More happy, but not more secure, 

The glorified spirits in heaven.” 

And, I used to think I could never sing that hymn. It was 
the sauce, you know. 1 might manage to eat some of the plain 
bread, but I could not dip it in that sauce! It was too high 
doctrine, too sweet, too consoling. But, I thank God I have 
since ventured to dip my morsel in it, and now I hardly like my 
bread without it! I would have every trembling sinner be 
prepared to take the comfortable parts of God’s Word, even those 
called “HIGH.” I hope, brothers and sisters, you will never 
grow as some Christians do — who like all sauce, and no bread. 
There are some high-flying brothers and sisters who must have 
nothing but the vinegar; and very sour it turns upon their 
stomachs, too. I hope you will love the bread. A little of the 
vinegar, a little of the spice, and much savor; but let us keep to 
the bread as well; let us love all revealed truths of God; and if 
there is a trembling gleaner here, let me invite and persuade her 
to come here, to eat the bread, and to dip her morsel in the 
sauce! 

Now, I think I see her, and she is half prepared to come, 
for she is very hungry, and she has brought nothing with her 
this morning; but she begins to say, “I have no right to come, 
for I am not a reaper; I do nothing for Christ; I did not even 
come here this morning to honor Him; I came here, as gleaners 
go into a corn field, from a selfish motive, to pick up what I 
could for myself; and all the religion that I have lies in this — 
the hope that I may be saved; I do not glorify God; I do no 
good to other people; I am only a selfish gleaner; I am not a 
reaper.” Ah, but you are invited to come! Make no questions 
about it. Boaz bids you. Take his invitation and enter at once. 
“But,” you say, “I am such a poor gleaner; though it is all for 
myself, yet it is little I get at it; I get a few thoughts while the 


713 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sermon is being preached, but I lose them before I reach home.” 
I know you do, poor weak-handed Woman! But still, Jesus 
invites you. Come! Take the sweet promise as He presents it to 
you, and let no bashfulness of yours send you home hungry! 
“But,” you say, “I am a stranger; you do not know my sins, my 
sinfulness, and the waywardness of my heart.” But Jesus does; 
and Jesus still invites you! He knows you are but a Moabitess, 
a stranger from the commonwealth of Israel; but He bids you! 
Is not that enough? “Eat the bread, and dip your morsel in the 
vinegar.” “But,” you say, “I owe so much to Him already; it is 
so good of Him to spare my forfeited life, and so tender of Him 
to let me hear the gospel preached at all; I cannot have the 
presumption to be an intruder and sit with the reapers.” Oh, 
but He bids you! There is more presumption in your doubting 
than there could be in your believing! HE bids you! Will you 
refuse Boaz? Shall Jesus’ lips give the invitation, and will you 
say no? Come, now, come! Remember that the little which 
Ruth could eat did not make Boaz any the poorer; and all that 
you need, will make Christ none the less glorious, or full of 
grace. What? Are your necessities large? Yes? But His supplies 
are larger! Do you require great mercy? He is a great Savior! I 
tell you that His mercy is no more to be exhausted than the sea 
is to be drained; or than the sun is to be rendered dim by the 
excess of the light which it pours forth today. Come! There is 
enough for you, and Boaz will not be hurt by what you get! 

Moreover, let me tell you a secret — Jesus loves you. 
Therefore it is that He would have you feed at His table. If you 
are now a longing, trembling sinner, willing to be saved, but 
conscious that you deserve it not, Jesus loves you, sinner, and 
He will take more delight in seeing you eat than you will take in 
the eating! Let the sweet love He feels in His soul toward you 
draw you to Him. And what is more — but this is a great secret 
and must only be whispered in your ear — He intends to be married 


714 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


to you! And when you are married to Him, why, the fields will 
be yours; for, of course, if you are the spouse, you are joint- 
proprietor with Him. Is it not so? Does not the wife share with 
the husband? All those promises which are, “Yes, and Amen in 
Christ” shall be yours — no, they all are yours NOW, for, “the 
man is next of kin to you,” and before long He will spread His 
skirt over you and take you unto Himself forever, espousing 
you in faithfulness, and truth, and righteousness. Will you not 
eat of your own? “Oh, but,” says one, “how can it be? I am a 
stranger.” Yes, a stranger — but Jesus Christ loves the stranger. 
“A publican, a sinner;” but He is “the friend of publicans and 
sinners.” “An outcast;” but He “gathers together the outcasts 
of Israel.” “A stray sheep;” but the shepherd “leaves the ninety 
and nine” to seek it. “A lost piece of money;” but He “sweeps 
the house” to find you. “A prodigal son;” but He sets the bells 
a ringing when He knows that you will return. Come, Ruth! 
Come, trembling gleaner! Jesus invites you — accept the 
invitation! “At mealtime come here and eat of the bread, and 
dip your morsel in the vinegar.” 

III. Now, thirdly — and here is a very sweet point in the 
narrative. BOAZ PASSED HER THE PARCHED CORN. “She did 
come and eat.” Where did she sit? You notice, she “sat beside 
the reapers.” She did not feel that she was one of them — she 
“sat beside” them. Just as some of you do, who do not come 
down in the evening to the Lord’s Supper, but sit in the gallery. 
You are sitting “beside the reapers.” You are sitting this 
morning as if you were not one of us — had no right to be 
among the people of God — still you will sit beside us. If there 
is a good thing to be had, and you cannot get it, you will get as 
near as you can to those who do! You think there is some 
comfort even in looking on at the gracious feast. “She sat 
beside the reapers.” And while she was sitting there, what 
happened? Did she stretch forth her hand and get the food 


715 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


herself? No, it is written, “HE passed her the parched corn.” 
Ah, that is it. I give the invitation, brothers and sisters, today — 
give it earnesdy, affectionately, sincerely; but I know very well 
that while I give it, no trembling heart will accept it unless the 
King Himself comes near, and feasts His saints today. He must 
pass the parched corn; He must give you to drink of “the juice 
of the spiced wine of His pomegranate.” How does He do this? 
By His gracious Spirit; He first of all inspires jour faith. You are 
afraid to think it can be true, that such a sinner as you is 
accepted in the beloved; He breathes upon you, and your faint 
hope becomes expectation — and that expectation buds and 
blossoms into an appropriating faith, which says, “Yes, my 
beloved is mine, and His desire is toward me!” Having done this, 
the Savior does more; He sheds abroad the love of God in jour heart. 
The love of Christ is like sweet perfume in a box. Now, He 
who put the perfume in the box is the only Person who knows 
how to take the lid off. He, with His own skillful hands, takes 
the lid from the box; then it is, “shed abroad,” like “ointment 
poured forth.” You know it may be there, and yet not be shed 
abroad. As you walk in the woods there may be a hare or a 
partridge there, and yet you may never see them, but when you 
starde them, and they fly or run before you, then you perceive 
them. And there may be the love of God in your heart, not in 
exercise, but still there; and at last you may have the privilege 
of seeing it — seeing your love mount with wings to heaven, and 
your faith running without weariness! Christ must shed abroad 
that love — His Spirit must put your graces into exercise! 

But, Jesus does more than this. He passes the parched corn 
with His own hands when He gives us close communion with Him. 
Do not think that this is a dream! I tell you there is such a thing 
as talking with Christ today. As certainly as I can talk with my 
dearest friend, or find solace in the company of my beloved 
wife, so surely may I speak with Jesus, and find intense delight 


716 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


in the company of Immanuel! It is not a fiction! We do not 
worship a far-off Savior; He is a God near at hand! We do not 
adore Him as One who is gone away to heaven, and who can 
never be approached; but He is near us, in our mouth, and in 
our heart, and we do, today, walk with Him as the elect did of 
old — and commune with Him as His apostles did on earth — 
not after the flesh, it is true, but spiritual men value spiritual 
communion — better than any carnal fellowship! 

Yet, once more, let me add, the Lord Jesus is pleased to 
pass the parched corn, in the best sense, when the Spirit gives us 
the infallible witness within, that we are “bom of God. ” A man may 
know infallibly that he is a Christian. Philip de Morny, who 
lived in the time of Prince Henry of Navarre, was accustomed 
to say that the Holy Spirit had made his own salvation to him 
as clear a point as ever a problem proved to a demonstration in 
Euclid could be. You know with what mathematical precision 
the scholar of Euclid solves a problem or proves a proposition! 
And just the same, with as absolute a precision, as certainly as 
twice two are four, we may, “know that we have passed from 
death unto life.” The sun in the heavens is not clearer to the 
eyes than his salvation to an assured believer — such a man 
would as soon doubt his own existence, as suspect his interest 
in eternal life! 

Now, let the prayer be breathed by poor Ruth, who is 
trembling yonder. Lord, pass me the parched corn! “Draw me, 
we will run after You.” Lord, send Your love into my heart — 

“Come, Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove, 

With all Your quickening powers, 

Come, shed abroad a Savior’s love, 

And that shall kindle ours.” 


717 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


There is no getting at Christ, except by Christ revealing 
Himself to us! 

IV. And now, the last point. After Boaz had passed the 
parched corn, we are told that, “SHE DID EAT, AND WAS 
SATISFIED AND LEFT.” So shall it be with every Ruth. Sooner 
or later every penitent shall become a believer! There may be a 
space of deep conviction, and a period of much hesitation; but, 
by God’s grace, there shall come a season when the soul 
decides for the Lord. If I perish, I perish. I will go as I am to 
Jesus. I will not play the fool any longer with my huts and ifs, 
but since He bids me believe that He died for me, I will believe 
it, and will trust His cross for my salvation. And oh, whenever 
you shall be privileged to do this, you shall be “satisfied. ” “She 
did eat and was satisfied.” Your head shall be satisfied with the 
precious truth which Christ reveals; your heart shall be content 
with Jesus, as the altogether lovely object of affection; your hope 
shall be satisfied, for whom have you in heaven but Christ? 
Your desires shall be satiated, for what can even the hunger of 
your desire wish for more than “to know Christ, and to be 
found in Him”? You shall find Jesus fills your conscience till it is 
at perfect peace; He shall fill your judgment till you know the 
certainty of His teachings; He shall fill your memory with 
recollections of what He did, and fill your imagination with the 
prospects of what He is yet to do! You shall be “satisfied.” Still, 
still it shall be true, that you shall leave something. “She was 
satisfied and she left.” Some of us have had deep draughts; we 
have thought that we could take in all of Christ; but when we 
have done our best, we have had to leave a vast remainder. We 
have sat down with a ravenous appetite at the table of the 
Lord’s love and said, “Now, nothing but the infinite can ever 
satisfy me; I am such a great sinner that I must have infinite 
merit to wash my sin away.” But we have had our sin removed, 
and found that there was merit to spare! We have had our 


718 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


522 Mealtime in the Corn Fields - 
Ruth 2:14 


hunger relieved, and found that there was a redundancy for 
others who were in a similar case! There are certain sweet things 
in the Word of God which you and I have not yet enjoyed, and 
which we cannot yet enjoy; we are obliged to leave them for a 
while. “I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot 
hear them now.” There is a knowledge to which we have not 
attained — a place of fellowship yet nearer to Christ! There are 
heights of communion which as yet our feet have not 
climbed — virgin snows upon the mountain untrod by the foot 
of man. There is yet a beyond, and there will be a forever! 

But, please notice — it is not in the text, but it is recorded a 
verse or two further on, what she did with her leavings. It is a 
very bad habit, I believe, at feasts, to carry anything home with 
you. But she did, for that which was left, she took home; and 
when she reached Naomi, and showed her the quantity of 
wheat in her apron, after she had asked, “Where have you 
gleaned today?” and had received the answer, she gave to 
Naomi a portion of that which she had reserved after she was 
satisfied. So it shall be even with you, poor tremblers, who 
think you have no right to any for yourselves! You shall be able 
to eat and be quite satisfied — and what is more — you shall have 
a morsel to carry to others in a like condition. I am always 
pleased to find the young believer beginning to pocket 
something for other people. When you hear a sermon, you 
think, “Well, poor mother cannot get out today, I will tell her 
something about it; there now, that point will just suit her; 1 
will take that, even if I forget everything else; I will tell her that 
by the bedside! There is my brother William, who will not come 
with me to chapel; I wish he would; but, now, there was 
something which struck me in the sermon, and when I get close 
to him, I will tell him that. Then I will ask, ‘Will you not come 
this evening?’ I will tell him those portions which interested me; 
perhaps they will interest him.” There are your children in the 


719 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Sunday school class. You say, “That illustration will do for 
them.” I think sometimes, when I see you putting down my 
metaphors on litde scraps of paper, that you may remember to 
tell somebody else; I would gladly give more where they are so 
well used! I would let fall an extra handful on purpose, that 
there may be enough for you and for your friends! There is an 
abominable spirit of self among some professors, prompting 
them to eat their morsels alone. They get the honey; it is a forest 
full of honey, like Jonathan’s woods; and yet they are afraid — 
afraid lest they should eat it all up — so they try to maintain a 
monopoly. I know some congregations which seem, to me, to 
be sort of spiritual protectionists; they are afraid heaven will be 
too full, that there will not be room enough for them! When an 
invitation is given to a sinner, they do not like it — it is too open, 
too general — and when there is a melting heart, and a tearful 
eye for the conversion of other people, they feel quite out of 
their element; they never know what it is to take home that 
which is left, and give to others. Cultivate an unselfish spirit! 
Seek to love as you have been loved! Remember that “the law 
and the prophets” lie in this — to “love the Lord your God with 
all your heart, and your neighbor as yourself.” How can you 
love your neighbor as yourself if you do not love his soul? You 
have loved your own soul — through divine grace you have been 
led to lay hold on Jesus. Love your neighbor’s soul, and never 
be satisfied till you see him in the enjoyment of those things 
which are the charm of your life, and the joy of your spirit! 

I do not know how to give my invitation in a more 
comfortable way; but as we are sitting down to feed at His table 
in the evening of this day, I pray the Master to pass a large 
handful of parched corn to some trembling sinner, and enable 
him to eat and be satisfied! 


720 



523 From Death to Life - 1 Sam. 2:6 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, July 26th, 1863, 
by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“The Lord kills and makes alive; He brings down to the 
grave, and brings up.” - I Samuel 2:6 

THIS SENTENCE occurs in the very remarkable song of 
Hannah, who was equally illustrious as a poetess, and prevalent 
as a suppliant. She sings an experiential song, for her deep 
sorrow had been a living death to her, and her joyful exaltation 
was a triumphant resurrection. Her hymn is a golden bracelet 
set with the jewels of sparkling contrasts; and this verse, with 
its vivid opposition between life and death, restoration and the 
grave, bears in it diamonds of the finest quality! Like the ewes 
in the Canticles, this verse bears twins. There is the double 
blessing of Othniel’s wife in this text — it has both the upper 
and the nether springs as its inheritance. It has its own plain 
and natural meaning which lies upon its surface like dust of gold; 
it has, moreover a spiritual meaning, which needs to be dug for 
like silver in the mine. 

I. In reference to ITS FIRST AND MOST MANIFEST 
MEANING, “The Lord brings down to the grave and brings up.” 
Here the agency of God, in life and death, is clearly revealed to 
us. How well it is to discern the Lord’s hand in everything. Our 
Puritan forefathers were accustomed to speak of God as 
compelling the bottles of heaven, or sending a gracious rain; as 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sending forth the wind, or hiding it in His storehouse; but we 
have grown so wise that we begin to understand how the rain 
is formed, and we talk about the winds as if we had been into 
the chambers from which they come howling forth, and had 
discovered all the secrets of the universe! We ascribe events to 
second causes, to the laws of nature, and I know not what. I 
think it were far better, if we would go back to the good old 
way of talking and speaking of the Lord as being in everything. 
While we do not deny the laws of nature, nor decry the 
discoveries of science, we will suffer none of these to be hung 
up as a veil before our present God! O foolish wisdom, which 
widens the distance between me and my heavenly Father! O 
sweet simplicity of love, which sees the God of love in every 
place, at every hour! I need no telescope to see my God — 
behold, O sons of men, He is here — and my heart joyfully 
perceives Him! 

God is in life and death, in sickness and in health. This, 
surely, will soften the pains of sickness, and gild the joys of 
recovery! If you look upon sickness and restoration as merely 
the products of natural causes, you will not feel humbled when 
you are stretched upon the bed, nor grateful when you walk out 
again, and breathe the fresh air; but, if you see God’s finger in 
touching your bones and your flesh, you will be humbled under 
the chastisement; and, if you discern His hand in restoring your 
youth, like the eagle’s, you will be able, like David, to say, “Bless 
the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits.” Let others 
forget God, if they will, that is the attribute of the wicked; but 
let His saints remember Him, and let them speak well of His 
name, and have it in their mouths all day long — 

“It is God who lifts our comforts high, 

Or sinks them in the grave!” 


722 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


This most precious fact should produce several gracious 
results in our hearts. 

First of all, it should awaken gratitude. What a mercy it is that 
we are here this evening! You would think it more a mercy, 
perhaps, if certain of yonder seats had been left unoccupied 
because those who sat there but a few days ago have gone the 
way of all flesh. If those pews could tell you where their former 
owners now are, you would praise the preserving hand of God 
far more heartily. Why, I looked just now with solemn gaze 
upon a spot where was custom to sit one who has heard me 
preach for years, but God has lately called him to His bar; and 
I turn my head and look upon another spot — just there — 
where used to sit another friend, but this last week, while 
journeying in Wales for his health, he ran down a slope on one 
of the beautiful mountains a little more rapidly than he should 
have done, the fence at the bottom gave way, and he was 
precipitated into an eternal world! 

Even in our recreations, what dangers dog our heels! You 
sometimes smile at old-fashioned people who thank God for 
“journeying mercies” and “journeying protections,” but, 
indeed, such petitions are as fitting as ever they were! I always 
like to offer to my God thanksgivings for mercies known and 
mercies unknown. Christ had unknown sufferings, and we enjoy, 
as the result, unknown mercies! When we know that — 

“Dangers stand thick through all the ground, 

To push us to the tomb, 

And fierce diseases wait around, 

To hurry mortals home,” 

our preservation from these dangers should make us bless 
our God, “who redeems our life from destruction.” glory be to 
that solitary arm which shields us from a vast array of foes! 


723 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


While it causes gratitude, dear friends, it should compel 
consideration, and lead us to pray that sickness and health may be 
sanctified to us. “The Lord brings down to the grave,” and it is 
His rule never to do anything without a purpose! “He does not 
afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men for nothing.” 
There is always a “needs be,” if “we are in heaviness through 
manifold temptations.” Is it not the part of wisdom to say, with 
Job, “Show me why You contend with me?” Should not the 
sick chamber be a place where we should seek God? Indeed, 
where is there a place in which we should not seek Him? 
Brothers and sisters, we ought to ask the sanctified use of 
everything! Are we not to ask a blessing at the table upon our 
every meal? What is there, then, upon which we do not need 
the blessing of God? But especially do we need it upon our 
trials. Ask a blessing, my brothers and sisters, upon your 
troubles. Say grace over a table which is not as well loaded as it 
used to be. Say grace over broken bones and aching heads, over 
pains, and pangs, and partings, for there you need divine grace 
more than anywhere else, with the exception, it is true, of your 
prosperity — and there, likely enough, you need a double 
portion of His Spirit! If we have been lifted up from the couch 
of languishing and suffering, then, let us quiedy expect the 
comfortable fruits of righteousness which are afterwards to be 
brought forth in those who are exercised with trials. Let us pray 
God that the pruning may make us bring forth more fruit; that 
the filing may make us shine the more brightly; that the furnace 
may consume our dross, and the deep rivers drown our follies. 
If the rod shall scourge our sloth to death, and the staff shall 
strengthen our faith, both rod and staff shall be seen to be in 
the Lord’s hands, and shall, therefore, comfort us! 

I think you will all agree with me, too, that the Lord’s 
bringing us low and raising us up again, should cause great searching 
of heart. Suppose I had died when last I was sick — was I then 


724 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


prepared to die? Woman, you remember when you last were 
stretched upon that sickbed, and even the physician had given 
you up for hopeless? God spared you; but if He had not, where 
now would your soul be? Let your conscience answer that 
question, and it may be that it will make you tremblingly say, “I 
would have been like they who go down into the pit of hell.” If 
it had been your lot, my hearers, some of you to have perished 
as this friend of ours has done during the past week, I dare not 
have said of you, “Lord, we thank You that it has pleased You 
to take this, our brother, to Yourself.” I could not have uttered 
a sentence of hope concerning you! I would have forged a lie 
had I comforted your friends by holding out a fraction of hope 
concerning your soul’s salvation, for alas, are there not some of 
you who are gospelhardened, and grow worse rather than 
better? While we are preaching to you, and pleading with you, 
and weeping for you to turn to Christ; and while we are trying 
to lift up Jesus upon His cross in the hope that the Spirit may 
thereby attract you, you are getting to look upon the gospel as 
an old, old tale, and upon the preacher himself as one whom 
you have heard so often, that really he is growing quite tedious 
and dull! Ah, there are some of you whom I could stir once, as a 
thunderclap, or a flash of lightning would have startled you, but 
now you can almost sleep under my voice. God knows I am 
willing enough to confess my own lack of zeal and earnestness; 
but still, my hearers, it is not that which keeps some of you from 
coming to Christ — it is because you keep putting off the day of 
repentance by perpetual procrastination! You live in a continual 
suicide, always destroying your own soul! Meanwhile, that 
which does not melt you, hardens you, and so you grow worse 
and worse, ripening like tares for the fire. My dear friends, let 
the judgments of God lead you to try your hearts, and to see 
what your state before God may be! “Beware lest He take you 
away with His stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver you.” 


725 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


To those of us who are believers in Christ, restoration from 
sickness, and the privilege of again coming up to God’s house 
after an absence from it through illness, should suggest renewed 
activity. Hurry up! Hurry up, for behind you are the flying wheels 
of the chariot of death, and the axles are growing red hot with 
speed. Fly, man, if you would accomplish your lifework, for you 
have not a moment to spare! I think I see my work before me — 
the wheat ripe unto the harvest — “broad acres and wide 
fields” — multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of decision! 
“Arise,” says the Master, “reap for Me!” I have reaped until my 
arms ache and my head swims. I wipe the hot sweat from my 
weary brow, and would gladly rest awhile, but He says, “Reap! 
Reap! Reap! Reap while the morning’s dew is falling! Reap while 
the hot sun scorches the ripening corn! Reap while the sun is 
setting! Reap until it has quite gone down; then you shall rest 
from your labors; but until then your work shall not be done!” 
Am I to reap alone? My brothers and sisters, there are many 
new, bright sickles — here is one for each of you — up and to 
the fields, my fellow reapers! Men and women, up from your 
lethargy! Woe unto you who are at ease in Zion, who lie upon 
beds of down, and forget that men are making their beds in hell! 
Get up and begin to be troubled for the sorrows of God’s 
people, for the deaths of sinners, for the destruction of this 
great city! If ever Jonah’s soul was stirred within him as he 
thought of Nineveh, much more ought yours and mine to be 
stirred with the burden of this great London! There is no time 
to waste. Men are dying! Hell is filling! How dare you loiter! 
Again I sound the alarm. Work, O you saints of the Lord, with 
all your might! Work with both your hands, by night and by day! 
Sow beside all waters! In the morning, sow your seed, and in 
the evening, withhold not your hand. Let, then, the nearness of 
death, and the shortness of life, be to us as double spurs to 
stimulate our jaded spirits to fresh action! 


726 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


What more need I say? You who are scholars in the college 
of affliction, are more fit to instruct me than I am to teach you! 
I shall but add this one thought — surely, if it is the Lord who 
brings down to the grave — and He may do it at any day, we ought 
to be very watchful. Are we not, many of us, like the virgins of the 
parable? We have fallen asleep! We have our lamps with us, but 
are not they almost out? It is the dead hour of night, and all 
things are quiet. I think I hear a cry which ought to startle every 
sleeper — “Behold, the bridegroom comes! Go out to meet 
Him!” Can you sleep after that? Do I not see you starded? You 
rub your drowsy eyes; you look at your lamps, and you find the 
oil gone; you seek to trim them, and the cry fills you with alarm 
and confusion, “Behold, the bridegroom comes! Go out to 
meet Him!” But some of you have no oil, and now you try to 
borrow it where it is not to be had. Alas for you, for you will 
be shut out, and shut out forever! Others of you have oil in 
your vessels, but you need to hastily trim your lamps or else the 
bridegroom will come and find you sleeping. The Lord grant 
that as He may come today, as you, sitting there in your seat, 
may die; as I, standing here, may cease to breathe before the 
next word shall come from my lips, we may all be ready! — 

“That awful, that tremendous day, 

Is coming, who shall tell? For as a thief 
Unheard, unseen, it steals with silent pace 
Through night’s dark gloom! Perhaps as here I stand, 
And rudely talk of these tremendous themes, 

Soon shall the tongue be checked, and dumb the mouth 
That lisps the faltering strain! 

O Power supreme, You Guardian of my life, 

Preserve me from a dread surprise in death. 

From ways where I might weep to find a grave, 

Keep You, Your servant by Your mighty grace! 


727 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


O may Your heavenly summons never disturb, 

Nor come unwelcome, to my waiting heart 
But find me rapt in meditation high, 

Hymning my great Creator! Or in prayer, 

Bringing the blessing down upon the crowd; 

In earnest work for Jesus, lifting up 
His cross and glory of His saving name!” 

Be watchful, brothers and sisters, for the Lord brings down 
to the grave, and from that grave He brings us not up again to 
work, though He will bring us up to the reward, and to the rest 
which remain for the people of God. 

I shall now leave the text as it stands naturally; and briefly, 
but O may the Spirit of God help me to do it earnesdy, try to 
speak of it in a spiritual sense. 

II. Our text seems to indicate a state of heart 

THROUGH WHICH THOSE PASS WHO ARE BROUGHT TO 

God. 

There always is, in every case, though not to the same 
degree, a stripping time before there is a dressing time; there 
must be an emptying before there is a filling; there is the digging 
out of the foundations before the building up of the house; 
there is a time in which this verse is fulfilled — “The Lord kills 
and makes alive; He brings down to the grave and brings up.” 

Let me describe now, for the comfort of those who are 
passing through the same, what that state of heart is in which 
the Lord brings down to the grave. I shall now speak 
experientially, for if there breathes one soul on earth who can 
speak experientially here, I am that man! 

The sinner is led, first of all, to hear his own sentence pronounced. 
He was getting careless and thoughtless before, but now he is 
brought to think- Thinking, he perceives his sins; perceiving his 
sins, he fears an angry God looking down from heaven — no, 


728 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


with His sword drawn, reaching down from heaven, to smite 
him on account of his iniquities! Well do I remember when I 
stood speechless at God’s bar. Not a word had I to answer Him 
for one sin of a thousand! When 1 read, “Cursed is everyone 
who continues not in all things which are written in the book 
of the law, to do them,” I knew that that curse was upon me, 
for I had not continued in anything, much less in all things written 
in the book of the law! It seemed to me as though I saw the 
Judge open the book; not to read my indictment — for that had 
already been published — but to proclaim the sentence. The trial 
had been gone through; I myself had made confession of my 
crimes, and now the Judge put on the black cap and 
commanded me to be taken to the place from which I was to 
suffer eternal wrath! When that sentence was to be executed 
He did not tell me, but it appeared to me as if it must come the 
next moment; and if it did come, I knew I could not blame the 
justice of God, for I deserved it well. Is that your position? Oh, 
where are you tonight, poor condemned sinner? Perhaps I 
cannot see you, for the crowd is great, nor can you see me, for 
you are in a corner, but yet you are bowing your head and saying, 
“Ah, that is just my case; I am cursed and I deserve it; God is 
angry with the sinner every day — I am a sinner, and deserve 
that anger.” — 

“There is a dreadful hell 
And everlasting pains, 

Where sinners must with devils dwell, 

In darkness, fire, and chains!” 

“That is my lot,” you are saying, and you are wringing your 
hands while you are speechless as to any self-justification, and 
are only able to say, “It is most just; I deserve it well”? 


729 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Further than this — the convicted sinner is often made to 
feel not only the sentence and the justice of it, but the very horror 
of death itself You may have read in the narrative of the old 
American war, of the execution of deserters. They were 
brought out one bright morning, while yet the dew was on the 
grass, and were bid to kneel down, each man in his coffin, and 
then a file of soldiers stepped forth; the word was given and 
each man fell down in his coffin in which he was to be buried. 
Such things as the punishment of deserters are common in 
every war, but what must be the horror of the man who stands 
there, knowing that the bullet is waiting to reach his heart? In 
the old wars, they used to have a black heart sown on the man’s 
breast, and all the soldiers were to take aim and fire at that. Why 
the man must suffer a thousand deaths while he stood waiting 
for the word of command! I have stood there, spiritually; and 
there are hundreds here who have thus faced their eternal 
doom. They have felt the horrors of death get hold upon them, 
and the pangs of hell encompass them — and they have found 
trouble and sorrow. O sinners, if you know yourselves, you will 
soon feel this, for do you not know that if you are without 
Christ, you are standing in that position right now? The great 
guns of the law, charged to the muzzle, are all pointed at you; 
they do but wait the fatal moment when the uplifted finger of 
justice shall bid them be discharged — and where will you be 
then? Lost beyond hope! Ruined beyond remedy! Beware, 
sinner, beware of this! “Well,” says one, “that is the horror 
which I felt tonight; I felt as I came along that it was a wonder 
the earth did not open and swallow me up, and though I am 
now in God’s house, I feel as if such a wretch as I am ought 
not to be in the company of the faithful; I wonder that I am 
still alive, and I am ready to cry out with the hymn writer — 


730 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


“Tell it, unto sinners tell; 

I am, I am out of hell!” 

Ah, dear friends, this is another part of the experience 
through which many are called to go, before the Lord who 
brings them down to the grave promises to bring them up again! 

Then, there is yet a further death which the convicted 
sinner is made to feel and that is the death of inability. While we 
are unregenerate, we think that we can do everything. Nothing 
is so easy, we imagine then, as believing; it is mere child’s play 
to pray to God, only a trifle to turn to God and get a new heart. 
Yes, but when man begins to work in real earnest, he finds it a 
very different thing! He feels like one in a swoon. There lies a 
woman who has fainted. You tell her, it is but to put up her 
finger, to open her eyes, to move her limbs, to walk into the 
fresh air, to drink a draught of water, and to recover. Yes, but 
she cannot do any of these things! In one sense she can; the 
faculties are there, but they are all in a dormant state, and so 
utterly powerless that all the woman is conscious of is her 
inability. Such is the state of the sinner when under a sense of 
guilt. He feels that deadly swoon of death into which Adam 
threw all his children. Now he moans most wretchedly, in 
words like those of good old John Newton — 

“I would, but cannot sing, 

I would, but cannot pray! 

For Satan meets me when I try, 

And frightens my soul away! 

I would, but can’t repent, 

Though I endeavor often. 

This stony heart can never relent 
Till Jesus makes it soft! 

I would, but cannot love, 


73i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Though wooed by love divine. 

No arguments have power to move 

A soul so base as mine! 

0 could I but believe! 

Then all would easy be; 

1 would, but cannot — Lord, relieve, 

My help must come from Thee!” 

He feels himself brought into a perfect state of death, as if 
a stupor had gone through every nerve, and frozen every 
muscle rigidly in its place, so that even the lifting of his litde 
finger to help himself appears to be beyond his power! I am 
glad, dear friend; you are brought here, for I know the Lord 
never does empty a soul thoroughly of all creature-strength 
without very soon showing what the Creator can do! If He has 
brought you down to this grim sepulcher of corruption, 
dishonor, weakness, and self-despair, He will shordy bring you 
up again! It is when you are strong that I am afraid for you; but 
when you are weak, and then my hopes are high! The climax of 
your disease is just the dawn of my hopes; your direst poverty 
is the time when I expect to see you enriched — for when you 
are completely emptied and have nothing, then Jesus Christ will 
be your strength and your salvation. Trust Him to be your all- 
in-all now that you are nothing at all! There must, at least in 
some degree, be a sense of thus being brought down to the 
grave before there will be a bringing up again. 

No doubt, the man now sees death written upon all his hopes. 
There was a door through which I had hoped to enter eternal 
life. I had spent much time in painting it, and making it comely 
to look upon. It seemed to me to have a golden knocker, a 
marble threshold, and posts and lintels of mahogany — and I 
thought it was the door of life for me. But now what do I see? 
1 see a great black cross on it, and over it there is written, “Lord, 


732 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


have mercy upon us.” This door is the door to heaven by my 
own good works, which I thought full sure would always be 
open to me, but lo, I see that all my best works are bad and, 
“Lord, have mercy upon us,” is the highest thing my works can 
produce for me! Still I must cry, even over them, “God have 
mercy upon my good works; forgive me for my best deeds, for 
I need to be forgiven even for these.” The death of legal hope 
is the salvation of the soul! I like to see legal hope swung up 
like a traitor. There let him hang to rot before the sun, more 
cursed than any other that was ever hanged on a tree! O, soul, 
have done with him, for while you are so fond of him, while 
you treat him with the best you have, and set him at the head 
of your table, you are ruined; but when you slay him, and drive 
him from you, then it is that your joy and your hope begin! 

No more, then, concerning this death — “The Lord brings 
down.” 

But now a word or two of comfort for any of you who are 
brought down to this spiritual grave. There are many precious 
promises for such. “Awake, you who sleep, and arise from the 
dead, and Christ shall give you light.” “Though you have lain 
among the pots, yet shall you be as the wings of a dove covered 
with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.” Remember the 
experience of Jonah — “For You had cast me into the deep, in 
the midst of the seas; and the floods compassed me about: all 
Your billows and Your waves passed over me. Then I said, I 
am cast out of Your sight; yet I will look again toward Your 
holy temple... I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; 
the earth with her bars was about me forever: yet have You 
brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God.” Let the 
hope of Jeremiah be your consolation — “But though He cause 
grief, yet will He have compassion according to the multitude 
of His mercies. For He does not afflict willingly nor grieve the 
children of men.” You who are brought very low, you feel that 


733 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you are wounded tonight. Do you not know how many 
promises there are to the wounded ones? “He heals the broken 
in heart, and binds up their wounds.” Was notjesus Christ sent 
on purpose for this — “to bind up the broken-hearted, to 
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison 
to them who are bound?” The name of our God is “Jehovah- 
Rophi: the Lord who heals you.” His own words are, “I will 
restore health unto you, and I will heal you of your wounds.” 
“I have seen his ways and will heal him: I will lead him, also, 
and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners.” You are 
tonight like the dead. Do you not remember that passage in 
Ezekiel, filled with rich mercy to you, where the Lord speaks 
concerning Israel, that they said their bones were dry, their 
hope was lost, and they were cut off from their parts? But, 
nevertheless, He would raise them up, and they should live in 
His sight? “Therefore, prophesy and say unto them, Thus says 
the Lord God, Behold, O My people, I will open your graves, 
and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you 
into the land of Israel. And you shall know that I am the Lord, 
when I have opened your graves, O My people, and brought 
you up out of your graves, and shall put My Spirit in you, and 
you shall live, and I shall place you in your own land: then shall 
you know that I, the Lord, have spoken it, and performed it, 
says the Lord.” Remember how Hosea, speaking of the dead 
who were slain as you are, says, “The third day He will raise us 
up, and we shall live in His sight”? And that passage we read 
just now — “I kill, and I make alive” — do you not see the 
comfort of it? That “and” is a diamond rivet, joining the two 
sentences together; you cannot separate the, “I kill,” from the, 
“I make alive,” for where God kills by His Spirit, He always 
quickens by the same! He does not in this life kill our legal 
hopes and our carnal security, without by-and-by making us 
alive! You will tell me that the Lord has withdrawn from you, 


734 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


but, oh, what a multitude of promises there are for you! “For a 
small moment have I forsaken you; but with great mercies will 
I gather you.” “If any walk in darkness and see no light, let him 
trust in the name of the Lord.” So that though you have lost 
the comfortable hope of His love, you are still to trust in Him! 
“Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him,” said Job; and do 
you, though you are slain, still trust — for there is still ground 
for trust — no sinner was ever brought too low for God to bring 
him up again! Others have been as low as you are now. 

Remember Heman the Ezrahite, whose mournful notes we 
read just now in the 88th Psalm. What words are these — “You 
have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps. Your 
wrath lies hard upon me, and You have afflicted me with all 
Your waves. ..I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: 
while I suffer Your terrors I am distracted. Your fierce wrath 
goes over me; Your terrors have cut me off’? Yet this man of 
God received comforts, after all, from the God of his salvation! 
You yourself are not brought so low as you would be if you 
had a still clearer view of your sins. Remember, God’s mercy is 
so great that you may sooner drain the sea of its water, or 
deprive the sun of its light, or make space too narrow — than 
diminish the great mercy of God! So that though brought to 
the very last pinch, and dead like the free among the slain who 
go down into the pit of hell, you may still find mercy in the 
Lord our God! Let me beg you never to be satisfied until you 
get a Savior; do not be content with any comfort short of faith 
in Christ! Do remember, dear friends, that you must not be 
satisfied because you have good desires, or because you 
experience holy feelings. When friends say to you, “God has 
begun the good work in you, and you may be content, for He 
will carry it on” — remember, you can never be sure that God 
has begun the good work till you have believed in Christ! 
Believe in Jesus Christ! That is, as far as you are concerned, the 


735 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


first clear proof that God has begun a saving work in you; and 
it is for you, though dead and ruined, though swooning and 
fainting, and unable to do anything as of yourself, to swoon 
into the arms of the Savior; to faint, as many a child has done, 
into its father’s arms; to die in the bosom of the Savior, and lie 
buried in His grave. Oh, this is a happy, happy way of being 
nothing — that Christ may be all-in-all! 

And now, I close, for time fails us, by just noticing, that 
where God has thus killed and brought down, we may rest 
assured He will certainly bring up again. 

Beloved friends, the Lord does not send His Holy Spirit to 
bring sinners to a sense of their need whom He does not intend 
to save, for that were a waste of His divine energy! He leaves 
reprobates, for the most part, to their natural hardness and 
impassive hearts, but those whom He deigns to make sensible 
of guilt, those whom He deigns to condemn in their 
consciences, and to write the sentence of death in their 
members — these He intends, sooner or later, to bring up again 
from their despondency! Why, it stands to reason that He will! 
“Ah,” said one good old divine once to a fainting sinner, “You 
cost Christ too much for Him to let you perish! He bought you 
too dearly to let you be a castaway forever.” Remember, since 
you are His — and we have a comfortable hope that you are 
because you sigh and cry and have a blessed hunger and thirst 
after Him — since you are His, I say, you are very precious in 
His sight, and He will not, therefore, allow you to be lost. “Oh,” 
says one, “can I be a child of God after all, and yet be brought 
so low as I have been?” Some months ago, there were two 
women who kept a shop, and they put all their money, some 
hundred pounds, in sovereigns, under the fireplace at night, in 
a bag, to save it from thieves. The cleaning girl cleared away the 
ashes, and of course, cleared away the sovereigns, too, and they 
were swept into the dust heap! Well, this gold might have said 


736 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


to itself, “Now I am going to the dust heap! How worthless I 
am, because I am put here among the lowest dregs — here is a 
piece of old rag — and here a rotten mass of filth; I cannot be a 
gold sovereign or else I would not be cast here. ” Ah, but you 
see, when they came to rake the heap, they raked the golden 
coins out again! The sovereigns were, by-and-by discovered; 
they might be in the ashes, but they were not to lie there forever! 
So you may be brought to feel yourselves the lowest, the worst, 
and the most useless of all creatures — but if the Lord has set 
His love upon you, you are gold in His esteem — none the less 
because of the ashes and the dunghill upon which you may be 
cast. And He will yet bring you up again! Remember, there may 
be a work of divine grace in your heart and yet you may not 
know it! There are many pebbles in the bottom of a river which 
you cannot see, but they are there; there may be some degree 
of faith and hope, and love, and yet, your soul may be so much 
disturbed, that you cannot as yet perceive it; or the Lord may 
be really bringing you up from the grave, and yet the muddiness 
of your thoughts, and the darkness of your soul’s eyes may 
prevent your perceiving what the Lord is doing for you. Still, I 
repeat it, He will bring you up again! O let your faith seize hold 
on this comforting assurance! If it is not done yet, it will be in 
due time. “Well, how will it come?” asks one, “How will the 
Lord give me comfort?” My dear friend, I do not know the 
manner of it; it may come suddenly — before this service is over 
you may feel all the joy that a believer can know; it may be that 
the Lord will reveal Himself to you as you are walking home, 
or tonight while you are in prayer before you go to your rest; 
possibly it will come gradually — first the blade, then the ear — 
and then the full corn in the ear. 

There are some to whom the light of life comes as the light 
of the rising sun — first, a glimmering twilight; then, the ruddy 
hues upon the clouds; then, a flood of light, and afterwards, the 


737 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sun has fully risen. It may be so with you. But there is one thing 
I know — when your hope does come, when God quickens you 
from your grave — it will be just at that moment when you are 
led to look away from your own feelings, your own doings, and 
your own willings, and to look to Christ alone! I heard the other 
day a trembling woman — I hope she will yet be rejoicing in the 
Lord — I heard her saying she was afraid she would never be 
saved, and I told her I was afraid so, too, for she would not 
believe in Christ, but was always raising questions and doubts! 
Well, she said, she did not know whether the Lord had begun 
a good work in her. I told her I did not know that either, and 
that I did not inquire about it; I knew what the gospel said and 
that was, “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be 
saved.” But she said, perhaps it was not God’s time. Ah, I said, 
“Today is the accepted time; today is the day of salvation.” Ah, 
she said, but she could not believe. 1 asked her why she could 
not believe. Could she not believe what Christ said? Was He a 
liar? Could she dare to say that she could not believe her God? 
Well, she did not exacdy mean that, but then, there were her 
sins. But, I said, “The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from 
all sin.” Well, she said, she hoped she would have the strivings 
of the Spirit, and that one day she would get right. “My sister,” 
said I, “I charge you before God, do not get any hope out of 
that; your business is to come to Christ and to come to Christ 
now; but if you stop anywhere short of that, in any sort of 
feelings or experience, then, you will never get to your journey’s 
end!” A believing sinner’s business is with Jesus, and not with 
the Spirit’s operations. The Spirit works salvation in him, but 
he is nowhere bid to look to the Spirit for salvation! No man 
can come to the Father but by Christ, and no man can come to 
an acknowledgment of the Spirit’s operations but by a sight of 
Christ! I grant you that the Spirit brings us to the cross, but we 
do not know when we come that the Spirit is at work with us. 


738 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


By a mysterious force we come to Jesus, and then afterwards, 
we look back and say, “Why, it must have been the Spirit of 
God that drew me to Christ.” You are not, however, to begin 
with that — you are to begin by looking at the cross! 

Although I have been talking to you about how God wills 
to bring us down, I have not set up these feelings as a standard 
of experience, or as being the grounds of our salvation. A sense 
of need is a sign of our salvation, for no soul ever will come to 
live through the life of Christ unless he has first been slain by 
the great sword of the law. No sinner ever comes empty- 
handed to Jesus till he has been knocked down and robbed of 
all the worthless trash which he prizes as jewels. But still, I say, 
for all this, the thing which saves the soul is for that dead, 
helpless, swooning, feeble, lost, ruined soul, to look to Him 
who hangs on yonder cross — where the Just suffers for the 
unjust — that He may bring us to God! This is how the Lord 
brings us up again. I know there will be some who will say they 
have not felt all I have described to any great degree or extent. 
Remember, again, I do not set this up as a standard to keep you 
from Christ; I have been preaching thus in order to catch you 
who do not come because you have terrors — not to frighten 
those who come without them! There are two sorts of you we 
have to deal with. Some of you say you cannot believe in Christ 
because you have such terrible convictions. You wish you had 
not felt them. And another class of you say if you had these 
horrible terrors, you could believe in Christ! There is no 
pleasing either of you. Now, remember, you who have the 
convictions, the Lord who brings you low will bring you up 
again; and you who have not the convictions, you still have this 
preached to you — “Jesus Christ came into the world to save 
sinners, of whom I am chief.” Come to Jesus just as you are, 
you shall have such conviction as the Lord sees fit for you; you 
shall, indeed, be led in the same way as others; though, being 


739 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


blind, you will not know at the time that it is the same way. You 
will be killed, and you will be made alive; you will be emptied, 
and you will be filled; you will be made nothing, and Jesus shall 
be your all-in-all! 

O that my Master would bless these few rambling remarks 
to some of you! I do not like drawing the bow at a venture; I 
cannot stand that metaphor, but I do love to draw the bow at 
a certainty, to smite some of you, and I would to God that the 
Lord would do that now! The Lord gready blesses that class 
over which our dear sister, Mrs. Bartlett, presides — but there 
are still some in it who are unconverted; O that the Lord might 
bring some of them in tonight! You young women who take an 
interest in the things of God — may the Lord now decide you! 
I want to speak personally and affectionately to you now, 
because you may be in the grave before another Sunday. As I 
look around me here, I miss some of my congregation, and in 
such a large congregation as this, there are at least two who 
depart every week. I suppose, according to the natural order of 
things, two of you must die each week, and when I think of this 
solemn fact, I ask — where are the two? Where are the two who 
are to be the victims of death this week? “Perhaps they are at 
home, sick,” you say. Ah, well, perhaps, also, they are here in 
good, strong health! Prepare to meet your God, young men, for 
you are not too young to die! And you in the Sunday school; I 
am so pleased to hear of the boys being converted, and of the 
girls being brought in; but, O children, some of you may soon 
make a little hillock in the cemetery with your young bodies! 
May the Lord make you young Samuels — remember, it was 
Samuel’s mother who penned this text — may you be led to feel 
your need of Jesus, and then to find Him for the salvation of 
your soul! You who are diligent in business, but are not fervent 
in spirit, you will be busy buying and selling all the week, but 
oh, do not sell your souls! “Buy the truth and sell it not.” You, 


740 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


523 From Death to Life - I Sam. 2:6 


gray-heads, yonder, what a multitude of old men we always 
have in this assembly, and I am glad to see the fathers here, 
though I often wonder how aged Christians can be fed by such 
a child as I am! But still, those gray hairs only make a fool’s cap 
for you if you have grown old in sin as well as old in years! God 
help you that you may yet be made babes in grace though you 
are on the very verge of the grave. 

God add His blessing, but we will not separate till we have 
sung this one verse — and I beg none to sing it but those who 
deeply can feel it — 

“Just as I am, without one plea, 

But that Your blood was shed for me, 

And that You bid me come to Thee, 

O Lamb of God, I come, I come!” 


74i 



524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, August 12th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Gather not my soul with sinners.” - Psalm 26:9 

We MUST ALL be gathered in due course. When time shall 
have ripened the fruit, it must hang no longer upon the tree, 
but be gathered into the basket; when the summer’s sun has 
perfecdy matured the corn, the sickle must be brought forth, 
and the harvest must be reaped; to everything there is a season 
and an end. There shall be a gathering time for every one of us. 
It may come tomorrow; it may be deferred another handful of 
years; it may come to us by the long process of consumption 
or decline; it may advance with more rapid footsteps, and we 
may in a moment be gathered to our people. Sooner or later, to 
use the expressive words of Job, the Almighty shall set His 
heart upon each of us, and gather unto Himself our spirit and 
our breath. That gathering rests with God! The prayer of the 
Psalmist implies it, and many Scriptures affirm it. As Young 
sings in Iris Night Thoughts — 

“An angel’s arm can’t hurl me to the grave.” 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


Accidents are but God’s arrangements; diseases are His 
decrees; fevers His servants, and plagues His messengers. Our 
mortality is immortal, till the Eternal wills its death! “Return, 
you children of men,” can be spoken by none but our heavenly 
Father, and when He gives the word, return we must without 
delay. I do not know, my brothers and sisters, seeing that our 
death is certain, and remains entirely in the hands of our 
gracious God, that there is any prayer which we need to offer 
concerning it, except, “Father, into Your hands I commit my 
spirit,” and this brief sentence, “Gather not my soul with 
sinners.” Scarcely can I commend those who plead to be 
delivered from sudden death, for sudden death is sudden glory! 
Hardly can I advise you to request a hasty departure, for flesh 
and blood shrink from speedy dissolution. Pray not for long 
life, nor for an early grave — cheerfully leave all these matters to 
the choice of infinite wisdom, and concentrate all your desires 
upon the one desire of the text. Filled with a holy horror of the 
hell of sinners, let us make most sure of our calling to the 
heaven of the blessed; let the fear of being cast forth with the 
withered branches increase our fruitfulness, and let our horror 
of the sinner’s character and doom lead us to cleave more 
closely to the Savior of souls! 

We will divide our discourse thus — first, the gathering, and 
here let us behold a vision; next, the prayer, and here let us note 
an example; thirdly, a fear, and here let us observe a holy anxiety; 
and then fourthly, an answer yielding a consolation. 

I. First, THE GATHERING. Let the man who has his eyes 
open behold the gathering of sinners, and in the sanctuary of 
the Lord let him understand their end. 

There have been many partial gatherings of the ungodly, 
all ending in sudden ruin and overthrow. Turn your eyes here. 
Two hundred and fifty men have impudently taken censers into 
their hands, and have dishonored the Lord’s chosen servants, 


743 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Moses and Aaron. Mark well their proud reviling of the Lord’s 
anointed. In the gainsaying of Korah they all have a part. The 
people hasten from their tabernacles, and they stand alone. It 
is but for a moment. Look! The earth cleaves asunder; they go 
down alive into the pit of hell, and the earth closes her mouth 
upon them! My soul trembles and hides her face for fear — and 
my fainting heart groans out her desire — “Gather not my soul 
with sinners!” 

Look yonder, my brothers and sisters, to the city of palm 
trees surrounded by its strong munitions. All the inhabitants 
are gathered together within it; from the top of the walls they 
mock the feeble band of silent Israelites, who for six days have 
marched round and round their city. The seventh day has come 
and the rams’ horns give the signal of destruction! The Lord 
comes forth from His rest, and at the terror of His rebuke the 
walls of Jericho fall flat to the ground! Now where are your 
boastings, O congregation of the wicked? The sword of Israel 
is bathed in your blood, O accursed sons of Canaan! As we hear 
the shriek of the slaughtered, and mark the smoke of the city 
ascending up to heaven like the flames of Sodom of old, we 
reverently bow the knee unto Jehovah and cry, “Gather not my 
soul with sinners.” 

Leaping over centuries, with weeping we behold the holy 
city, beautiful for situation, once the joy of the whole earth, but 
now forsaken of her God, and beleaguered by her foes. All the 
Jewish people have come together from the four winds of 
heaven — as the flesh is cast into the caldron, and the fire burns 
fiercely, so are they gathered together for judgment. Well might 
their rejected Messiah weep over the devoted city as He 
remembered how often He would have gathered her children 
together as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and 
they would not; now are they gathered in another manner and 
the wings of vultures flutter over them, hastening for the prey! 


744 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


See yonder the Roman armies, and the mounds which they 
have cast up! Woe unto you, O city of Zion, for the spoilers 
know no pity; they spare neither young nor old. “Blessed are 
the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which 
never gave suck,” for the day of the Lord’s vengeance is come, 
and the words of Moses are fulfilled, when he said — “The Lord 
shall bring a nation against you from afar, from the end of the 
earth, as swift as the eagle flies; a nation whose tongue you shall 
not understand; a nation of fierce countenance, which shall not 
regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the 

young And you shall eat the fruit of your own body, the 

flesh of your sons and of your daughters, which the Lord your 
God has given you, in the siege and in the desperate straits, 
wherewith your enemies shall distress you.” Listen! The clarion 
summons the warrior to arms. The veterans of Vespasian and 
Titus dash to the assault. Where are you now, O city polluted 
with the murder of prophets, and stained with the blood of the 
prophets’ Lord? Your walls protect not your sons; they keep 
not the temple of your glory. Look! A soldier’s ruthless hand 
hurls the red firebrand into the sacred precincts of the temple, 
and its smoke darkens the sky! Can you walk those smoldering 
ruins and behold the heaps of ashes mingled with burning 
flesh — the crimson streams of gore — and the deep pools of 
clotted blood? Can you linger there where desolation holds her 
reign supreme, and refuse to see the justice of the God of Israel, 
or fail to breathe the humble prayer of the Psalmist, “Gather 
not my soul with sinners”? Wherever the enemies of God are 
gathered, there we have, before long, confusion and tears, and 
death! In whatever place sinners may hold their counsels, when 
the Judge of all the earth comes out against them, we soon see 
an Aceldama — a field of blood! 

But, forgetting all these inferior gatherings, illustrious in 
horror though they are, my eyes behold a greater gathering 


745 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


which is proceeding every day to its completion. Every day the 
heavens and the earth hear the voice of God, saying, “Gather 
you, gather you My foes together, that I may utterly destroy 
them.” “Therefore wait you upon Me, says the Lord, until the 
day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather 
the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms to pour upon 
them My indignation, even all My fierce anger: for all the earth 
shall be devoured with the fire of My jealousy.” As the 
huntsman, when he goes forth to the battle, encompasses the 
beasts of the forest with an ever narrowing ring of hunters — 
that he may exterminate them all in one great slaughter — so the 
God of justice has made a ring in His providence round about 
the sinful sons of men! Within that circle of divine power are 
imprisoned monarchs and peasants, peers and paupers; that 
ring encompasses all nations, polite or barbarous, civilized or 
rude. No impenitent sinner can break through the lines; as well 
might a worm escape from within a circle of flame! Every hour 
the lines grow narrower, and the multitudes of the Lord’s 
enemies are driven into the center where His darts are flying, 
where His sharp arrows shall pierce them. I hear the baying of 
the dogs of death today, hounding the unbelieving to their 
doom! I see the heaps of slain, and mark the terrible arrows as 
they fly with unerring aim. Multitudes of sinners are scattered 
from the equator to the poles, but not one of them is able to 
escape the avenger’s hand! High and haughty princes, boasting 
their imperial pomp, fall like antlered stags, smitten with the 
shafts of the Almighty! Their valiant warriors, like wild boars 
of the forest, perish upon the point of His glittering spear! The 
vision of the Apocalypse is no mere dream. He whose name is 
THE WORD OF GOD, shall tread the winepress of the 
fierceness and wrath of Almighty God; and meanwhile, the 
angel standing in the sun cries with a loud voice to all the fowls 
which fly in the midst of heaven, “Come and gather yourselves 


746 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


together into the supper of the great God: that you may eat the 
flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty 
men: and the flesh of horses and of them who sit on them: and 
the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.” 
At the remembrance of all this, we may well exclaim with 
Habakkuk, “When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered 
at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled 
in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when He 
comes up unto the people, He will cut them in pieces with His 
troops.” O God of all grace, I pray You, by the atoning sacrifice 
of Jesus in which 1 trust, “Gather not my soul with sinners.” 
Let that providence which gathers Your people from among 
men, lay hold on me. Let Your angels who keep watch and 
ward about Your people, keep me from the snare of the fowler, 
and from the destruction which wastes at noonday! 

But the scene changes — we no longer see the assembling 
of the multitudes in the great valley of the shadow of death, but 
we track them further, till we find ourselves on the threshold 
of the abode of spirits. You have seen the prisoners in their 
cells, waiting for their trial at the next judgment. The strong 
hand of law has confined them in prison, where they await the 
summons to appear before the judge. I pray you note the 
company, and before the trumpet announces the judge, see 
what a strange gathering the prison contains. Do you mark 
them? There is the murderer, with blood-red hands; there is he 
who smote his fellow to his wounding; yonder lies the wretch 
who perjured himself before God, and here the man who 
pilfered his neighbor’s goods. However they differed from one 
another before, they are on a level in rank in this house of 
detention — and they all await one common jail delivery. It is 
no pleasant sight to visit these cells before the judgment comes 
on; crime, although as yet not condemned, is no comfortable 


747 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


vision. But, what of earthly prisons? My heart sees a sight far 
more terrible — 

“Look down, my soul, on hell’s domains, 

That world of agony and pains! 

What crowds are now associated there, 

Of widely different character. 

What wretched ghosts are met below, 

Some once so great, so little now; 

So gay, so sad, so rich, so poor; 

Now scorned by those they scorned before.” 

Multitudes are gathered together in the state where souls 
abide until their final doom is pronounced both on their bodies 
and on their souls; a place of misery where not a drop of water 
cools their parched tongue; a state of doubt and terror and 
suspense — a place from which consolation is banished, where 
the “wrath to come” perpetually afflicts them! There in 
captivity abide the formalist, the hypocrite, the profane, the 
licentious, the abandoned, those who despised God, and hated 
Christ, and turned away from the glory of His cross; there they 
are gathered, tens of thousands of them, at this day, waiting till 
the Great Judgment shall sit. O God, “Gather not my soul with 
sinners,” but let me be gathered with those whose spirits wait 
beneath the altar for their redemption, to wit, the resurrection 
of their bodies! Gather me with those who cry day and night 
until God avenges His own elect; gather me with the multitude 
of spirits who wait the coming of the Son of God from heaven, 
that their bliss may be complete! 

But now, my eyes, prophetic in the light of Scripture, see 
another gathering. The trumpet has sounded, the prison doors 
are opened, and the gates of death give way! They come, bodies 
and souls — souls from the place of waiting in the pit of hell, 


748 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


and bodies from their graves, from ocean and from earth — 
from all the four winds of heaven — bodies and souls come 
together, and there they stand — an exceeding great army. This 
time it is not in the valley of suspense, but “multitudes, 
multitudes in the valley of decision. ” “And the Lord shall utter 
His voice before His army; for His camp is very great: for He 
is strong who executes His Word: for the day of the Lord is 
great and very terrible: and who can abide it?” “Assemble 
yourselves and come, all you heathen, and gather yourselves 
together round about: there cause Your mighty ones to come 
down, O Lord. Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to 
the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the 
heathen round about. Put in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: 
come, get You down; for the press is full, the vats overflow; for 
their wickedness is great.” “And I saw a great white throne, and 
He who sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven 
fled away; and there was found no place for them. And I saw 
the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books 
were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book 
of life; and the dead were judged out of those things which were 
written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave 
up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up 
the dead which were in them; and they were judged, every man 
according to their works. . .And whoever was not found written 
in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.” Oh, well may 
you and I pray that we may have a part in the first 
resurrection — upon such the second death has no power! 
Grant us, O Lord, that we may not be with the wicked, the rest 
of the dead, who rise not until after a thousand years are 
finished, but give us a portion among those whose iniquities 
are blotted out, who have not received the mark of the beast 
on their foreheads, who therefore live and reign with Christ a 
thousand years (Rev 20:4). May we be gathered with the harvest 


749 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of the Lord, when He who sits on the cloud shall reap it with 
His golden sickle; but this gathering of which my text speaks is 
not the harvest of the righteous, but the vintage of the wicked; 
when “the angel which had power over fire” shall cry, “Thrust 
in Your sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the 
earth: for her grapes are fully ripe.” How dreadful that great 
winepress of divine wrath which shall be trod outside the city, 
and how terrible that flow of blood, like a mighty stream of 
wine, so deep that it ran even unto the horses’ bridles by the 
space of 1,600 furlongs! “Gather not my soul with sinners,” O 
God, in that terrible day! 

I need not stop to paint — for colors equal to its terrors I 
have none — that dreadful place where the last gathering shall 
be held. That great synagogue of Satan, the place appointed for 
unbelievers, and prepared for the devil and his angels; where 
“sullen moans and hollow groans, and shrieks of tortured 
ghosts” shall be their only music; where weeping, wailing, and 
gnashing of teeth shall be their perpetual occupation; where joy 
is a stranger, and hope unknown; where death itself would be 
a friend! No, I will not attempt to describe what our Savior 
veiled in words like these, “These shall go away into everlasting 
punishment.” “Where their worm dies not, and their fire is not 
quenched.” “Outer darkness, where shall be wailing and 
gnashing of teeth.” We drop the curtain, hoping that you have 
seen enough to make you pray, “Gather not my soul with 
sinners.” Dear brothers and sisters, when we recollect that that 
last gathering will be a perfect one; that there will be no sinner 
left with the saints; that, on the other hand, no saint will remain 
with sinners, when we recollect that it will be a final one — no 
redistribution will ever be made, and that it will entail an 
everlasting separation — a great gulf being fixed, which none 
can cross — it remains for us to be solemnly anxious to be 


750 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


found on the right hand, and to put up, with vehemence, this 
prayer — “O Lord, gather not my soul with sinners!” 

II. Having thus shown the vision of the gathering; let me 
with deep solemnity, conduct your minds for a litde time to 
THE PRAYER ITSELF. I am sure we are all agreed about it, 
every one of us. Balaam, if he is here this morning, differs not 
from me. The worst and most abandoned wretch on earth 
agrees with David in this. Sinners do not wish to be gathered 
with sinners. Balaam’s prayer is, “Let me die the death of the 
righteous, and let my last end be like his,” which only differs in 
words from David’s petition, “Gather not my soul with sinners.” 
But then, the reasons of the one prayer are very different in 
different persons. We would all like to be saved from hell, but 
then there is a difference in the reasons why we would so be 
delivered. The same prayer may be uttered by different lips; in 
the one it may be heard and accepted as spiritual prayer, and in 
the other it may be but the natural excitement produced by a 
selfish desire to avoid misery. I know why you would not wish 
to be gathered with sinners — those of you who are ungodly and 
impenitent — you dread the fire, the flames which never end! 
You dread the wrath, the suffering; you dread the horrors of 
that world to come! Not so with the Christian, these he dreads 
as all men must, but he has a higher and a better reason for not 
wishing to be gathered with sinners. I tell you, sirs, if sinners 
could be gathered into heaven, with their present character, the 
Christian’s prayer would be what it now is — “Gather not my 
soul with sinners.” If sin entailed happiness; if rebellion against 
God could give bliss, even then the Christian would scorn the 
happiness, and avoid the bliss which sin affords! His objection 
is not so much to hell, as to sinners themselves; his desire is to 
avoid the contamination and distraction of their company. 
Many of you will say, “Now I dislike the company of sinners.” 
Indeed, most moral people dislike the society of a certain class of 


75i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sinners. I suppose there is scarcely one here today who would 
wish to be found in the den of the burglar, where the 
conversation is concerning plunder and violence; you would 
not probably feel very easy in the haunt of the harlot, where 
licentious tongues utter flippandy lascivious words. You shun 
the house of the strange woman. The alehouse is not a favorite 
resort for you. You would not feel very much at ease at the bar 
of the gin palace; you would say of each of these — “This is no 
joy to me!” Even those of you who are not renewed by Christ, 
despise vice when she walks abroad naked. I fear you cannot 
say as much when she puts on her silver slippers, and wraps 
about her shoulders her scarlet mantle. Sin in rags is not 
popular. Vice in sores and squalor tempts no one! In the 
grosser shapes, men hate the very fiend whom they love when 
it is refined and delicate in its form. I want to know whether 
you can say, “Gather not my soul with sinners,” when you see 
the ungodly in their high days and holidays? Do you not envy 
the fraudulent merchant counting his gold — his purse heavy 
with his gains, while he himself by his craft is beyond all 
challenge by the law? Do you not envy the giddy revelers 
spending the night in the merry dance, laughing, making merry 
with wine, and smiling with thoughts of lust? Yonder 
voluptuary, entering the abode where virtue never finds a place, 
and indulging in pleasures unworthy to be named in this 
hallowed house — does he ever excite your envy? I ask you, 
when you see the pleasures, the bright side, the honors, the 
profits, the gains, the merriments of sin, do you then say, 
“Gather not my soul with sinners”? 

There is a class of sinners that some would wish to be 
gathered with — those easy souls who go on so swimmingly. 
They never have any trouble; conscience never pricks them; 
business never goes wrong with them; they have no bands in 
their life, no bonds in their death; they are not in trouble as 


752 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


other men, neither are they plagued like other men. They are 
like the green bay tree, which spreads on every side, until its 
branches cover whole acres with their shade. These are the men 
who prosper in the world, they increase in riches. Can we say, 
when we look at these, when we gaze upon the bright side of 
the wicked, “Gather not my soul with sinners”? Remember, if 
we cannot do so without reservation, we really cannot pray the 
prayer at all! We ought to alter it, and put it, “Gather not my 
soul with openly reprobate sinners.” And then mark you, as 
there is only one place for all sorts of sinners, moral or immoral, 
apparendy holy or profane, your prayer cannot be heard, for if 
you are gathered with sinners at all — with the best of sinners — 
you must be gathered with the worst of sinners, too! I know, 
children of God, you can offer the prayer as it stands, and say, 
“In all their glory and their pomp, in all their wealth, their peace, 
and their comfort, my soul abhors them, and 1 earnesdy 
beseech You, O Lord, by the blood of Jesus, ‘Gather not my 
soul with sinners.’” 

Brothers and sisters, why does the Christian pray this 
prayer? He prays it, first of all, because as far as bis acquaintance 
goes with sinners, even now he does not wish for their company. The 
company of sinners in this world to the saint is a cause of 
uneasiness. We cannot be with them and feel ourselves 
perfecdy at home. “My soul is among lions, even among them 
who are set on fire of hell.” “Rid me from strange children.” 
We are vexed with their conversation, even as Lot was with the 
language of the men of Sodom. We lay an embargo upon 
them — they cannot act as they would in our society — and they 
lay a restraint upon us, we cannot act as we would when we are 
with them. We feel a hindrance in our holy duties through 
dwelling in the tents of Kedar. When we would talk of God, 
we cannot in the midst of company to whom the very name of 
Jesus is a theme for jest. How can we well engage in family 


753 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


devotions, when more than half the family is given up to the 
world? How can we sing the Lord’s song in a strange land? You 
who sojourn in Mesech, you know how great a grief it is, what 
a damper it is to your spirituality, what a serious hindrance it is 
to your growth in divine grace. Besides, the company tempts 
believers to sin. Who can keep his garment pure when he 
travels with sinful companions? If I am condemned to walk 
continually in the midst of thorns and briars, it is strange if I do 
not tear my garments. Often our nearest friends get a hold 
upon our hearts, and then, being enemies to God, they lead us 
to do things which we otherwise would never have dreamed of 
doing! 

The company of the sinner is to the Christian a matter of 
real loss in another respect, for when God comes to punish a 
nation, the Christian has to suffer with the sinners of that 
nation. National judgments fall as well upon the holy as upon 
the profane, and therefore, through being mingled with the 
ungodly of this world, the Christian is a sufferer by famine, war, 
or pestilence. Well may he, from the litde taste he has known 
of their company, cry, “Gather not my soul with sinners.” Why, 
brothers and sisters, I will put you for a moment to the test — 
you shall be in the commercial room of an inn — you are on a 
journey, and you sit down to attend to your own business, or 
to await the train. Now, if two or three fast men come into the 
room, and they begin venting their filth and blasphemy, how 
do you feel? You do not wish to hear; you wish you were deaf. 
One of them cannot speak without larding Iris conversation 
with an oath. There is another, perhaps a man elevated above 
the situation which his education fits him to occupy, who, in 
his conversation utters the most abominable and atrocious 
language, and the others laugh at him. Before many minutes 
you will steal out of the room, for you cannot endure it. What 
must it be to be shut in with such persons forever? On board a 


754 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


steamboat, it may be, you fall into the middle of a litde knot, 
who are talking on some infidel subject in a manner far from 
palatable to you. Have you not wished yourself on shore, and 
have you not walked to the other end of the boat to be out of 
their way? I know you have felt that kind of thing. Your blood 
has chilled; horror has taken hold upon you because of the 
wicked who keep not God’s law. If such has been your 
experience, you can well understand the reason of the 
Psalmist’s prayer, for much of such torment you could not bear. 

Moreover, I do not know any class of sinners whose 
company a Christian would desire. I would not like to live with 
the most precise of hypocrites. What ugly company to keep! 
You cannot trust them anywhere — always hollow — always 
ready to deceive and to betray you. I would not choose to live 
with formalists, self-righteous people, because whenever they 
begin to talk about themselves and their own good deeds, they 
do, as it were, throw dirt upon the righteousness of Christ, 
which is our boast — and that is ill company for a Christian! The 
believer triumphs in the free grace of God, the power of the 
Holy Spirit, and the efficacy of the blood of Jesus; but the self- 
righteous man speaks only of his church attendance or his 
going to chapel, his fasting, his almsgivings, and the like. We 
cannot agree with the person who relies on his self-trust; we 
could almost as well associate with the profane as we could with 
the self-righteous! As for blasphemers, we could not endure 
them a moment. Would you not as soon be shut up in a tiger’s 
den as with a cursing, swearing, thievish degenerate? Who can 
endure the company of either a Voltaire or a Manning? Find 
out the miserly, the mean, the sneaking, the grasping — who 
likes to be with them? Who wants to be with the angry, the 
petulant, who never try to check the unholy passion — one is 
always glad to be away from such folks — you are afraid lest you 
should be held responsible for their mad actions, and therefore 


755 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


if you must be with them, you are always ill at ease. With no 
sort of sinners can the child of God be an associate! Lambs and 
wolves, doves and hawks, devils and angels, are not fit 
companions; and so, through what little trial the righteous have 
had, they have learned that there is no sort of sinners that they 
would like to be shut up with forever! 

But then, we have other reasons. We know that when 
impenitent sinners are gathered at the last, their characters will be 
the same. They were filthy here, they will still be filthy. Here on 
earth their sin was in the bud — in hell it will be full-blown! If 
they were bad here, they will be worse there. Here they were 
restrained by providence, by company, by custom — there, 
there will be no restraints — hell will be a world of sinners at 
large, a land of outlaws, a place where every man or woman 
shall follow out his own heart’s most horrible inclinations! Who 
would wish to be with them? Then again, the place where they 
will be gathered alarms us — the pit of hell, the abode of misery 
and wrath forever — who would be gathered there? Then, their 
occupation — they spend their time in cursing God — in inventing 
and venting fresh blasphemies. They go from bad to worse — 
climbing down the awful ladder of detestable depravity! Who 
would wish to be with them? Remember too, their sufferings; the 
pain of body and of soul they know, when God has cast both 
body and soul into hell. Who would wish to be with them? 
Remember, too, that they are banished forever from God, and God 
is our sun, therefore they are in darkness; God is our life, 
therefore they are worse than dead; God is our joy; therefore 
they are wretched to the extreme. Why, this would be hell, if 
there were no other hell to a Christian — to be banished from 
his God! Moreover, they are denied the joys of Christ’s society. No 
Savior’s love for them, no blissful communion at His right 
hand, no living fountains of water to which the Lamb shall lead 
them. O my God, when I think of what the sinner is, and where 


756 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 5 2 4 From The Saint’s Horror at the 

Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 

he is, and how he must be there forever, shut out from You — 
my soul may well pray with anguish that prayer, “Gather not 
my soul with sinners.” — 

“You lovely chief of all my joys, 

You sovereign of my heart! 

How could I bear to hear Your voice 
Pronounce the sound ‘Depart’? 

Oh wretched state of deep despair, 

To see my God remove, 

And fix my doleful station where 
I must not taste His love. 

Jesus, I throw my arms around, 

And hang upon Your breast; 

Without a gracious smile from 
You My spirit cannot rest.” 

III. But I am afraid I weary you, and therefore, dear friends, 
let me take you very briefly to the third point. There is in our 
text, A FEAR, as if a whisper awakened the Psalmist’s ear to 
trembling, “Perhaps, after all, you may be gathered with the 
wicked.” 

Now, that fear, although marred by unbelief, springs, in the 
main, from holy anxiety. Do you not think that some of us may 
well be the subjects of it? This holy anxiety may well arise if we 
recollect our past sins. Before we were converted, we lived as 
others lived. The lusts of the flesh were ours; we indulged our 
members; we permitted sin to reign in our mortal bodies 
without restraint, and there will be times to the pardoned man, 
even though he has faith in Christ, when he will begin to 
think — “What if, after all, those sins should be remembered, 
and I should be left out of the catalog of the saved?” Then 
again he recollects his present backwardness; and as the little apple 


757 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


on the tree, so sour and unripe, when it sees the crab apples 
gathered, is half afraid it may be gathered with them, so is he, 
with so little grace, so little love, he is afraid he shall be gathered 
with the ungodly. He recollects his own unfruitfulness, and as he 
sees the woodman going round the orchard, knocking off first 
this rotten bough, and then cutting off that other decayed 
branch, he thinks there is so litde fruit on him that perhaps he 
may be cut off, too; and so, what with his past sins, his present 
backsliding and unfruitfulness, he is half afraid he may yet have 
to suffer the doom of the wicked! And then, looking forward 
to the future, he recollects his own weakness and the many 
te??iptations that beset him, and he fears that he may fall, after all, 
and become a prey to the enemy. With all these things before 
him, I wonder not that the poor plant, set yonder in the garden, 
is half afraid that it may be pulled up with the weeds and burned 
on yonder blazing fire in the corner of the garden! “Gather not 
my soul with sinners.” What man is there among you who has 
not need sometimes, to tremble for himself? If any of you can 
say you are always confident, it is more than I can say! I would 
to God I could always know myself saved and accepted in 
Christ, but there are times when a sense of sin within, present 
evil, and prevailing corruptions make the preacher feel that he 
is in jeopardy, and compel him to pray, as he does sometimes 
now, in fear and trembling, “O God, gather not my soul with 
sinners.” 

IV. And here comes in, to conclude, THE ANSWER TO 
THIS PRAYER, which is a word of consolation. 

Brothers and sisters, if you have prayed this prayer, and if 
your character is rightly described in the Psalm before us, be 
not afraid that you shall ever be gathered with sinners! Have 
you the two things that David had — the outward walking in 
integrity, and the inward trusting in the Lord? Do you endeavor 
to make your outward conduct and conversation conformable 


758 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


to the example of Christ? Would you scorn to be dishonest 
toward men, or to be undevout toward God? At the same time, 
are you resting upon Jesus Christ’ sacrifice, and can you 
compass the altar of God with humble hope? If so, then rest 
assured with the wicked you never shall be gathered, for there 
are one or two things which render that calamity impossible! 

The first is this that the rule of the gathering is like to like. 
“Gather you together first the tares, and bind them in bundles 
to burn them” — all the tares together — “but gather the wheat into 
My barn.” It is not, “Make a mixture of them; throw them 
together in a heap — put the wheat and the tares in My garner.” 
Oh, no — “Tares in bundles; wheat in sheaves.” If then, you are 
like God’s people, you shall be with God’s people; if you have 
their life within, their character without; if you rest on their 
Savior; if you love their God; if you have a longing towards 
their holiness, you shall be gathered with them — like to like! 

There is another rule — those who have been our proper comrades 
here are to be our companions hereafter. God will be pleased to send 
us where we wish to go in this life. That is to say, if in this life 
1 have loved the haunt of the sinner; if I have made the theater 
my sanctuary; if I have made the drinking house my abode of 
pleasure, and have found my solace with the gambler, and my 
comfort with the debauched; if I have lived merely for business 
and for this world, and never for the next, then I shall go with 
my companions; I shall be sent where I used to go — being let 
go, 1 shall go to my own company among the lost! But, on the 
other hand, if I have loved God’s house; if I can say with the 
Psalmist, “I have loved the habitation of Your house, and the 
place where Your honor dwells,” if the excellent of the earth 
have been my companions, and the chosen of God have been 
my brothers and sisters, I shall not be separated from them; I 
shall have the same company in heaven that I have had on earth! 
If I have walked with God here, I shall reign with God there; if 


759 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I have suffered with Christ here, I shall reign with Christ 
hereafter. That is another thing which prevents your being 
gathered with the wicked. 

Again, you cannot be gathered with the wicked, for you are 
too dearly bought. Christ bought you with His blood, and He will 
not cast you into the fire. It is a doctrine we never can hold, 
that Christ redeemed with His precious blood any that are 
damned in hell! We cannot conceive it possible that Christ 
should have stood as their sponsor in suffering, and yet they 
should be punished, too! That He should pay the debt, and then 
they should have to pay it also. 

And again, you are loved too much. God the Eternal Father has 
loved you long and well, and proved that to you by His great 
gift, and by His daily consideration and care of you. And it is 
not, therefore, possible that He should permit you, the darling 
of His heart, the child of His desire, a member of the mystical 
body of His only beloved Son, to perish forever in Tophet! 

Again, that new nature within you will not let you be gathered 
with sinners. What does your new nature do — what must'w do? 
It must love God. What? Love God and be in hell? Your new 
nature must pray. What? Pray in the pit of hell? Your new nature 
must praise the God that created it. What? Sing songs to the 
Divine Being amidst the howling of the damned? Impossible! 
If you have a new heart, and a right spirit; if your soul clings 
with both its hands to the cross of Christ; if you love Jesus, and 
long to be like He is, you may have this fear, but it is a 
groundless one — for you shall never be gathered with sinners! 
Your feet shall stand in the congregation of the righteous in the 
day when the wicked are cast away forever! 

I had hoped, this morning, to have so handled my text that 
perhaps God might bless it to the sinner — and who can tell it 
may be so? Sinner, if it is a dreadful thing to be gathered with 
you, what a frightful thing your gathering must be! My dear 


760 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


524 From The Saint’s Horror at the 
Sinner’s Ball - Ps. 26:9 


careless and thoughdess hearer, this morning I have no burning 
words with which to awaken you; I have no earnest tones with 
which to startle you; but still, from my soul I do entreat you 
consider that if it is a subject of horror to us to dwell with you 
forever, it must be an awful thing to be a sinner! And will you 
be a sinner any longer? Will you abide where you now are? Alas, 
you cannot save yourself; you are hopelessly ruined — you have 
lost all power as well as all virtue; you are as a dead thing, as a 
potter’s vessel that is broken to fragments with a rod of iron. 
But, there is one who can save you, even Jesus, and His saving 
voice to you this morning is, “Believe in Me, and you shall be 
saved.” To believe in Him is to believe that He can save you, 
and therefore to trust Him. Do you not believe that of Him who 
is God? Can you not believe that of Him whose ways are not 
as your ways, whose grace is boundless, and whose love is free? 
Will you now believe that Christ can save you, and that He will 
save you? And will you now trust yourself to Him to save you? 
Say in your heart, “Here, Lord, I give my soul up to You to 
save it; I believe You will and You can; Your nature and Your 
name are love, and I trust Your name, I believe in Your 
goodness, I repose in You.” 

Sinner, you are saved! God has saved you! No soul ever so 
believed in Christ and yet was left unpardoned! Go your way; 
be of good cheer, “Your sins which are many, are all forgiven 
you.” Rejoice in Him evermore, for you shall never be gathered 
with sinners! May God give His blessing to you now, for Jesus 
Christ’s sake. Amen. 


761 



525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, August 23rd, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“You shall be called, Sought Out.” - Isaiah 62:12 

THE FIRST MEANING of our text is very clear. Here is a 
prophecy, because Jerusalem, having been deprived of her 
beauty by her enemies, was for a long time forsaken and worthy 
to be called, “A city which no man seeks after,” so, in a brighter 
day, her glory shall return, she shall be an attraction to all lands, 
and the joy of the whole earth. Multitudes of willing pilgrims 
shall seek her out that they may behold her beauty. She shall be 
a city gready set by, and gready sought out by those who love 
the hallowed spots where the mighty deeds of the Lord were 
worked, and the arm of Jehovah made bare. The text, doubtless, 
has a similar reference to the Church of God. During many 
centuries the Church of Christ was hidden — a thing obscure, 
despised, unknown, abhorred; she concealed herself in the 
catacombs; her followers were the poorest and most illiterate 
of men, proscribed by cruel laws, and hunted by ferocious foes. 
Although the royal bride of Christ, and destined to be the ruler 
of nations, she made no figure in the world’s eyes; she was but 
a litde stone cut out of the mountain without hands. But the 
day is already come in which multitudes seek the Church of 
Christ! Behold, they fly as a cloud and as doves to their 
windows! They ask the way to Zion with their faces in that 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


direction. As time rolls on, and the millennial kingdom of 
Christ comes nearer and nearer, the Church of God shall be 
more and more sought out, and from the ancient East, and the 
far-off West they shall come, multitudes beyond all count, 
saying, “Tell us where is the city of the Lord, the people of His 
love?” Though this, doubdess, is the primary meaning, I 
nevertheless believe that we may, without violence to the text, 
use it in another manner. In a fuller and more spiritual sense, 
the Church of God may well be called, “Sought Out,” and the 
like tide may truthfully be applied to every single member of 
that dearly-loved and dearly-purchased family! All the children 
of God may take for their name and distinction, the words, 
“Sought Out.” 

Without indulging in a longer preface, let us at once 
proceed to map out the plan of our present meditation. We 
intend to talk a litde while upon the natural condition implied, and 
then upon the surpassing grace revealed. Our third point will be the 
distinguishing title justified, and finally, the special duty suggested. 

I. First, THE NATURAL CONDITION IMPLIED IN THE 
TITLE, “SOUGHT OUT.” 

If the Church of God, my brothers and sisters, has been 
“ sought out ,” then, it is clear enough that originally it was lost — lost 
like that woman’s piece of silver which she valued so much that 
she lit her candle, and swept her house, and searched diligently 
until she found it. The tremendous fact of man’s utter ruin is 
the underlying cause of the necessity for divine grace to seek 
out its objective. If the fall had not been so complete in its ruin, 
there had been no need to seek us, for we would have sought 
the Lord. This, however, is the gloomy truth — that we have 
altogether become abominable, and all flesh has perverted its 
way. Of this fact, there can be no doubt, for you and I, who 
have been saved by grace, know right well that we were lost — 
hopelessly and forever lost — had not Jesus sought us out! Many 


763 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of the chosen seed are allowed to indulge in sin until they are 
lost even to the presence of virtue and morality — lost to the 
hopes of the most earnest friends, and the most affectionate 
entreaties of anxious relatives. Lost, we all were in our federal 
head, by imputation of his sin; lost, effectually by infusion of 
his corrupt nature; lost, afterwards, by our practice; lost, 
manifestly, by an accumulation of evil habits, and the growing 
force of depraved appetites. We have, by nature, departed far 
from God, and like the prodigal; have gone into a far country. 
We are comparable to that poor wretch who was possessed 
with a legion of devils, whom fetters could not bind, nor chains 
restrain. He who said that, by nature man is half brute and half 
devil, was not far from the truth! 

O my brothers and sisters, shall we ever know in this life 
how lost we were by nature? Until we can comprehend what 
“the Wrath of God” means, by gazing steadfastly into the pit 
of hell — until we can understand the purity of God amid the 
perfection of heaven — and so can measure the awful distance 
between our depraved condition and the perfect holiness of 
Jehovah, we shall not know how lost we were! But we know 
enough to make us shudder. Oh, when we saw, or thought we 
saw, the desperate evil of sin, then we cried out, “Lost! Lost! 
Lost!” with greater bitterness than he who sorrows for his only 
son, even for his first-born. Oh, the horrors of that terribly 
truthful discovery which showed us ourselves. We felt in our 
conscience that we were lost to everything which could 
commend us to God, or could attract His regard; we knew that, 
in ourselves, there were no means of restoration to purity and 
happiness. We were utterly and entirely lost and, as I said before, 
some of us lost with a vengeance — for our outward life had 
become a foul development of the filthy fountains within! 
Aliens, enemies, rebels, traitors — what shall we say more — no 
name is too vile for us! Had we been left to lie among the 


764 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


broken potsherds as worthless refuse, or had we been swept 
away with every unclean and loathsome thing, this had been 
our just desert. God could not have been too severe, even if 
the lowest pit of hell had been our portion. 

And then, my brothers and sisters, we were so lost that we 
did not seek the Lord. Natural men have superficial and passing 
thoughts of seeking God, but they have no true hunger and 
thirst after Him. Now and then, a pang of conscience, a sickly 
wish after something better crosses the unrenewed mind, but 
as the smoke out of the chimney is blown away by the wind, so 
these hasty emotions are gone and forgotten; as the dew which 
trembles at early morn upon the hedgerow evaporates in the 
heat of the sun, so the best desires which unregenerate men can 
know are soon melted away when once the sun of the world’s 
temptation rises upon us! My brothers and sisters, we who 
know the Lord know that we had no serious effectual thoughts 
of seeking after God until He sought after us! We were 
wandering sheep, well skilled in straying, but without the will 
to return. When the Spirit of God came upon us, He found 
nothing in our hearts ready to work with Him, but everything 
running in the opposite direction. Every imagination of the 
thought of our heart was only evil and that continually. Those 
who repent and seek the Lord before His grace draws them to 
Himself must be of a different race from us, for we were far 
off, and loved the distance too well to dream of returning! 

To descend still lower, my brothers and sisters — as we had 
no thought of coming to God — so we never would have willed to 
return. Left to ourselves, like the lost sheep, we would have 
wandered farther and farther, feeding upon yonder mountain 
of vanity, or skipping in the green valleys of sin; but back to 
God, to Christ, to heaven, we never could or would have come! 
As well might water labor to ascend like fire, as for fallen 
humanity to long after God. Wolves and tigers do not, without 


765 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a miracle, renounce their feasts of blood, nor will man refuse 
his natural food of sin! If there is any true desire in the human 
heart towards God and His Christ, it must have been implanted 
there by a divine power. God Himself in His bounty must have 
placed it there, for from the soil of Nature it never could have 
come — at least, so we have found it in our own case, for to 
this day, though we are saved, we find that the natural motions 
of our heart are all from God — none of them to God! And 
though we are His children exalted above measure by His great 
grace, yet, still the evil heart of unbelief departs from the living 
God, and never does it come toward Him. O carnal mind, you 
desperately evil thing, you are not reconciled to God, nor 
indeed can you be! O God, giver of every good and perfect gift, 
had You left us until our nature had spontaneously desired 
renewal, and our hearts had panted after Your salvation, You 
would have left us forever, for we would have chosen the 
downward path, and the lusts of the world we would have 
sought! The text, I think, implies all this, for God never works 
unnecessary wonders, and if we could have come to Him, or 
would have come to Him without His seeking us, doubtless He 
would have left us to that free will of which some boast so 
much. Brothers and sisters, we were lost , lost without a wish to 
return, and without a possibility of ever having such a wish! 

No, I must go further — our lost estate is shown yet more 
clearly in the fact that, so far from seeking God, we did not desire 
Him to seek us! Till He first inspired the wish to be found, we 
resisted His seeking. So far from asking Him to visit us with 
His salvation, when He did come, we took up arms against our 
gracious friend! Well do I remember those early strivings of the 
Spirit with my youthful heart which I choked, one after the 
other with a resolute determination. Well can I recollect those 
strong wrestlings, when it seemed as if the Spirit of God would 
separate me from my sins and I mustVessj hold on Christ, and yet, 


766 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


still determined to abide in sin and self-righteousness, I stood 
out against the Lord and would not have “that man” to reign 
over me! Ah, how long did Jesus stand and knock at our door, 
so long that He might well cry, as He does in the Canticles, “My 
head is wet with dew, and My locks with the drops of the night.” 
We would not let Him in — instead of rising to open, we sought 
to fasten every bolt, and to send every bar home, and we turned 
the horrible key of our self-will in the wards of the lock, with a, 
“Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of Your ways.” 
Ah, my brothers and sisters, if He sought us out, it was not 
because we had a will towards Him, or because we were 
persistent in prayer; our will was His great opponent; we were 
desperately set on mischief, and if we had not been sought out 
by sovereign grace, we never would have been saved — 

“’Twas Your love, O God, that knew us, 

Earth’s foundations long before 
That same love to Jesus drew us, 

By its sweet constraining power, 

And will keep us Safely, now and evermore.” 

To complete the story of this, our natural condition, I must 
add that our being sought out, considering our condition, was one of the 
greatest wonders ever known or heard of. I have occasionally heard 
this expressed in words; when a man has come to join the 
Church, he has said to me, “If anyone had told me six months 
ago that I would make a profession of being a follower of 
Christ, I would have knocked him down! If anyone had said to 
me, ‘You will repent of your sins, and seek and find a Savior,’ I 
would have laughed him to scorn! ‘I am no such fool,’ I would 
have said, as to become one of your sanctimonious hypocritical 
Methodists — such a thing can never be!’” And yet the thing did 
occur, and that soul which was once like the demoniac, full of 


767 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


devils, comes to sit clothed and in its right mind at the feet of 
the Savior, rejoicing in His power to save! In every one of us, 
if we have not put it into just such words, the divine grace 
which sought us has been quite as illustrious. What reason can 
you find why God should love you? How can you show any 
reason why He should follow you in all your wanderings? Why 
was it that He should track your devious footsteps, and never 
leave you until the predestinated moment came? How was it 
that, then, He grappled with you and overcame — and made you 
willingly bow your neck to His joyous yoke? You can give no 
reason; you can only clap your hands in admiration, and lift up 
your heart in wonder — and bless and praise the Lord thatjwr 
name is, “Sought Out.” — 

“’Twas all of Your grace we were brought to obey, 

While thousands were allowed to go 

The road which by nature we chose as our way, 

Which leads to the region of woe!” 

Thus much, then, is concerning our natural condition. You 
who know it, and have felt it, need not my words to teach you, 
but it is well for you to look often to the hole of the pit where 
you were drawn, and the rock where you were hewn. A sight of 
your first state will humble you, and fill your heart with praise 
to the God of grace who has made you to differ. 

II. Secondly, we have in the text SURPASSING GRACE 
REVEALED. 

This grace lies in several particulars. First that they were 
sought out at all; it is very wonderful grace on the part of God 
that He should plan a way of salvation; that He should prepare 
a great marriage supper, and issue the invitation to all men to 
come and feast. The gospel which says to men, “Whoever will, 
let him come and take of the water of life freely,” is a most 


768 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


gracious gospel; but there is something more gracious than this 
generous summons! One would have supposed that after the 
invitation had been freely given, and the preparation for the 
feast had been generously made, that the Lord would leave men 
to come or not as they willed. It is divine grace enough, surely, 
for God to provide meat for the hungry; let them come and eat, 
and if they will not, let them starve. To prepare ointment for 
the wounded, is not that enough? If the sick will not accept the 
medicine, then let them perish for their ingratitude in rejecting 
the healing gift. Ah, but God’s ways are not as our ways! Your 
bounty and mine would never dream of going any further; we 
never force our charity on unwilling recipients; we do not 
follow after diseased men, and beg and plead with them to be 
made whole. Not we! We think our bounty large enough if we 
give to him that asks of us — but to seek after pensioners — this, 
we never did, and probably never shall do. But hear O earth! 
And be astonished you heavens! After the general proclamation 
of the gospel has been made and man has rejected it; after 
Christ has been offered to men, and they have refused Him, 
God’s love does not stop there, but, determined to glorify His 
love, He then comes to seek out those who will not seek Him! 
“If,” He says, “you will not turn at My rebuke, if My invitation 
is trod under foot — I will do more than this — I will come out 
in the splendor of My grace and the magnificence of My power, 
and I will deal with that will of yours and overcome it; I will 
touch that stubborn nature of yours and make you yield; ‘A new 
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you.’ 
“You shall call Me, my Father; and shall not turn away from 
Me.’” It is a marvel of marvels, that sinful man fleeing from his 
Maker, rejecting his Creator’s invitation, refusing to be blessed 
with the blessedness of God, is nevertheless with unparalleled 
perseverance, and unexampled love, sought out and made 
captive by Almighty love! 


769 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


But this grace appears even more conspicuous if you 
consider the persons sought out. That any should be sought out is 
matchless grace — but that we should be sought — is grace 
beyond degree! My brother, my sister, I do not know what may 
have been your particular condition, but this I do know — you 
will feel that there were 10 times more reason that you should 
have been left out than that you should have been included in 
the purpose of grace! Often have I thought that I was the odd 
man. If in the muster roll of eternal life there must be one left 
out, I should myself have made the selection of my own person 
as the one most worthy to have been disregarded. Why me, 
Lord? Why me? — 

“Why was I made to hear Your voice, 

And enter where there’s room; 

While thousands make a wretched choice, 

And rather starve than come?” 

Does not the same thought arise in your mind? Is not your 
soul stirred with a holy and grateful wonder that you should 
have been sought out? And when, my brothers and sisters, I 
think of some in this place — some who once were in the harlots’ 
company — but who were sought out; some of you who once 
were plunged in drunkenness, how shall I sufficiendy praise the 
Lord for you? Many of you on the Sunday never listened to the 
preached Word, but sought your own pleasure, and followed 
your own business — but you were sought out! Many a tongue 
that sung the hymn just now once cursed and blasphemed God! 
Glory be to the divine grace which sought you out! Yes, though 
such were some of us, “We are washed, we are sanctified, and 
we are cleansed.” And is not this a marvel that, such as we are, 
should have been sought out? If He had sought kings and 
princes, we might have found a reason, but to seek us poor, 


770 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


obscure working men, illiterate, without ability — this is 
sovereign grace indeed! That He should seek the good, the 
moral, the excellent, we would not marvel; but to seek us, the 
depraved, the wicked, the abandoned — how shall we glorify 
His name? Tell it in hell and let devils howl, publish it in heaven 
and let angels sing; chant it, you blood-washed ones, before the 
eternal throne; He has chosen the base things of this world and 
the things that are not — to bring to nothing the things that are! 
This is a wonder of wonders, that we, even we, should bear the 
name of, “Sought Out”! 

Nor must I fail to bring to your recollection that the 
surpassing grace of God is seen very clearly in that m were sought 
OUT. The word “out,” conveys a mass of meaning. We were 
not only sought, but sought out. Men go and seek for a thing 
which is lost upon the floor of the house, but in such a case, 
there is only seeking, not seeking out. The loss is more 
perplexing, and the search more persevering when a thing is 
sought out. We were mingled with the mire; we were as when 
some precious piece of gold falls into the sewer, and men 
attempt to gather it out, and have to carefully inspect a heap of 
abominable filth, to turn it over, and over, and over, and 
continue to stir and rake, and search among the heap until the 
thing is found! Or, to use another figure, we were lost in a 
labyrinth; we wandered here and there, and when ministering 
mercy came after us, it did not find us at the first coming; it had 
to go to the right hand, and to the left, and search here and 
there, and everywhere, to seek us out, for we were so 
desperately lost, and had got into such a strange position, that 
it did not seem possible that ever grace could come to us. And 
yet, we were sought out! No gloom could hide us, no filthiness 
could conceal us — we were found! Glory to divine grace, God 
the Holy Spirit found us! The lives of some of God’s people, if 
they could be written, would make you marvel. The romance 


771 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of divine grace is infinitely more interesting than the romance 
of imagination! We have known persons who have run into the 
arms of Christ while they were intending to run down to hell; 
some who no more dreamed of being saved than of being made 
princes — who strolled into the house of God from curiosity — 
and the minister’s finger, or the glance of his eyes arrested them, 
and they felt the power of the divine life; some, who were 
rushing to the river to take away their own lives, but some text 
spoke to their conscience, and arrested their guilty feet. Strange 
and marvelous are the ways which God has used to find His 
own! He would shake a whole nation with His strong right 
hand to find His own elect; He would shake all nations, and 
bring the whole world to unparalleled confusion before He 
would suffer one of the blood-bought pearls of His crown to 
be lost among the ruins of the fall! He must and will seek them 
out, as the shepherd seeks out his sheep in the cloudy and dark 
day, bringing some of them down from the steep summit, 
others from the caverns among the crags; some from the river’s 
brink, others from the flood itself — all must be brought into 
one place, where they shall form one fold, under one Shepherd! 

One second will suffice to hint, dear brothers and sisters 
that the grace of God is illustrious in the divine agent by whom we 
are sought out. The text, taken in its context, tells us that we were 
sought out by divine grace. Saved souls are sought out by God 
Himself, and omnipotence is strained, omniscience is fully 
exercised — every attribute of God is put to its sternest labor to 
seek out lost souls! The most tremendous effort of divine 
strength we know is the regeneration of man. To bring Christ 
from the dead made God’s name to be right honorable for 
mighty power — but to raise His people from their graves is 
equally a work of stupendous power and grace. Do you ever 
wonder, Christian, who it was that came to seek you? It was not 
the minister; he might have sought you year after year, and 


772 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


never have found you. Your tearful mother, with her many 
prayers, would have missed you. Your anxious father, with his 
yearning heart of compassion, would never have discovered 
you. Those providences, which like great nets were seeking to 
entangle you, would all have been broken by your strong rushes 
after evil! Who was it sought you out? None other than Himself! 
The Great Shepherd could not trust His undershepherds; He 
must come Himself, and oh, if it had not been for those eyes 
of omniscience, He never would have seen you — He never 
would have read your history, and known your case — if it had 
not been for those arms of omnipotence, He never could have 
grasped you; He never could have thrown you on His shoulders 
and brought you home rejoicing. You were divinely sought! 
There is as much the impress of the linger of God upon a 
sought-out soul, as there is upon a newly-created world! You 
may see God’s finger in the green meadow studded with yellow 
flowers, in the flowing rills and towering mountains, and in the 
bright lamps of heaven at eventide — but you shall see the 
whole hand of God most clearly when a new-born soul is led 
to seek after the Lord’s salvation! You shall be called, “The 
people sought out.” And this shall be the wonder of it — that 
you were sought out in a divine fashion — 

“Love strong as death, no, stronger, 

Love mightier than the grave! 

Broad as earth and longer 
Than ocean’s widest wave — 

This is the love that sought us, 

This is the love that bought us, 

This is the love that brought us, 

To most glad day from saddest night, 

From deepest shame to glory bright, 

From depths of death to life’s fair height!” 


773 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Then, dear brothers and sisters, to close this part, 
remember that the glory of it is that we were sought out effectually. 
We are a people not sought out and then missed at the last. 
Almightiness and wisdom combined will make no failures. I 
may seek some of you in vain, as, alas, I have done; I may 
preach and preach again, as I do today and yet, perhaps, you 
will all miss the net. But when my Master comes out to fish for 
souls, the net will soon be full — there is no failure in His work! 
All of us, dear brothers and sisters, who have been brought into 
union with Christ, know that we were brought because it was 
effectual grace that came to us. There is a grace which may be 
resisted, there are common strivings of the Spirit, against which 
a man may contend successfully, but when the Spirit puts out 
the fullness of His divine energy, with the intention to work a 
sure work, it can never be frustrated! In each of our cases, there 
has been a divine intention, omnipotent, to compel us to be 
saved, and that Intention has been followed up by a divine 
action, which it was impossible for us to have effectually 
resisted! Which, in fact, we did not, and could not resist, 
because it charmed us into a complete subjection! We yielded 
at once to its sway. This has taken place in every single heart, 
and this is the glory of the name, “Sought Out” — that we were 
not half sought out, we were not feebly and unsuccessfully 
sought — but we were effectually and completely sought out! 
That is the reason why we are today heirs of God, and joint- 
heirs with Christ. 

III. Let us notice, in the third place, THE 
DISTINGUISHING TITLE JUSITIFIED. We are a people sought 
out. How were we sought out? Let us justify the name. 

Brethren, we are sought out, first of all, in the eternal purposes 
and the work of Christ. The coming of the Lord Jesus Christ from 
heaven was the commencement, the first overt act of seeking 


774 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


our souls. All that bloody pilgrimage of His, when hands and 
feet were bleeding; all that dreadful suffering of His upon the 
cross, was a seeking out of His people. Like some great pearl 
diver, the Lord Jesus Christ stood upon the glorious cliffs of 
heaven and plunged deep into the floods of sorrow and sin that 
He might seek out the lost pearls. Virtually, our Lord did save 
all His people then and there. “He came to seek and to save 
that which was lost,” and He did save, by His death, all His 
elect. Though not actually, they were virtually, every one of 
them, saved in that very hour when He bowed His head and 
said, “It is finished.” At that moment, they were in His hands; 
they were united to His person in the divine decree. At that 
moment, they stood in Him — 

“Not as they stood in Adam’s fall, 

When sin and sorrow covered all; 

But as they’ll stand another day, 

Fairer than sun’s meridian ray.” 

“He has saved us” first, “and called us” afterwards, “with 
a holy calling.” 

This seeking out, as far as we know it, began with gracious 
words of mercy. In the case of some, these were heard very early. 
A godly mother told us the truths of God with weeping; a holy 
father set us a good example; we were sought out by that little 
Bible we were taught to read, and that hymnbook which was 
put into our hands. We were sought out when we were taken 
to the house of God. The minister preached the gospel freely 
to all; he described our character and affectionately bid us come 
to Jesus. We were sought out while the preacher called the 
Sabbath-breaker, while he called the hard-hearted, the 
hypocrite, the formalist, the abandoned, and the profane! While 
he called each of these, according to our case, we felt that he 


775 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


was calling us, and we thought the eyes of Jesus were looking 
on us, and His voice was bidding us repent and live. Sometimes, 
we were especially sought out under the ministry when the 
preacher was led to describe our case, painting it in glowing 
colors. We thought somebody had told him, he seemed to 
know us so well, to have read us through and through, and we 
went home to our chamber, moved, at least for a season, with 
a desire after God — for we had been sought out! 

Nor did the Lord leave us only to the kind invitations of 
the ministry. Afflictions sought us out. The fever hunted us to the 
cross. When the cholera came, it carried a great whip in its hand 
to flog us to the Savior. We had serious losses, a decaying 
business — all which should have weaned us from the world. 
Our friends sickened — from their graves we heard the voice of 
invitation, “Come unto Christ and live.” We were disappointed 
in some of our fondest hopes, and our heart, torn for the time, 
yearned after a higher life, and a deeper satisfaction. Affliction 
after affliction, and tribulation after tribulation were the means 
which God used for seeking us out. And then there were 
visitations , mysterious visitations. It was in the night season, 
when all was still. We sat up in our bed and solemn thoughts 
passed through us. The preacher’s words, which we had heard 
years ago, came back fresh as when we heard them for the first 
time! Old texts of Scripture, the recollection of a mother’s 
tears — all these came upon us. Or it was in the midst of 
business, and we did not know how it was, but suddenly, a deep 
calm came over us. We felt as if an unseen hand was drawing 
us to pray; we resisted the divine impulse, but we knew that it 
had been there. It came again and again, and often as we walked 
the streets, we seemed attended by another soul than our own! 
It appeared to us, as if at times, we were two men in one — and 
that new and better man wrestled with us like the angel with 
Jacob, and at last divine grace overcame us, and brought us to 


776 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


repentance and humble faith. But after all, dear friends, these 
visitations, these providences, the preaching and so on, would 
all have been nothing, if it had not been for the appointed time 
when the Holy Spirit came and sought us out! Can I ever forget 
that moment when the preacher’s finger pointed to me, and he 
said, “Young man, believe in Jesus Christ, believe in Jesus 
Christ now. ” It was not his voice, alone, that spoke to me, but 
the voice from the mysterious throne said, “Believe now. ” And 
believe I did! I found no will to refuse! The thing I could not 
do before, the thing I did not understand till that moment, I 
both understood and did! I did believe in Jesus, and the burden 
rolled from off my bowed shoulders, and the spirit was 
emancipated and free! O may that time come to you who have 
never yet been sought out! May the Spirit of God so touch you 
that you cannot resist Him — so effectually move you, that you 
must yield subjection to the cross of Christ! In your cases, as 
well as mine, beloved in the Lord Jesus, you will be led to see 
that it was the effectual power of God the Holy Spirit that really 
did bring you to Christ, so that the tide is fully justified — 
“Sought Out. ” There may be some persons who come to Christ 
of themselves, I do not believe there are, and I am not one of 
them. There may be some who keep to Christ by the power of 
their free will — I believe there is a denomination who professes 
to do so — but I can only say their experience is the very reverse 
of what I have felt. I believe that those, of whom we read in 
Christian biographies, and in Scripture, owed their salvation to 
free, rich, and sovereign grace! The religion of these persons 
who come to Christ of their own free will is of modern 
invention, and I would not give a snap of the finger for the 
grace that springs from self, or another snap of my finger for 
the conversion which is the result of free will! May the Lord 
give us to be born from above, and if we have not a religion which 
is not worked in us by the Spirit of God, the sooner we get rid 


777 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of it the better! Then, perhaps, we shall go to Him who can give 
us the true bread of heaven that we may not be found empty at 
the last. 

IV. Now, 1 have dispatched these three matters, and I 
come to the practical part of the subject, and may I have your 
earnest attention? There is A SPECIAL DUTY INCUMBENT 
UPON THOSE WHO WEAR THE TITLE, “SOUGHT OUT.” 

My brothers and sisters, if it is really so that you are such 
debtors to divine seeking, ought you not to spend your whole 
lifetime in seeking others out? If you owe everything to divine 
grace, and nothing to self, are you not under solemn obligation 
to be the Lord’s forever, and ought you not — not by proxy, but 
personally and individually, everyone of you — to seek out the 
rest of the Lord’s people, that they, like you, may bear the title 
of a people sought out? I am earnest in the desire of inducing 
every member of this Church, and of every other Church to be 
winners of souls! 

The preaching of the gospel is God’s grand instrument of 
mercy; that is His great magnet. Those of you, who can use this 
holy weapon, do! You who have ability and have talents, devote 
yourselves to God’s cause; give yourselves up to His ministry. 
I would to God there were more of those who are successful 
in professions, men who either in medicine or law have attained 
eminence, would consecrate their talents to the ministry! They 
need not fear that in giving themselves to God, He will not take 
care of them, and as to honor, if it is found anywhere; it is the 
sure heritage of the faithful ambassador of Christ! If you have 
been sought out, my brother, I do not blush to recommend you 
to give up the most lucrative employment to seek out others. 
If you have the power to stir other’s hearts, if God has given 
you the tongue of the eloquent, consecrate it neither to 
parliament nor to the bar — devote it to the plucking of brands 
from the burning — become a herald of the cross, and let the 


778 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


whole world, as far as possible, hear from you the tidings of 
salvation! The preaching of the gospel is not the only means; it 
is a way of seeking out most commonly used; but there are 
other methods which I will recommend to you this morning. 
We are not to preach merely to those who come to listen. We 
must carry the gospel to where men do not desire it. We should 
consider it our business to be generously impertinent — 
thrusting the gospel into men’s way — whether they will hear, 
or whether they will not! Let us hunt for souls, first of all, by 
visitation. There are thousands in London who never will be 
converted by the preaching of the gospel, for they never attend 
places of worship. Some of them do not know what sort of 
thing a religious service is. We may shudder when we say it — it 
is believed there are thousands in London who do not even 
know the name of Christ — living in what we call a Christian 
land — and yet, they have not heard the name of Jesus! Thank 
God things are better than they were, but things are still bad 
enough. Brethren, you must go and see these things and mend 
them. To the lodging houses, young men, you must carry the 
gospel, and to those thickly-peopled habitations where every 
room contains a family, and not one room a Christian. I believe 
there is very much good to be done by house-to-house 
visitation. Not by City Missionaries and Bible-women only — 
may God speed those noble bodies of laborers — but by all of 
you! By you who have position in society among your 
neighbors — make yourselves free, and go and talk to them of 
Christ in the little houses that are near to you. As far as your 
time allows, be a visitor; and if there is one dark part of the 
town known to you as the haunt of sinners, make it a point to 
use this agency of visitation from house-to-house. Let the lost 
sheep of Israel’s house be sought out! Some will need special 
means, before ever they can be found and brought in. How 
does one’s heart rejoice over the reformatories, and the 


779 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


midnight meetings — over the attempts to bring that class of 
souls to Christ! I have often heard it said that few of the converts 
from those meetings hold on and prove sincere. It is a great 
lie — a very considerable portion are reformed, and mere 
reformations are of litde use — but where regeneration is worked, 
and these girls are pointed to a Savior, you will never find one 
of them go back! Has not God been pleased to give us, in this 
Church, scores of instances where those who were decoys for 
Satan are now the leaders of others to the cross of Christ, and 
like Mary, love much because they have been much forgiven? 
Seek them out! If there is any other class that is neglected, seek 
it out; if you happen to know any of the more degraded part of 
the population, who are only sought for by the policeman, and 
never hear a word of good advice — except from the 
magistrate — seek them out! If Christ sought you out, the 
inference is strong that you ought to seek out others! 

And if special means are needed, let special means be 
applied. You must be very kind; to broken hearts you must 
speak very gendy. Their distance from God is a distance of fear. 
The gulf that separates them is despair. There are some such in 
this house, perhaps. Seek them out, and if you find them very 
desponding, writing bitter things against themselves, let love be 
shown them! Try if you can, to get the cords of affection 
around them, and so draw them to Christ. Do not turn from 
them and say, “They are such miserable objects, so unbelieving, 
I will not look after them.” But the more you find they need a 
tender heart and weeping eyes to bring them to the Savior, the 
more carefully follow them till you bring them to Him! You will 
find some who will need a world of perseverance. Perhaps your 
child has been unconverted for 30 years. Your prayers have 
been unheard till now, and the devil tempts you to give it up. 
Never do so! If you had to be sought so long — and some of 
you needed to be sought for 50 years before you were found — 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


525 Am I Sought Out? - Isa. 62:12 


never give up a fellow creature! Follow your child in all his 
ingratitude, pursue his footsteps with your loving kindness, and 
never leave him until you have brought him, at last, to find joy 
where you found it — in the wounds of Jesus! Let me beg you, 
where all other means fail, to seek men by your prayers. As long 
as a man has one other man to pray for him, there is a hope of 
his salvation. If you, in your daily supplications, make mention 
of men — if you select special cases — if you bear their names 
before the Lord, you shall have the joy of seeing them turned 
from darkness to light, and they, with you, shall be a people 
“sought out.” If a word of mine shall stir up but one of you to 
seek the Lord’s hidden ones, my soul shall rejoice! And if every 
one of you shall register a vow in this house of prayer — “I will 
seek out some family today, and continue my work tomorrow; 
and the next day I will be seeking out others. I will not wait till 
they come to me to be taught, but go and seek them and 
compel them to come in that the house may be filled, that the 
Church of God may have its full complement of Christ’s 
chosen.” If you will do this, my soul shall be well content! If 
you have never been sought, then you will not seek others; if 
you have never tasted that the Lord is gracious, I shall not 
marvel that you neglect this work! But oh, by the hell from 
which you are delivered, by the heaven to which you are going, 
by the blood which redeemed you from death and hell, by that 
gracious Spirit which quickened you, and still keeps you alive, 
by every glorious promise which stimulates you in your onward 
career, I pray you spend yourselves, and be spent in seeking 
souls! 

Look at this great mass of habitation, this wilderness of 
human dwellings — if we do not work with all our might, we 
can never hope to see the knowledge of the Lord covering this 
great world of London — let alone the greater world outside! O 
let us be up and doing, and let it be told in every house, in every 


781 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


alley, that Christians care for souls! If you are the people sought 
out, go and seek others; tell them that, “Whoever believes on 
the Lord Jesus Christ shall be saved.” 


782 



526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, August 23rd, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“...and did not know that what was done by the angel was 
real, but thought he was seeing a vision.” - Acts 12:9 

FANCY, NOT fact! A dream! A delusion! That would be 
the world’s estimate of the most blessed Christian experience. 
“Fanaticism” is the name by which they call it. But, call it by 
whatever name you please, the divine grace that interposes and 
rescues a sinner from the law’s threats, from Satan’s tyranny, 
from the malice of men, and the fears of one’s own heart is 
matter of abundant joy. Then, let it be witnessed by a life of 
undeviating principle and devoted service of God — sneer who 
may — suspect it who will — it is a noble triumph! Such 
triumphs of grace we have among us, and there are many who 
can witness to the fact. Still, dear friends, not infrequently does 
it happen that you, whose salvation is our joy, of whom we 
speak with the utmost assurance, are yourselves in straits, 
exercised with fights without and fears within; and you are 
unable to satisfy your own consciences that the work is divine. 
Observe now that Peter was brought out of prison by a great 
miracle, and yet it seemed to him as a vision or a dream. I need 
not recapitulate the circumstances. I have just read them in 
your hearing. This much I propose. 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I. First, let me endeavor to draw out some reflections from the 
narrative; and then, secondly, I shall take up the text itself and try to 
show you that there is no illusion, whatever you may think, in the mighty 
operations of the Lord. 

To begin — the first remark we think we are justified in 
making is this, that if ever our enemies can get hold of us, they 
will be quite sure to hold us as fast as they can! When Herod 
had been able to apprehend Peter, he was not content with 
ordinary means of keeping him in custody. He has Peter put 
into the strongest prison in Jerusalem; to make assurance 
doubly sure, he is chained not to one soldier, but to two. He 
was too great a prize to be readily lost. He anticipated as much 
satisfaction for himself from the applause of the people, for 
putting so eminent a servant of Christ as James to death, that 
he could not afford to lose an opportunity of getting further 
prey; so he seized him who was accounted a pillar in the Church 
with singular quickness. Mark you, brothers and sisters, if by 
any fault of our own, we ever fall into the hands of our enemies, 
we need expect no mercy from them. And, if without fault, we 
are delivered for a litde season into their hands, we have good 
reason to cry aloud to God, for whoever may be spared, the 
Christian never is. Men will forgive a thousand faults in others, 
but they will magnify the most trivial offense in the true 
follower of Jesus! Nor do I very much regret this. Let it be so, 
and let it be a caution to us, to walk very carefully before God 
in the land of the living. You young members of the Church, 
who are often engaged in your worldly calling, where a great 
number of persons are watching for your falling, let this be a 
special reason to walk very humbly before God. If you walk 
carelessly, remember the lynx-eyed world will soon see it, and 
then, with its hundred tongues, it will soon spread the story. 
You may say — “Tell it not in Gath; publish it not in the streets 
of Askelon, lest the daughters of Philistia rejoice.” But, they will 


784 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


tell it. With many an addition of their own, they will repeat the 
story. You shall hear them say — “Aha! Aha! So would we have 
it! All these Christians are inconsistent, they are all mere 
professors; they are hypocrites to a man, every one of them.” 
Thus will much damage be done to our good cause and much 
insult offered to the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The cross of Christ is in itself an offense to the world; let 
us take heed that we do not add any offense of our own. It is 
“to the Jew a stumbling block;” let us mind that we put no 
stumbling blocks where there are enough already. “To the 
Greek it is foolishness;” let us not add our folly to give point 
to the scorn with which the worldly deride the gospel. Oh, how 
jealous should we be of ourselves, for we serve a jealous God! 
How rigid should we be with our consciences, for we serve one 
whose name is “Holy, Holy, Holy!” Yes, in the presence of 
adversaries who will misrepresent our best deeds and twist our 
best endeavors into something selfish — impugning our 
motives where they cannot censure our actions — how 
circumspect should we be! We pilgrims travel as suspected 
persons through the world. Not only are we under surveillance, 
but there are more spies than we imagine. The espionage is 
everywhere — at home and abroad. If we fall into their hands, 
we may sooner expect generosity from a wolf, or mercy from a 
devil, than to find anything like patience with our infirmities 
from the men of the world, or anything like the hiding of our 
iniquities from the men who spice their infidelity towards God 
with scandals against His people! The world is too much like 
the accursed Canaan who pointed to his father’s nakedness. We 
can only expect of our own brothers and sisters, the conduct 
of Shem and Japheth, who shall go backward to cast the mantle 
over us. Better far that we should so act and so live as to not 
ever need this mande of charity, but be able to say, with all 
humility, yet with holy courage — “Lord, You know that in this 


785 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


thing I have not sinned, but have walked uprightly in Your 
ways.” That is the first lesson which I feel bound to teach, “For 
what glory is it, if when you are buffeted for your faults, you 
shall take it patiendy?” 

The second lesson is this. When a case is put into God’s 
hands, He will certainly manage it well, and He will interfere in 
sufficient time to bring His servants out of their distress. Peter’s 
case was put into God’s hands. The company that met at the 
house of Mary, the mother of Mark, was appealing to the great 
Advocate. If any man is in prison, “We have an advocate with 
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.” With their humble 
prayers and tears they were pleading for their brother, whose 
valuable life they could ill afford to spare, for the infant Church 
needed the apostles, at least for a season. I think I hear them 
pleading one after the other — “Lord, remember Peter! You 
know how we love him; our desires go up for him. James is 
dead. Alas, we took up his body and mourned him! Let not 
Peter be slain! Oh, take not the prop from under us! Remove 
not the pillar from the wall, nor the stone from its place.” The 
Lord has heard their cries. Peter’s cause is in His hands. He will 
interfere in due time. The assurance that prayer is heard is the 
earnest that prayer will be answered. The petition is accepted, 
though no answer has yet been received. Well, we can leave it 
there. But look, brothers and sisters, Peter has been lying in 
prison the whole week. The feast of unleavened bread is over; 
it is the last night, the last night! The evening has crept on; no, 
the dark hours have set in; it is midnight. The sun will soon be 
rising — in a few more hours — and then where is Peter? Lord, 
if You do not interfere, where is Peter? If You come not now 
to help him, his blood shall make the populace of Jerusalem 
glad while they gloat and delight in his slaughter! But just at that 
last and dark hour of the night, God’s opportunity overtook 
man’s extremity! A light shone in the dungeon. Peter was 


786 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


awakened. God never is before His time; nor is He ever too 
late; He comes just when He is needed. But look, there is Peter 
asleep! Peter is asleep, doing nothing, doing nothing! Well, and 
the best thing for him, too, for the case was put into God’s 
hands! I ask you, dear friends, suppose Peter had been awake, 
what could he do? Had he been fretting and troubling himself, 
what good could he have done? Finding, therefore, that 
nothing remained for him, he just throws himself upon the 
mercy of God, shuts his eyes as peaceably as though he were 
to wake tomorrow to a wedding feast, and not to his own 
execution. Sleep on, blessed Peter! Well might Herod envy you 
that peace which his kingly robe could never give him. You 
sleep, though your hands are chained, for your spirit is free; and 
it may be that in your dreams you are rejoicing “with a joy 
unspeakable, and full of glory.” When the case is taken into 
God’s hands, and you and I feel that we can do nothing for 
ourselves, we may take sleep in perfect quietude, for so He 
gives His beloved sleep. While we sleep, His watchful eyes keep 
their ceaseless guard. Jesus might seem on one occasion to be 
asleep, but you know where He slept — it was in the back part 
of the ship. Why there? I think He slept with His hand on the 
tiller, so that the moment He awoke, He might steer the 
vessel — 

“Though winds and waves assault your keel, 

He does preserve it, He does steer — 

Even when the boat seems most to reel! 

Storms are the triumphs of His art, 

Sure He may close His eyes, but not His heart.” 

God never sleeps; He is always on the watch for His people. 
“Well, but,” says one, “surely the Lord should have interfered 
before this time, for Peter is not only asleep, but he is bound — 


787 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


bound to two soldiers! How can he escape?” Ah, that word 
“How ?” — that word “How?” What a deal of mischief it has done 
to faith! Don’t you know that true faith has no such word in all 
her vocabulary? Faith never asks, “How?” God has said, “It 
shall be,” faith believes it will be. As to how it shall be, that is 
God’s business, not mine! It is Unbelief that says, “How? I do 
not see it. How? How? How can it be?” Hush, Unbelief! The 
fetters shall drop off; gates shall open of their own accord. The 
case is in God’s hands! If it were in man’s hands, it would fail, 
for cursed is he who trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm. 
The strongest sinew in an arm of flesh must crack; there must 
be impossibilities to humanity, but to Deity impossibilities are 
non-existent! Be quiet, for the case is with Him; it may be the 
last moment, the apostle may be asleep, and he may be bound, 
but Peter must come out; for God has heard the prayer, and 
Peter shall be free! 

Yet a third remark, we think, lies like a precious stone upon 
the very surface of this narrative. It is this — that when God 
shall come to deliver His people, all the circumstances which 
seem to go against their deliverance shall only tend to set forth 
His glory more! What contempt He puts upon chains, prisons, 
cords, iron gates, cells — inner and outer cells — look how He 
breaks their bonds asunder, and casts their cords from Peter! I 
know of nothing that seems to illustrate more God’s splendid 
triumph over man’s cunning than the resurrection of Christ. 
“His disciples will steal Him away while men sleep.” “Well,” 
says Pilate, “you have a watch, go and make it as sure as you 
can.” He trusted to men, who were sure to do the thing well — 
the men who hated Him. They keep the watch, they roll the 
great stone, they seal it, and they go home to their beds. Ah, 
men of the Sanhedrin, proud priests! You have done the work, 
go to your rest, and say, “This deceiver shall never shake the 
earth again, nor call us dumb dogs that cannot bark, nor tell us 


788 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


that we are blind leaders of the blind; He is buried and the seal 
is on Him.” — 


“Vain the watch, the stone, the seal, 

Christ has broken the gates of hell!” 

Look! He rises! And as the angel sits down upon the stone, 
he seems, in quiet sarcasm, to say to the priests, to earth, to hell, 
“Roll it back again if you can, and seal it once more, for He is 
risen and has overcome the wiles of men.” So, Christian, rest 
assured that everything that looks black to your gaze now, shall 
only make it the brighter when God delivers you! Every dark 
and bending line shall surely meet in the center of His love, and 
but express more to your mind His power, His wisdom, His 
faithfulness, His truth! 

Furthermore, the whole story seems to teach us that no 
difficulty can ever occur which God cannot meet when He 
makes bare His arm. The chains are gone, the cells are passed, 
but there is that iron gate. Oh, that iron gate! I think there are 
some of you tonight who are troubled about it. God has been 
helping you; you have had faith up till now, but you have got 
to the iron gate. Oh, if you could but pass that — it leads into 
the city — all would be well. But that iron gate! Some of you get 
to dread the iron gate a month before you get to it; you get to 
fretting and troubling yourself for three months, perhaps, 
about the iron gate! You do for months as those holy women 
did for hours, which went out at the break of day to the 
sepulcher, and as they went along they said, “Who shall roll 
away the stone?” There was no stone to roll away! And when 
you go to this place, you will find that there is no iron gate there, 
or if there should be, it will open of its own accord! Oh, how 
often have we had to wonder at our own folly and we have said, 
“Well, I will never do that again! 1 will never more borrow 


789 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


misery; sufficient for the day is the evil thereof; I will never go 
out to get a loan of sorrow for tomorrow.” But alas, we have 
done it the very next day! Wait, wait, O Christian, on the Lord! 
Leave all anxiety about the iron gates to Him! Since the day 
when you believed in Him and put your soul into His hands by 
prayer, it has been God’s cause, not your cause; it has been 
God’s work to deliver you, and not your work — 

“The gates of brass before Him burst, 

The iron fetters yield.” 

There is yet this one further remark. See, beloved, see 
clearly; see indisputably — the omnipotence of prayer. If all those 
disciples had sworn an oath that they would get Peter free, they 
could not have accomplished it! What could they do? Herod 
has an army; the prison is strong; the guards are not to be 
bribed; the last night is come. What can they do? There was 
only one weapon they could use, and that was hanging at their 
belts — the weapon of all-prayer! They told Jesus about it. When 
every other gate was shut, there was the gate to heaven open — 
so they sent messages up to Him who is able to free the 
prisoners, and to their own surprise Peter is freed! Have not we, 
in this Church, often felt the power of prayer? I sometimes fear, 
beloved, we are lagging here now — lagging in prayer. I may be 
permitted to say there are some of you I do not see as often at 
prayer meetings as I would wish. It is a busy time of the year, 1 
know, and therefore I make plenty of excuses for you, but 
when it was not so busy I did not see you! And then, there are 
some who grow dull in their recollections of fact. At Park Street 
have not we had seasons when our hearts were hot within us, 
when we could not speak because we thought, “Surely God is 
in this place”? It seemed an awful place to us; we were 
prevailing with God, we were drawing down the blessings, and 


790 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


those blessings continued up till now, as the result of earnest 
supplication. What simple prayers they were! Strangers who 
came in found much fault, but the Lord did not. There were 
often things said that were not very grammatical; but what did 
it matter if the heart was in the thing? We stormed heaven’s 
gates and down came legions of mercies to us! 

We need more prayer, more prayer! I am always glad to 
hear that your special prayer meetings, and your social 
assemblies for supplication, are well attended, and that there is 
a desire among the members to have such prayer meetings 
often. I am sure the elders of the Church will join with me in 
advocating and encouraging them. We will lend the rooms 
connected with this Tabernacle, convinced that the more we 
meet together, and the more we supplicate the throne of grace, 
the blessings will come down! There are a few brothers and 
sisters who have met every morning for these last four years, 
or five years it may be; they meet now every morning, wet or 
dry, winter or summer, every morning in the chapel at Park 
Street, always praying for our prosperity. Their numbers are 
few to what they used to be. We have not got the fire now that 
we once had, I fear. May the Lord put the embers together and 
fan them with His breath, and make them blaze again, until our 
ministry shall be with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven, 
and the multitudes shall hear the voice of God speaking in their 
hearts! Brethren, pray for us, pray for your children, your 
households; take everything to God in prayer, no matter how 
hard, how intricate, how difficult. If there is a knot you cannot 
untie, cut it with prayer! God knows how to deliver you when 
you cannot deliver yourself. Be much in supplication, for this 
will make you mighty; make you prevalent with men when you 
have prevailed with the Maker of men! Such are the reflections 
that occur to us from the narrative. 


791 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


II. But now I turn more closely to my text itself. When 
Peter came out of prison, his deliverance was so marvelous that 
he did not know whether it was true or whether it was a vision! 
Like the Psalm which says, “When the Lord turned again the 
captivity of Zion; we were like them who dream.” Thus, when 
a sinner is saved, pardoned, justified, he is utterly astonished 
and thinks it cannot be true, because it is so good! The 
astonishment lies in this — “It cannot be true,” he says, “that I 
am saved. I! I! I! If it had been all the people in the world, I 
could have believed it, but can it be that / am delivered? How 
is it that He should have mercy upon me? I who was so lately in 
fetters? That a week ago could blaspheme? That a day or two 
ago could have talked all the idlest jests and could have lived 
upon the foulest of earth’s pleasures? That I, I should be 
saved — delivered from sin, though so filthy — set free, though 
so fast bound?” 

I must try to interpret this peculiar reflection — this dream- 
like feeling. The reality of God’s mercy is only apprehended by 
faith; and because faith has to do with things not seen, you are 
apt to throw suspicions on its evidence. You see no tangible 
instrumentality equal to the mighty task. Our ruin was, in some 
sense, effected by degrees. We can trace the course of evil. The 
soul of man is like a temple in ruins. The temple built for God 
has become an abode for unclean spirits. God suddenly deserted 
it, but it gradually fell into its present dilapidation and 
uncleanness. The eyes that were once as lamps, which flashed 
with light and love, have become contracted, and their habit 
now is to love darkness rather than light; the tongue that was 
once a fountain that sent forth sweet water, pure and refreshing, 
has become as a noxious spring, whose bitter streams savor of 
enmity to God, and envy of the brothers and sisters. The heart 
that was once as the holy place of all our frame, where the 
beauty of holiness reposed in heavenly calm, has now become 


792 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


the place of idols and the abode of secret abominations; the 
very breath that sent up its sacred incense in rich perfume, 
acceptable to God, has grown corrupt, and breathes out its 
poison and its foul impurities. Will God in very deed dwell with 
man upon the earth? Will He take up His abode with us? Shall 
the change be worked in the twinkling of an eye? Does it suffice 
that the Word sown in weakness, springs up with the power of 
the Holy Spirit? Man fallen may baffle us, but man redeemed is 
a mystery we cannot fathom! It seems always to mere mortal 
sense as a vision, the dream of poets, or the work of 
imagination. But why marvel? The angel of the covenant has 
descended from heaven to earth, and you knew not it was He, 
till He loosed your bonds, broke up your path, or rather opened 
every door with the keys that hang at His belt, and gave you 
knowledge of salvation, by the remission of your sins! Then 
you thought it was a vision, because you had not known 
redemption except that your own soul was redeemed; you had 
not understood salvation except that you were yourself 
redeemed; and that matchless secret of the new birth 
penetrated your understanding in the same hour that it was 
worked upon your own heart! Thus it is commonly with us, 
brothers and sisters. We see, as a main fact, the downward 
course by which we corrupted our ways when we were dead in 
sin. But, the hour we first believed, that blessed season when 
we were translated out of the kingdom of darkness into the 
kingdom of God’s dear Son, seems like a vision to us! 

Another reason why it appears so visionary to us, is 
because no forethought or intention of our own helped and 
availed. Now, this is true with some of you in one way. Never 
were your purposes less inclined to seek the Lord than they 
were when He found you! Your plans were broken off before 
you were aware of it. You were asleep when the angel entered 
your cell; and you were dreaming of other things than those 


793 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


that were in store for you. Perhaps you dreamed that the bolts 
were not heavy, the bars were not thick, the locks were not fast, 
and you might get up and let yourself out whenever you liked. 
It was only when you were delivered that you saw how fast you 
had been held. The rescued soul, alone, can know how “Satan 
binds our captive minds fast in his slavish chains.” And, in yet 
another way, some of us have proved the same. We had our 
schemes to get loose, and many a bitter day we had tried and 
toiled in vain, till at length we had fallen asleep in blank despair, 
dreaming of nothing but our fearful doom, when the 
deliverance came in such an unheard of manner, we could 
scarcely persuade ourselves it could be true! And so it is, 
brothers and sisters, we never believe anything to be as real as 
what we see with our own eyes, and work with our own hands. 
And I suppose it is just the natural idea which flesh and blood 
is prone to take of the things of God. They seem more like a 
vision, than the work of a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. 

And still, I scarcely think I have probed the matter to the 
bottom yet. The simplicity of God’s method of divine grace has 
not ceased to be a marvel. The Jews seek after a sign; and there 
is something of the Jewish nature about us all. At least I find a 
host of exercised souls who are asking for signs. Well, and the 
Greeks, who are rather a refined class of unbelievers — they 
seek after wisdom! They want some extraordinary endowment. 
And this craving has not died out among us! For the first, I hear 
one say, “I am afraid, sir, that my experience is only a dream. I 
need a sign to give me assurance.” Let me tell you that simple 
faith gives clearer evidence than any fancy that could possess 
your mind! Are you still bound with the chains of your sins? 
Are you still shut up in the stronghold of unbelief? Have you 
never seen the key in the Savior’s hand that opened the door to 
set you free? “Oh, yes,” you say, “but I am afraid it was only a 
vision, for I am but a poor, helpless creature after all.” And 


794 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


what else could you be? You are never as safe as when you are 
emptied of all confidence in self. Paul could boast of 
extraordinary revelations, but the Lord sent him a thorn in the 
flesh, lest he should be puffed up by them. Then, again, there 
are those who show more anxiety after gifts than after divine 
graces; and to them all the mercy they have received seems but 
a vision because they are not raised up above common mortals. 
After this extraordinary release of Peter, you do not find any 
display. The aposde was but a poor, trembling believer; he 
would not have Mary or the damsel Rhoda talk too loudly, or 
express their gladness too cheerfully — he beckoned them with 
his hand to hold their peace. He just declared how the Lord 
had brought him out, and then he departed and went into 
another place. Brethren, I would have you make your boast in 
the Lord, and speak of what He has done for your souls; but I 
would warn you not to vaunt your experience, or attempt to 
magnify yourselves as if we, any of us, had herein matter for 
glory! The very manner of God’s delivering grace is to hide 
pride from our eyes; and the reality is none the less tangible, 
because the angel did all for us to show his strength, and then 
withdrew from us that we should feel our own weakness! 

Once again — the suddenness of this deliverance will 
surprise you. “So suddenly, too!” It seems like a vision. We 
have often known persons suddenly renewed in heart who 
would not believe it. They knew it was so, but still, in thinking 
it over, it did seem as though it could not possibly be true that 
they were saved. They had to rub their eyes again to see 
whether they were not asleep and dreaming. It was much too 
good to be true, and happened all so quickly. The greatness of 
the mercy has made them stagger. That God should just forgive 
them, and let them into heaven would have been marvelous, 
but that He should make them His children, His sons, heirs of 
God, joint heirs with Christ — this surpassed all belief! Their 


795 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


fears had got such hold of them, that they were ready to die; 
but little prepared to be saved. Their convictions had been 
terrible, but now the joy is so excessive, they cannot think but 
that it must be all presumption, all a dream. Many and many 
have there been who have come to the pastor and said, “Oh I 
had such joys! I did believe in Christ, I know I did; I cast myself 
wholly on Him and I felt such a change, I became so different 
a person from what I had ever been before, but now I come to 
look back upon it, I cannot think it was true, it must have been 
a vision, it cannot possibly be a matter of fact!” 

Now, dear friends, lest you should give way to this 
apprehension too much, let me remind you that inasmuch as 
this is a great thing, it is all the better evidence that it comes 
from God; so great a river may well have a rapid tide; so glaring 
a sun may well shine with uncommon splendor. The great God 
does not do litde acts of divine grace. His works are all great, 
sought out by all them who fear Him. Inasmuch as you confess 
that you are a great sinner, and therefore this is a surprising 
thing, let me remind you that this is the ordinary way in which 
God works to give great mercies to great sinners. He does not 
give His favors to men who think they deserve them; He 
searches the heart with a glance, and He abhors the proud. But, 
to those who are made to feel that there is no good thing in 
them, and rest on His grace because they have nothing else on 
which to depend, the mercy comes, and the prisoners are freed! 
Dear friends, do you not remember that the gospel that we 
preach is a very great gospel? Is it not called in Scripture, “The 
great salvation”? Now, when you find your salvation to be great, 
do not shrink back and say, “Oh, it cannot be genuine because 
it is great.” It would not be the genuine gospel if it were little! 
If it were not a surprising wonderful thing, if it were not 
marvelously astonishing, it would not be the gospel. “For My 
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are My ways your ways, 


796 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


says the Lord. As high as the heavens are above the earth, so 
are My thoughts above your thoughts, and My ways above your 
ways.” Besides, remember, my brothers and sisters that Jesus 
died in unutterable pangs on the cross. Did He die there to buy 
farthing mercies, to purchase little favors for little sinners? The 
blood of bulls and goats might achieve some litde, but the 
blood of Him who was the only begotten of the Father cannot 
have been shed for trifles! Therefore, consider that this must 
have been true, because it is so great, so strange, so surpassing 
all your thoughts! God help you to say with the apostle Peter, 
“Now I know that God has sent His angel.” Thus shall you 
know for sure that the Lord has sent His angel and has 
delivered you out of the hands of your enemies, and from all 
the expectation of your doubts and fears. I will tell you how to 
prove the reality of it. If you should fear that your feelings have 
been all a dream, come with me, hand in hand, and let us go 
and prove the authenticity of our faith at the cross! You and I, a 
pair of sinners, full of sin, covered with the leprosy of it from 
head to foot — let us go and stand at Calvary’s cross! There He 
hangs! His hands and feet are pierced; the blood distils. Jesus! 
O my Lord! For whom do You die? “For sinners,” He says. 
Here are two, most gracious Master; remember us when You 
come into Your kingdom! I think I hear Him say, ‘You shall 
be with Me in Paradise,” for never souls breathed that prayer 
in humble faith and were unheard! Jesus, we look to Your 
wounds and they are clefts in the rock into which we fly like 
doves, or if we may not compare ourselves thereunto, we will 
fly as ravens and we will hide till the tempest is over. Your 
blood we trust to redeem us, Your merit to clothe us from head 
to foot, Your plea to preserve us, Your strong arm to keep us, 
Your love to give us life now and in eternity! 

And now, before I close, let me tell you that the picture 
may be inverted. If there are those to whom reality seems to be 


797 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a dream, what multitudes there are, on the other hand, to whom 
mere dreams appear to be real and true! Ah, such dreaming is 
the saddest thing I know; and about the hardest task it is that I 
ever tried — to awaken such slumberers from their delusions. 
Hear me, you who seek out your own inventions, yet submit 
not yourselves to the righteousness of God! Do you believe in 
God? Yes? Then the god you believe in is not the God who 
created heaven and earth, but the god of your own imagination! 
Do you profess Christ? The Christ you profess is not the Son 
of the Father, but the child of your own fancy; and do I hear 
you talk of your experience? Alas, then, it is not the witness of 
the Holy Spirit, but the incoherent ramblings of a delirious 
brain! O you poor deluded souls, who put your thoughts for 
God’s counsels, your devices for His decrees, and your efforts 
for His interposition; you “shall be as a dream of a night vision. 
It shall even be as when a hungry man dreams and, behold, he 
eats; but he awakes, and, his soul is empty — or as when a thirsty 
man dreams and, behold, he drinks; but he awakes and, behold, 
he is faint and his soul has appetite.” Christians you call 
yourselves today, but Christ shall say to you another day, “I 
never knew you.” Ah and it is true, for you never knew Him! 
Do you dream of peace? Without God’s pardon it is a dream! 
Do you dream of heaven? Without holiness it is a dream! Do 
you dream of joy at God’s right hand? But you are not His 
people; you have never renounced the world, overcome the 
wicked one, confessed the faith, or followed the Master in the 
regeneration, which is the earnest of a blessed resurrection. Oh, 
my hearers, consider the words, I beseech you — “As a dream 
when one awakes, so, O Lord, when You awake, You shall 
despise their image.” 

Here are many, I dare say, who do not understand what I 
have been talking about; God give them understanding. Sinner, 
you must either be in Christ, or perish! Remember, sinners, 


798 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


526 No Illusion - Acts 12:9 


tonight there is one of two things for you — either to be shut up 
in the prison of hell, or else to be delivered from the prison of 
sin. Your destiny hangs here — salvation or damnation, life or 
death. Dare you die, sinner, dare you die? Dare you die with 
your sins about you, like millstones strapped about your neck — 
dare you die? No! But when the time comes for you to die, you 
will say, “Now I cannot live, I must not live, and I dare not die.” 
Would you like to be able to die peacefully, sinner, and to rise 
joyfully and to reign forever hereafter? Trust Christ with your 
soul, and He will save you! He, the Son of God, begotten of 
the Father; the man of Nazareth, conceived of the Holy Spirit, 
and born of the Virgin Mary; He, God over all, blessed forever, 
and yet your brother, born to bear your sins! He says, “Trust 
Me and I will save you.” O, may His electing love move the 
hand of His effectual grace to compel you now to trust in Him, 
and that done, you are saved and out of this house, you may go 
a lawfully delivered captive, though perhaps, you will scarcely 
know what it is, and know not whether it is true that is done 
unto you. But it is true for all that! He who believes on Him is 
not condemned, and he who believes not is condemned already, 
because he has not believed on the Son of God! O that I might 
speak in God’s name to some of you, who perhaps, may never 
hear my voice again! I will meet you, as the spirit said to Brutus, 
on the plains I will meet you another day, each one of you, and 
if you live and die without trusting in that Lord, whose open 
wounds I have tried to set before your eyes, whose bleeding 
heart, streaming with His life blood, I have tried to set all warm 
before you — if you die without Him, on your own heads be 
your destruction! You have heard the gospel — O, that you 
would turn at its rebuke! Trust Christ! The feeblest touch of 
the hem of His garment — a look to Him — and you are made 
whole! As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so may 
we lift up the cross on high. O, lift it up, my brothers and sisters, 


799 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you who know Christ! Christian men and women, lift up that 
cross in your families. It is mine to lift it up here, and to cry 
with the Hebrew prophet, “Look, look and live!” Sin-bitten, 
covered with the wounds of sin — LOOK! — It is all He asks! 
“Look and live,” is written in the book; and written as on the 
clouds of heaven, legible only by the light they give, stand the 
soul- quickening words — “Believe and live.” Leave your doings 
for Christ’s doings — not your tears, but Christ’s tears, not your 
blood, but His blood, not your groans, but His groans, not your 
penance, but His agonies. Come and rest in Him! Join with me 
in saying, from your heart — 

“My faith does lay her hand 
On that dear head of Yours, 

While like a penitent I stand, 

And here confess my sin. 

My soul looks back to see 
The burden You did bear 
When hanging on the accursed tree, 

And hopes her guilt was there. 

Believing, we rejoice 
To see the curse removed, 

We bless the Lamb with cheerful voice, 

And sing His bleeding love.” 

The Lord bless you, the God of heaven and earth bless you, 
from this time forth and forever. Amen. 


800 



527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, August 30 th, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“This is the ordinance of the law, which the Lord has 
commanded, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, that 
they bring you a red heifer without spot, wherein is no blemish 
and upon which never came yoke: and you shall give her unto 
Eleazar the priest, that he may bring her forth outside the camp 
and one shall slay her before his face.” - Numbers 19:2-3 

The TRUE HEADING of all the books of Moses is to be 
found in the words of Jesus, “Moses wrote of Me.” Take the 
Lord Jesus Christ with you as a key, and however difficult the 
riddles of Leviticus or Numbers may at first sight appear, there 
is not one enigma in the whole collection which will not 
speedily open and yield instruction. To the Israelites themselves, 
these rites and ceremonies must have been rather an exercise 
of faith, than a means of instruction. “I cannot perfectly 
understand why this heifer is slain, or why yonder lamb is 
offered,” said the pious Israelite, “but though I cannot 
understand, I believe there is virtue in it all, and I reverently do, 
even to the smallest particular, that which God, through His 
servant Moses, has commanded me to do.” To us, the types are 
not a dark mystery to perplex our faith, but an open vision to 
delight our eyes. Having believed in Christ Jesus, having 
received Him as the Father’s sent One, and being reconciled 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


unto God by His death, we look back to the ceremonies of the 
old law as the patterns of heavenly things, to discover some 
new light in which the Savior’s beauties may be set, and to 
behold Him from some different point of view, so that we may 
love Him the better, and may trust Him more. 

Now, the particular point to which the red heifer referred, 
concerning Christ and His work, is just this — the provision 
which is made in Christ Jesus for the daily sins and failings of 
believers. 

In order to bring out our point clearly, we shall remark, 
first, that even true Israelites are in daily danger of defilement; secondly, 
that there is a provision made in the covenant of grace for the removal of 
the daily defilement ofsin, and thirdly, that the red heifer most beautifully 
sets forth Christ as being the constant purification of His people, that they, 
having their consciences purged from dead works, may have power to 
worship acceptably the living and true God. 

I. It is undoubtedly true, that even THE TRUE ISRAELITE, 
THE TRUE BELIEVER IN CHRIST, IS THE SUBJECT OF 
DAILY DEFILEMENT. 

My brothers and sisters, we who have believed in Christ 
are free from sin before the divine judgment seat. The moment 
that we believe in Christ, our sin is no longer ours; it was laid 
upon Christ, and cannot be in two places at one time; and, 
therefore, are we perfectly clean from sin before the eyes of a 
Holy God! This is justification , full, complete, everlasting. But, 
we are all aware, that in the matter of sanctification , we are not, 
as yet, delivered from evil. Sin dwells, though it reigns not in 
our mortal bodies; and since there is sin within, there is the 
capability of the defilement of sin without. Who has lived for a 
single day in this base world without discovering that in all his 
actions he commits sin? Who does not realize that in everything 
to which he puts his hand, he receives, as well as imparts, some 
degree of defilement? How is it, my brothers and sisters, that 


802 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


this is the case? The answer is easy, and it is to be found in the 
chapter before us. 

Some of our defilement arises from the fact that we do 
actually come into contact with sin, here imaged in the corruption of 
death. Read the 1 1 th verse — “He who touches the dead body 
of any man shall be unclean seven days.” We actually touch that 
dead thing, sin, by overt acts of transgression. The best man 
living still pollutes himself with evil. We have met with a few 
vain and ignorant persons who have boasted that they were 
perfect, but we never believed in their perfection, except as far 
as to concede that they were perfect in self-conceit, in boastful 
arrogance, and infamous impudence! “If any man says he has 
no sin, he deceives himself, and the truth is not in him.” The 
best of men are men at the best, and while they are men, they 
will sin. We find the aposde Paul crying out because of 
corruption, and even using such strong language as this — “O 
wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body 
of this death?” We are in close connection with sin because sin 
is in ourselves! It has dyed us through and through, staining the 
very warp and woof of our nature, and until we lay aside these 
bodies and are admitted to the Church of the first-born above, 
we shall never cease from very close and intimate connection 
with sin. Therefore, my brothers and sisters, we need to be 
constantly cleansed, because we are always defiling ourselves; 
in fact, we are always defiled because we are always touching 
the body of this death. 

Moreover, we get defilement, not only from our own actual 
sins, but from companionship with other sinners. You will read farther 
on in this chapter, “When a man dies in a tent: all who come 
into the tent, and all who are in the tent, shall be unclean.” The 
mere being with sinners defiles us! Christ could walk with 
publicans and sinners, and yet, incur no danger; the great 
physician could walk the leper house of this world untainted by 


803 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


contagion, but this is not possible with us. Even if the most 
honest and laudable motives shall lead us into the company of 
the ungodly, though our only aim may be to bring them to Jesus, 
yet, their unhallowed conversation will not only vex, but defile. 
It is not possible to look upon another man’s sin, even to look 
upon it with abhorrence, without receiving some degree of 
contamination, because the thought of evil is sin. Our hatred of 
evil always lacks in intensity — we do not detest it as we ought — 
and a failure here is a sin of omission which pollutes. You may 
say, you can go into evil company and get no defilement — my 
brothers and sisters — I doubt it. It may be absolutely necessary 
for you in your calling, and more especially in your desire to 
bless others, to mingle with the ungodly, but you might as well 
attempt to carry fire in your bosom, and not be burnt, or handle 
pitch and not be blackened, as to dwell in the tents of Kedar 
without receiving uncleanness! This dusty world must leave 
some mark upon our white garments — let us travel as carefully 
as we may. “I am black because the sun has looked upon me,” 
must always be the confession of the bride of Christ. This 
world is full of the spiritually dead, and since we live, we must 
often be rendered unclean among the sinful, and therefore, we 
need a daily cleansing to fit us for daily fellowship with a holy 
God! 

Reflect dear brothers and sisters, again, that one reason 
why we are so constandy defiled is our lack of watchfulness. You 
will observe that everything in the tent of a dead man was 
defiled except vessels that were covered over. Any vessel which 
was left open was at once unclean! You and I ought to cover 
up our hearts from the contamination of sin. It would be well 
for us if we kept our heart with all diligence, since out of it are 
the issues of life. Good Mr. Dyer says, “The Christian should 
lock up his heart in the morning, and give God the key, lest any 
evil should come in; and then, when He unlocks it at night, a 


804 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


sweet perfume of prayer will rise at eventide.” But alas, we 
forget to lock up our hearts; we do not keep our divine graces 
covered up! I believe that a man might go into the most sinful 
places under heaven without receiving defilement, if he 
exercised a sufficient degree of watchfulness; but it is because 
we do not watch that the poisoned arrows wound us. I noticed 
the other day an allegory of a candle in a lantern, with the motto, 
“One weak point is too much.” An enemy outside the lantern 
tried to blow out the candle. He blew all around, but it was 
well-secured, until, at last, he found a single crack, and then, 
through it he sent the destroying breath, and soon the flame of 
the candle was extinguished. This is what the devil does with 
us. We may be guarded in nine points out of ten, but our 
strength is to be measured, mark you, by the strength of the 
weakest point, and the devil will find out, sooner or later, some 
crack through which he will attack us to our soul’s evil. Watch, 
my brothers and sisters, watch carefully! It is because you and 
I fail here that we acquire this daily defilement, and need daily 
to be purified! 

A yet more striking thought is suggested by this chapter — 
sin is so desperately evil that the very slightest sin defiles us. He who 
touched a bone was unclean. It was not necessary to put your 
hand upon the clay-cold corpse to be defiled; the accidentally 
touching with the foot a bone, carelessly thrown up by the 
grave digger; even the touching it by the farmer as he turned 
up his furrow — even this was sufficient to make him unclean. 
Sin is such an immeasurably vile and pestilent a thing, that the 
slightest iniquity makes the Christian foul — a thought, an 
imagination, the glancing of an eye. We may have shut out the 
entire world from our closet, and yet find we have not shut out 
sin! We may make a covenant with our eyes, and with our hands, 
and with our feet, and with our lips, but still, our wanton hearts 
will go after evil. We have heard of some perfumes of which it 


805 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


is said that the thousandth part of a grain would leave a scent 
for ages in the place where it had been. And certainly it is so 
with sin — about its merest bone, there is an eternal pest — one 
sin of thought would be enough to destroy forever all 
communion with God! Therefore, brothers and sisters, we are 
defiled and need to be daily cleansed. 

I must not fail to remind you, also, that sin, even when it is not 
seen, defiles, for you will observe in the chapter that a man was 
defiled who touched a grave. The bones might be buried deep 
down so that he could not discern them, and over those bones 
the grass might have grown in green hillocks, decked with a few 
sweet flowers and yet, if the Israelite did but touch that grave 
with his foot, or with his hand, he was defiled! Oh, how many 
graves there are of sin — things that are fair to look upon, 
externally admirable, but internally abominable! Such-and-such 
a custom is tolerated, no, it has become fast fixed in society, 
and who shall find fault with it? Yet, many of our customs are 
but the graves of sin, and many of our actions, which we think 
so admirable, have loathsome rottenness within. Too much, 
even of our sanctuary services, is comparable to a whitewashed 
sepulcher! Those sweet hymns, the unanimous and hearty 
shout of praise, the earnest prayer, the reverent deportment — 
all those, I say, may be but the whitewashed sepulcher; for our 
thoughts may be going abroad after all sorts of mischief, and 
so our very sanctuary services may be but the green sods which 
conceal the loathsomeness of sin. O dear friends, this is enough 
to startle us! We sin enough to our own knowledge, but how 
much of sin we commit of which we are not aware, who can 
possibly tell? Sins unknown! I have often reminded you of the 
expression in the Greek liturgy, “Your unknown sufferings.” It 
is such a blessing that there are unknown sufferings for these 
unknown sins. We are ignorant of the heights and depths of 
Jesus’ love. Thank God that there is a vast atonement whose 


806 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


vast efficacy we must leave in ignorance, just as there are sins 
of ignorance utterly undiscoverable by us. 

Only one more thought here. I would have you notice, dear 
friends, that the Jew was not only in danger of defilement in his 
tent and when he walked the roads, but he was in danger in the 
open fields; for you will observe that it says that if he touched a 
body that had been slain in the open fields, or a bone, he should 
be unclean. For all he knew, there might have been a battle 
there. Perhaps he thought, “Well, this is out of the way of men; 
1 see no footprints, no tracks here,” and he walks carelessly 
across the green fields, but, though he knows it not, there lies 
in his way the corpse of one who had been lulled by accident, 
or murdered by his fellow in strife; he stumbles upon the body 
and lo, he is unclean! You may go where you will, but you 
cannot escape from sin. If you take the wings of the morning, 
and fly unto the uttermost parts of the sea, sin is there. If you 
make your bed in hell, it is there it reigns. If you seek the cover 
of midnight, is not midnight the very noon and carnival of evil? 
If you enter the Church of God, you shall find it there — high 
and low, rich and poor, polite and uncivilized — you shall search 
all ranks and positions of men, but sin is everywhere! And until 
we mount with eagles’ wings to dwell before the eternal throne, 
we shall have to complain that we are daily in danger of 
defilement. 

II. This brings us now to change the subject, by observing 

THAT A PURIFICATION HAS BEEN PROVIDED. A constant 
expiation is prepared. As Hart puts it — 

“If guilt removed, return and remain, 

Its power may be proved again and again.” 

The ransomed Church of God needs to be washed daily in 
the fountain, and the mercy is that the precious blood shall 


807 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


never lose its power, but its constant efficacy shall abide till they 
are, every one of them, “Saved to sin no more.” Beloved, there 
is a propitiation provided for daily defilement, for first of all, if 
it were not so, how terrible were jour case and mine! Suppose we were 
Israelites, true believers, and then, to have sinned, as we 
certainly should do? Then, beloved we would be cut off at once 
from all privileges! The unclean person had no right to go up 
to the house of the Lord; he had no participation in its solemn 
worship; for him, there was no glory of sacred praise, and no 
prevalence of earnest prayer. You and I would have no right to 
Christ, no adoption, no justification, no sanctification — for the 
unclean person has no right to any of these. And as we would 
have no privileges, so we could have no communion with God. 
God cannot immediately commune except with perfectly holy 
beings; He does now commune with the imperfect — but then, 
it is through a perfect Savior — and He cannot commune 
directly with you and me while sin abides in us. He has to look 
upon us as purified through Christ Jesus and being, therefore, 
wholly clean — or else it were not possible for Him to walk with 
us, and to manifest Himself to us. The ultimate result in the 
Israelites’ case would have been death. You observe that he 
who did not purify himself was cut off from Israel; first, cut off 
by excommunication, so as no longer to be a sharer in the 
citizenship of Israel, and then, probably, cut off either by the 
executioner, or else by the sudden judgment of God through 
plague, or fiery serpent, or some other terrible means. And 
certainly, if you and I, though believers could live for a season 
without being purified, carrying about with us the daily 
defilement of sin — before long it would end in spiritual death, 
and in utter destruction; but, thanks be unto God, He has 
provided against these terrible consequences! 

But think again, beloved, the Lord must provide a daily 
cleansing for our daily defilement, for if not, where were His wisdom, 


808 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


where His love ? He has provided for everything else. There is not 
a lack a saint can know, but God has furnished a supply! Out 
of the riches of His glory in Christ Jesus, our necessities are all 
supplied. But if this, this glaring, this soul-destroying need had 
not been provided for, how could we call Him our Father and 
trust in Him? How could we know Him to be the only wise 
God, our Savior? A failure would have occurred in a most 
important point. Beloved, the love, the wisdom, the complete 
wisdom of God demands that there should be such a purification 
supplied! 

The work of our Hard Jesus Christ assures us of this. What is there 
opened for the house of David, for sin and for uncleanness? A 
cistern that might be emptied; a water pot, such as that which 
stood at Cana’s marriage feast, and might be drained? No, there 
is a fountain open for sin and for uncleanness. We wash, the 
fountain flows. We wash again, the fountain still flows. From 
the great depths of the Deity of Christ, the eternal merit of His 
passion comes everlastingly welling up! Wash! Wash! It is 
inexhaustible, for it is fountain-fullness! Is it not said in 
Scripture, “If any man sins, we have an advocate”? Why is 
Christ an advocate today? Only because we need an advocate 
every day! Does He not constantly intercede yonder before the 
eternal throne? Why does He do that? Because we need daily 
intercession! And it is because we are constantly sinning that 
He is constantly an advocate — constantly an Intercessor. He 
Himself has beautifully set forth this in the case of Peter — after 
Supper the Lord took a towel and girded Himself, and then, 
taking His basin and His water, He went to Peter, and Peter 
said, “You shall never wash my feet.” But Jesus told him, “If I 
wash you not, you have no part in Me.” He had been washed 
once; Peter was free from sin in the high sense of justification, 
but he needs the washing of purification. When Peter said, “Lord, 
wash not my feet only, but also my head and my hands,” then 


809 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Jesus replied, “He who is washed” — that is, he who is 
pardoned — “needs not, save to wash his feet, for he is clean 
every whit.” The feet need constant washing. The daily 
defilement of our daily walk through an ungodly world brings 
upon us the daily necessity of being cleaned from fresh sin, and 
that the mighty Master supplies to us. I think I see Him at this 
very day still girded with that towel, still with that basin and 
flowing water, going round to all His saints, coming round to 
us, brothers and sisters, and saying, “I have washed your feet, 
I, your Master and your Lord, And you are clean every whit.” 
There is a provision then; the work of Jesus Christ meets the 
case! 

Moreover, beloved, the work of the Holy Spirit also ?neets the 
case, for what is His business but constandy to take of the things 
of Christ, and reveal them unto us — constandy to quicken, to 
enlighten and to comfort? Why all this, but because we are 
constandy in need, perpetually being defiled, and therefore, 
needing perpetually to have the purification applied? 

Best of all, facts show that there is purification for present guilt; the 
saints of old fell into sin, but they did not remain there. David 
cries, “Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean: wash me, and 
1 shall be whiter than snow.” Peter denies his Master, but he 
does not always remain a blaspheming, ungrateful coward. No, 
he comes back again to his Lord and Master, and makes the 
avowal, “You know all things; You know that I love You.” You 
and I, I hope, can give a better proof, still, that we have tried it 
ourselves. We remember that dear hour when first we came to 
Christ. Oh, it was no fiction, no dream! We were weighed down 
with a thousand sins, but one look at Jesus took them all away; 
and since that time we have often been cast down. There may 
be some of you who escape from doubts and fears. If you do, 
I gready envy you, but I think that most of us get, at times, in 
such a position that we cry with David, “My soul lies cleaving 


810 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


unto the dust.” You feel as if you dare not come into the Lord’s 
presence; you cannot hope that He will hear your prayer; you 
cannot grasp the promises, they seem too good for such as you; 
you cannot look up to Christ to call Him brother. “Abba, 
Father,” falters on your tongue; but, have you not known what 
it is to look to your Redeemer again just as you did at first? And 
then your love and joy have come back to you again once more, 
as if it had been a new conversion, and you have gone on your 
way rejoicing — you who only yesterday were hanging your 
harps upon the willows and refusing to sing to the praise of 
your Lord! 

My dear friends, if this were not a great truth of God, some 
of us would die in despair! I am sure if I might not still come 
to Jesus as a sinner, and still rest in Him, expecting to be 
cleansed from all defilement, I do not know that there would 
be anything in the Bible which could yield comfort to me. I 
must have a remedy as broad as the disease! I must have a 
supply as deep, as wide, as constant as my needs, and, thanks 
be to God, here is just such a supply, for Jesus takes away the 
foulest sins, and when our hearts have backslidden from God 
He does bring us back! Why, some of us have appeared in our 
own consciences to have gone into the very belly of hell, and 
yet the Lord has brought us up again to the gates of heaven! 
Ah, it does not take many minutes to work this change. 
Sometimes I have felt all God’s waves and billows rolling over 
me till I was ready to despair under a sense of my own 
unworthiness, and yet the next moment I have been able to 
clearly read my title to mansions in the skies! And believing on 
Christ, I have had full fellowship with Him! This is the power 
of purification — thus is it that the application of the precious 
blood of sprinkling always works, when faith, through the Holy 
Spirit, brings it to the conscience. May you and I know this by 


811 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


our daily constant experience of it — that there is a daily 
purification for daily defilement! 

III. But now, beloved, I bring you to the chapter itself. 
THE RED HEIFER SETS FORTH, IN A MOST ADMIRABLE 
MANNER, THE DAILY PURIFICATION FOR DAILY SIN. It was 
a heifer — an unusual thing for a sacrifice to be a female; and we 
scarcely know why it should be in this case, unless indeed, to 
make the substitution more evident. This red heifer stood for all 
the house of Israel — for the whole Church of God — and the 
Church is always looked upon and considered in Scripture as 
being the spouse — the bride — always feminine. Perhaps, to 
make the substitution obvious and complete, to show that this 
heifer stood in the place of the whole seed of Israel, it was 
chosen rather than the customary bull. It was a red heifer. Some 
think because of its rarity, for it was very difficult to find one 
that was red without a single spot — for if there were one white 
or black hair it was always rejected — it must be wholly and 
entirely red! Some think that this was to signify how unique and 
unrivalled is the person of Christ; how extraordinary — the only 
one of His Father — the only Redeemer of souls; of such 
matchless virtue, and of such glorious pedigree, that no angel 
can match with Him, neither any of the sons of men, for a 
moment, be compared with Him. Probably, however, the red 
was chosen only from its bringing to the mind of the Israelites 
the idea of blood, which was always associated with atonement 
and putting away of sin. Surely, my brothers and sisters, when 
we think of Christ, we always associate Him with the streaming 
gore, when we are under a sense of sin. At other times we think 
of Him as white and ruddy, as perfection itself; but there is no 
point about Jesus which the trembling conscience loves to rest 
upon so much as that red crimson blood of His. We have 
sometimes heard complaints made of our theology, that there 
is too much blood in it. “The blood is the life thereof.” If there 


812 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


is no blood in our preaching, there is no life in it, no joy, no 
true power of God! It is just because we love to extol that 
precious blood, that God is pleased to honor the Word, and 
make it comfortable to saints, and make it the word of 
quickening to sinners. I am sure, dear brothers and sisters, 
sometimes when we have sung that verse — 

“His dying crimson, like a robe, 

Spreads over His body on the tree,” 

in the presence of that blood-red mantle, we have felt the 
next lines to be no imagination, but a sober fact — 

“Then am I dead to the entire globe, 

And the entire globe is dead to me.” 

My Master, His face covered with bloody sweat, with ruby 
drops of blood around His head; my Lord with His back like a 
river of gore, where the accursed whips have beaten Him — His 
hands streaming with founts of crimson, and His feet flowing 
with rills of scarlet, and His side giving forth a rich waterfall of 
His heart’s blood — He never seems so lovely as when thus I 
see him arrayed in “a vesture dipped in blood.” “Who is this 
who comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? 
This that is glorious in His apparel, traveling in the greatness of 
His strength? I who speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Why 
are You red in Your apparel, and Your garments like he who 
treads in the wine vat?” This is the glorious Savior, mighty to 
save and never seen as mighty to save as when He is robed in 
crimson! Let it be the red heifer; it shall always bring to the mind 
of the pious believer the remembrance of Him who tread the 
winepress alone! 


813 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


It was a heifer without spot. This denotes the perfection of 
Christ’s character — “not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing.” Born without any human defilement; conceived 
immaculately through the Holy Spirit — “That holy thing which 
is conceived in you,” said the angel to the Virgin. Without any 
natural defilement such as we receive, He felt not the taint of 
original sin. Then, the heifer must be without blemish. Our 
Christ, as He had no spot of original sin, has no blemish of 
actual sin. “The prince of this world comes and has nothing in 
Me.” He became like unto us in all points, but always with this 
exception — “ yet without sin.” 

Observe that this red heifer was one where there never came a 
yoke. Perhaps this sets forth how willingly Christ came to die 
for us; not forced from heaven, but freely delivering Himself 
for us all. “Lo, I come to do Your will; in the volume of the 
book it is written of Me, I delight to do Your will, O God.” 
Not dragged to His death. “I lay down My life of Myself; I have 
power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again. No 
man takes it from Me.” The free Son of God wears no yoke, 
except that yoke which was easy to Him, and that burden which 
was light, the yoke of love which compelled Him to lay down 
His life for His people. 

An interesting circumstance about this red heifer is that it 
was not provided by the priests; it was not provided out of the 
usual funds of the sanctuary, nor yet by the princes, nor by any 
one person. The children of Israel provided it. Why? Why, that as 
they came out of their tents in the desert, or their houses in 
Jerusalem, and saw the priests leading the red heifer, every man, 
and every woman, and every child might say, “I have a share in 
that heifer; I have a share in that victim which is being lead out 
of the city to be consumed.” Brothers and sisters, I wish — oh, 
I would to God, I dare hope that every man, and every woman 
here could say, “I have a share in Jesus Christ,” for that is the 


814 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


meaning of this national provision — to let us see how Christ 
shed His blood for all His people — and they have all a part, and 
all an interest in Him. If you believe in Him, though you are the 
weakest of all His children, you have as good a share as the 
strongest! He is as much your Christ as He is the Christ of an 
aposde, or of a martyr who went to heaven in a chariot of fire! 
I hope, brothers and sisters, that you see this, and are assured 
that you have an interest in Him. 

As we noted what this victim was, there is yet to be 
observed what was done with it. Again, let me beg you to refer to 
your Bibles, to see what became of this red heifer. 

First, it was taken out of the ca?np. Herein it was a picture of 
Christ. That He might sanctify His people with His own blood, 
He suffered outside the camp. Outside the camp was the place 
of uncleanness. There the lepers dwelt; there every defiled 
person was put in quarantine. Jesus Christ must be numbered 
with the transgressors, and must suffer upon Mount Calvary, 
outside the city gates, upon that general Tyburn of criminals, 
“The place of a skull.” The people of God are to be a separate 
people from all the rest of the world; they are not to be 
numbered with the dwellers in this world’s city; they are to be 
strangers, and pilgrims, and sojourners, as all their fathers were. 
Therefore, Christ, to set them an example of separation, allows 
Himself to suffer outside the camp. 

When taken outside the camp, the red cow was slain. A dying 
Savior, who takes away our sins! Brothers and sisters, we love 
Christ the risen one, we bless Christ the living, pleading 
intercessor, but after all, the purification to your conscience and 
to mine comes from the bleeding sacrifice! See Him slain 
before our eyes. Let us sing with Watts — 

“My soul looks back to see 
The burdens You did bear 


815 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


When hanging on the cursed tree, 

And hopes her guilt was there.” 

When the heifer was slain, Elea^ar dipped his finger in the blood 
as it flowed gurgling forth. He dipped his finger in the warm 
blood, and sprinkled it seven times before the door of the 
tabernacle. Seven is the number of perfection — to show that 
there was a perfect offering made by the sprinkling of the blood. 
Even so, Jesus has perfecdy presented His bloody sacrifice! 

Now mark, all this does not purify. I am not yet come to 
that point. Atonement precedes purification — Christ must die 
and offer Himself a victim, or else He cannot be the purifier. 
All this is necessary, but the vital part of the purification comes 
presendy. They then took the body of the slain heifer, which 
was an unclean thing, and made everybody unclean who 
touched it, and laid it upon a pile prepared for its burning. They 
utterly consumed it — its skin, its flesh, its blood, even to its 
dung — not a single thing must be left! This sets forth the pangs 
of the Savior, His great and terrible agony upon the cross, His 
real death, His real forsaking by God. It sets forth how God 
accounted Him unclean, how our Master was compelled to say, 
“My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?” The heifer 
does not burn on the altar, it never smoked within the holy 
place as did the bullock which was God’s offering. This was a 
foul and guilty thing! The man who killed it became foul; he 
who gathered the ashes was unclean, and even the priest 
himself had to wash his garments. This sets forth how Christ 
was numbered with the transgressors, how the iniquity of His 
people was laid upon Him, and how the Lord, “made Him to 
be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the 
righteousness of God in Him.” You will say, “A strange thing 
that those who touched the sacrifice should be made unclean.” 
Yes, but types, like other emblems, do not run upon all fours. 


816 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


Therefore you must look at it in the light intended — who was 
it that put Christ to death? Were they not unclean? Were not 
the Roman soldiers unclean? That vulgar mob who shouted, 
“Crucify Him, crucify Him” — those eyes that gloated 
themselves with the agonies of His tortured body? And are not 
you and I, who helped to put Him to death — are not we 
ourselves unclean? No, I go farther. If I today gather the ashes 
and bring them before you — if I seek today to be as the man 
who sprinkled that purifying water, am I not unclean? Do I not 
feel that even when I am speaking best of my Master, I am 
sinning, for I cannot speak of Him as I should? And, my 
brothers and sisters, what makes you feel so unclean as contact 
with Christ? Is it not true that the very same Christ who takes 
your sins away, first makes you feel your sins? “They shall look 
on Him whom they have pierced, and they shall weep and 
mourn for their sins.” The same Savior, who takes tears away 
when we look to Him by faith, first brings those tears to our 
eyes when we look and see Him die! It was right, therefore, that 
He should first make those unclean who touched Him, and 
then afterwards should make them clean through another 
touch of His purifying power! 

When the whole was fully burnt, or while burning, we find 
the priest threw in cedar wood, hyssop and scarlet. What was this? 
According to Maimonides, the cedar wood was taken in logs 
and bound round with hyssop, and then afterwards the whole 
enveloped in scarlet; so what was seen by the people was the 
scarlet which was at once the emblem of sin and its 
punishment — “Though your sins are as scarlet, they shall be as 
snow; though they are red like crimson, they shall be as wool.” 
Everything you see still continues of the red color, to set forth 
atonement for sin. Inside this scarlet, there is the hyssop of 
faith, which gives efficacy to the offering in each individual, and 
within this is the cedar wood that sent forth a sweet and 


817 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


fragrant smell, a perfect righteousness, giving acceptance to the 
whole. One delights to think of this — in connection with 
Christ — that, as there is a daily witness of our defilement, so 
there is a daily imputation of His perfect righteousness to us, 
so that we stand every day accepted in the beloved by a daily 
imputation, by which not only is daily sin covered, but daily 
righteousness given to us! We are, therefore, every day as much 
accepted as we shall be in that last great day when He shall 
receive us to His everlasting glory! 

The essence of the matter lies in the last act, with the 
remains of the red cow. The cinders of the wood, the ashes of the bones, 
and dung, and flesh of the heifer, were all gathered together, and carried 
away, and laid by in a clean place. According to the Jews, there was 
not another heifer killed for this purpose for a thousand years! 
They say, but then we have no reason to believe them, that 
there have never been but nine red heifers offered at all; one in 
the days of Moses, the next in Ezra’s time, and the other seven 
afterwards, and that when Messiah comes, He is to offer the 
tenth, by which they let out the secret that they do look upon 
the Messiah as coming in His own time to complete the type. 
Our own belief is that a red heifer was always found when ashes 
were needed, and as there were hundreds and thousands of 
persons defiling themselves, the place where the ashes were 
kept was much frequented, and much of the purifying matter 
required. The ashes were to be put in a vessel with running 
water, and the water was sprinkled over the unclean person 
who touched a body or a bone. By this process, the ashes would 
require to be renewed much more often than once in a 
thousand years, in order that everyone might have his portion! 
Does not this storing up suggest that there is a store of merit 
in Christ Jesus? There was not only enough to make us free 
from sin by justification, but there is a store of merit laid up 
that daily defilement may be removed as often as it comes — 


818 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


“Here’s pardon for transgressions past, 

It matters not how black their cast! 

And, O my soul, with wonder view, 

For sins to come here’s pardon too!” 

From all the sins I shall ever commit there is a purification 
laid by to cleanse me! The seven times sprinkled blood has put 
these sins away before the judgment seat of God, and the ashes 
which are laid by shall put my sin away from my conscience, 
purging it from dead works. 

The ashes were to be put with running water. Running water 
is always the sweet picture of the Holy Spirit — “He leads me 
beside still waters.” The Holy Spirit must take of the things of 
Christ and reveal them unto us. Purification is made in heaven 
by the finger of Christ — seven times He sprinkled His own 
blood — but on earth, in our conscience, it is made by the Holy 
Spirit. The Holy Spirit must make Christ precious and 
efficacious to us. What is Christ on the cross? What is Christ in 
the grave? Nothing to any man till the Holy Spirit makes Him 
Christ in the heart! You will hear many complain that there is 
no beauty in Christ that they should desire Him — it is to them 
dull work to hear of Jesus. Ah, beloved, and well it may be — 
but when the running water comes, when the Spirit of God 
gives quickening and cleansing to the heart, and makes us love 
divine things, then there is nothing so precious, so 
inexpressibly desirable as the ashes of a slaughtered Savior! 

Observe that it was applied by hyssop. The hyssop was 
dipped in water, and then the unclean was sprinkled. Hyssop is 
always a type of faith. “Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be 
clean.” Our faith, like a little sprig of hyssop, is dipped into the 
blood, or dipped into this cleansing water which flowed from 
the side of Jesus, and so the remedy is applied. Brothers and 


819 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sisters, believe in Jesus more fully than you have done, and you 
will feel the power of His propitiation! He is God; He became 
man; He suffered — those sufferings are able to take away sin — 
you need have no guilt on your conscience, but be clean, 
rejoicing in Him, and accepted in the beloved! May the Lord 
give us to know more fully the mysteries of this red heifer, and 
the joy of pardoned sin! 

I will close by remarking that if there is any believer here 
who has fallen into sin, if there is one who has lost the presence 
of the Lord — if you have grown cold and dead, if you are 
conscious of having backslidden, if you have begun to doubt 
whether you are a child of God at all — here is in Christ just 
what you need! Ah, but, you say, you have fallen so often, 
sinned so constantly. Yes, but here are ashes for every day, 
cleansing for every hour, for every moment! Look upon your 
Lord and Savior. God is intending to forgive you not only once, 
but to cleanse you every day; He has taught you to forgive your 
brother not seven times, but 70 times seven — and do you think 
He will not do what He tells you to do? Ah, He will forgive you 
a countless number of times, yes, every day. If you will seek 
daily cleansing in Christ, you shall have communion with Him, 
you shall stand in His presence and rejoice with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory! This is no privilege reserved for the few, for 
all of us have — every child of God has — an interest in this! Let 
us come, therefore, boldly, and pray the Master now to apply 
again this purification of Christ, that we may again live near to 
God, and delight ourselves in His society! 

And as for you who have never believed in Jesus, let me 
remind you that this is not for you. You need to be washed for 
the first time in the blood! O soul, what a loathsome being you 
are out of Christ! Why, you are black all over from head to foot, 
and black within as well as without! What you need first is 
washing in the blood; you shall have the washing of water, of 


820 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


527 The Red Heifer - Num. 19:2-3 


which we speak, another day. The blood of Jesus can cleanse 
you from all sin. Trust to Him and He shall save you. Trust 
Him now! 

Come now! May the Spirit help you to come that you may 
be saved, both now and forever. Amen. 


821 



528 Chastisement- Nowand 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, September 6th, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but 
grievous: nevertheless afterwards it yields the peaceable fruit of 
righteousness unto them who are exercised thereby.” - 
Hebrews 12:11 

LAST Sunday MORNING we tried to show you how the 
uncleanness of sin is removed (see Sermon #527). By the 
application of the blood of Christ the guilt of sin is cleansed; by 
the water which flowed with the blood from the side of Jesus 
defilement is taken away forever. Our work this morning is to 
consider the destruction of the power of sin. This is a work which 
rests in the hands of God the Holy Spirit, and is not 
comprehended under the head of justification, but of 
sanctification. Beware, my brothers and sisters, lest you mix 
these two different things. It is in the sense of sanctification that 
the trials and afflictions of this life have the blessed influence 
of purging us from sin. It were a very great error to imagine 
that affliction ever cleanses us from the guilt of sin; for if we 
could be afflicted with all the pangs of the lost spirits in hell, 
and that forever, not a single spot of sin would be washed away 
by all our miseries and tears! Nor are we saved from the 
pollution of sin by our trials; our conscience must be purged 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


from dead works by the blood of Jesus alone. If the wedge of 
gold which Achan stole were accursed, you might have thrust 
it into the fire as many times as you would, but it would have 
still been accursed. There were fiery serpents which bit the 
children of Israel; their way was long, and their journey tedious, 
but yet I find that they needed the ashes of the red heifer, 
because that purification did for them what affliction could not 
do. No amount of affliction can avail, either to take away the 
guilt or the defilement of sin. It is in this sense that Kent 
sings — 

“With afflictions He may scourge us, 

Send a cross for every day, 

Blast our gourds but not to purge us 
From our sins as some would say — 

They were numbered 

On the scapegoat’s head of old.” 

Yet, as we have said, if you separate between sanctification 
and justification, and make a clear distinction between the 
indwelling power of sin and the guilt of it, then you may clearly 
perceive the place which affliction holds. When the Holy Spirit 
acts as Christ’s representative, and sits as a refiner, His furnace 
is affliction; the trials and troubles through which we have to 
pass are the glowing coals which separate the precious from the 
vile. They are, through divine grace, the means of restraining 
and destroying in us the tremendous power of indwelling sin 
until the day shall come when the blessed Spirit shall take away 
from us all corruption, and, consequendy, we shall need no 
more affliction. 

Coming at once to the text, we shall notice, first, the outward 
appearance of our trials, or SORE CHASTISEMENTS; secondly, the 


823 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


result of our chastening, or BLESSED FRUITFULNESS; and thirdly, 
the characters benefited by these exercises, or FAVORED SONS. 

I. First, we have very clearly in the text, SORE 
CHASTISEMENTS. 

1. Keeping literally to the words of the text, we observe 
that, all which carnal reason can see of our present chastisement, is but 
seeming. “No chastisement for the present seems to be joyous, 
but grievous.” All that flesh and blood can discover of the 
quality of affliction is but its outward superficial appearance. 
We are not able, by the eye of reason, to discover what the real 
virtue of sanctified tribulation is; this discernment is the 
privilege of faith. Brothers and sisters, how very apt we are to 
be deceived by seemings! Why, to our senses, even natural 
things are too high for us. The world seems to stand still, and yet 
we know, without any faith, that it is always moving! The sun 
seems to climb the heights of heaven, and then to descend and 
hide himself in the west, and yet we are sure that the sun is 
fixed in his sphere. When the sun is setting, he seems larger than 
when he shone in his zenith, but we are well aware, in this case, 
that the seeming is not the truth, and that the sun is no broader 
at his setting than when he was shining in the highest heaven! 
Now, if even in natural things the seeming is not the truth, and 
the appearance is very often false, we may rest quite sure that 
though affliction seems to be one thing, it really is not what it 
seems to be. Understand, that all that you can know about trial, 
by mere carnal reason, is no more reliable than what you can 
discover by your feelings concerning the motion of the earth. 

Nor, dear friends, are our seeming at all likely to be worth 
much when you recollect that our fear, when we are under 
trouble, always darkens what little reason we have! I remember 
one so nervous that when going up the Monument, he assured 
me that he felt it shake. It was his own shaking, not the shaking 
of the Monument, but he was fearful and timid at climbing to 


824 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


an unusual height. When you and I under trial get so afraid of 
this, and afraid of that, that we cannot trust the eyesight of the 
flesh, we may rest assured of this that “things are not what they 
seem.” Besides, we are very unbelieving and you know how 
unbelief is apt always to exaggerate the black, and to diminish 
the bright. When Giant Despair had put his victims into the 
casde, he was accustomed to beat them with a crab tree club. 
Some of us have felt the weight of that club — sore are its blows! 
Lying in that dungeon, Christian began to think whether it were 
not better to destroy himself, though, poor silly man, all the 
while the key of promise was in his bosom, and he needed not 
to have lain rotting in that dungeon for a single hour! We 
cannot, therefore, expect with such a mischief-making 
propensity within us as our inclination to unbelief, that we can 
fairly judge what affliction means. 

Added to this, over and above our unbelief, there is a vast 
amount of ignorance, and ignorance is always the mother of 
dismay and consternation. In the ignorant times in this country, 
men were always trembling at their own superstitions. If some 
old hag — perhaps some good old woman — sat by the fireside, 
they dreamed she had an evil eye; they thought that she might 
scatter plague among the sheep, or mildew over the corn! 
Afraid they were of the timid hare which crossed their path, or 
of the raven croaking in the old oak tree. The air was full of 
omens and presages of ill. Even the insect that cried, “Tick,” as 
it scratched the old decaying post, was a warning of death; and 
candles, and coals, and all sorts of things alarmed them! It is 
just the same spiritually with us. We are ignorant of what God 
means, and so we say with Jacob, “All these things are against 
me,” with about as much reason for saying so as our 
unenlightened ancestors had for being afraid of these omens 
and signs! We are profoundly ignorant, dear brothers and 
sisters, when we dream that we are most wise; and the best 


825 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


taught man among us, if he could compare the little that he 
does know with the tremendous mass which he does not know, 
would be surprised to find himself so great a fool! This mass of 
ignorance always becomes the fruitful parent of fears and 
doubts — and consequendy our chastisements seem to be very 
sore to us. 

Besides, dear friends, we are such selfish beings, and so fond 
of ease, and we are so unwilling to be cut and wounded with 
even God’s lances; we feel so afraid, even of our heavenly 
Father’s hand if it should give us a blow, that our chastisements 
always seem to be more horrible than they are. You know, 
when a man resolves that he will endure an amputation, 
because he foresees that future good will come of it, even 
though it is a painful operation, he lies like a hero with scarcely 
a groan or a tear; but another, careful of his flesh and timid of 
himself, is frightened even at the sight of the knife, and cries 
out when but the very slightest incision has been made, and 
scarcely any pain has been felt! So it is with many of us. We are 
so jealous of our own ease and pleasure, that the moment we 
even see the rod, we are frightened and alarmed, and at the very 
first stroke of it before it makes the flesh tingle, we think it is 
utterly unbearable, and that God intends to destroy us! What, 
then, with the clouds of fear, the dust of unbelief, the smoke 
of ignorance, and the mist of selfishness, it is little wonder that 
we do not perceive the truth and thus, “no chastisement seems 
to be joyous.” 

2. The text shows us that carnal reason judges afflictions only “for 
the present. ” “No chastisement for the present seems to be joyous.” 
It judges in the present light, which happens to be the very 
worst light in which to form a correct estimate. Suppose that I 
am under a great tribulation today — let it be a bodily 
affliction — the head is aching, the heart is palpitating, the mind 
is agitated and distracted, am I in a fit state, then, to judge the 


826 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


quality of affliction, with a distracted and addled brain? With 
the scales of the judgment lifted from their proper place, how 
can I sit and form a just idea of the wisdom of God in His 
dispensations? At such times old sins come up, and present 
passions become rebellious. How can I, when I have to 
contend with a thousand ancient sins, and present 
temptations — how can I sit down properly, and calmly judge 
what my affliction really is? I am compelled to judge of it only 
by a mere surface glimpse. Besides, Satan very seldom forgets 
to roar on such occasions! That old cowardly villain seldom 
meddles with God’s people when they can skillfully handle the 
shield of faith. He knows that we are more than a match for 
him when we are resting simply upon our God; but if he can 
only see a distracted brain, and sin pressing heavily upon us, 
and a clouded mind, then it is that he comes in a tremendous 
fury, and hopes to make a full end of us! And if, added to all 
this, God should hide His face from us, and we would be in the 
dark. It is hard judging Providences when it is dark — dark 
without and dark within — hell howling and earth shaking, while, 
perhaps, the wife is dying, the children weeping, property is 
flying, creditors are dunning, the mind vexed, and enemies 
slandering. When we — 

“See every day new straits attend, 

And wonder where the scene shall end,” 

is it a fit time to judge of God? Ought we not at such 
seasons, like Aaron, to hold our peace because the words we 
shall speak are sure to be unwise? Had we not better bid carnal 
reason hold its decision, and wait for better times to come? 
“No chastisement for the present can seem joyous but grievous.” 

3. This brings me to observe, that since carnal reason only 
sees the seeming of the thing — and sees even that in the pale 


827 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


light of the present — therefore, brothers and sisters, affliction 
never seems to be joyous. If affliction seemed to be joyous, 
would it be a chastisement at all? I ask you, would it not be a 
most ridiculous thing if a father should so chasten a child that 
the child came down stairs laughing, and smiling, and rejoicing 
at the flogging? Joyous? Instead of being at all serviceable, 
would it not be utterly useless ? What good could a chastisement 
have done if it were not felt? No smart? Then surely no benefit! 
It is the blueness of the wound, says Solomon, which makes 
the heart better; and so if the chastisement does not come 
home to the bone and flesh; if it does not distil the tear and 
extort the cry — what good end can it have served? It might 
even work the other way, and be hurtful, for the child would 
surely think that the parent only played with it, and that 
disobedience was a trifle — if those very gentle blows were 
enough, with one or two soft, chiding words, to express 
parental hatred of sin. If but the mockery of chastisement were 
given, the child would be hardened in sin, and even despise the 
authority which it ought to respect. My brothers and sisters, if 
God sent us trials such as we would wish for, they would not 
be trials! If they were chastisements that on the very surface 
seemed to be joyous, then they were not chastisements. They 
would still be the sweets, the harmful sweets which children 
like to eat until they turn their stomachs, and are overtaken with 
sickness. 

Let us here note that no affliction for the present seems to 
be joyous, in two or three respects. It never seems to be joyous 
in the object of it. You know the Lord always takes care when He 
does strike His people, to hit them in a tender place. When He 
comes forth to the work of image -breaking, He always dashes 
in pieces the most favorite image first. Look at David — how 
could the Lord have touched that man more to the quick than 
by touching him in his children? There is Iris daughter, Tamar, 


828 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


dishonored before his eyes; there is his son Amnon, who first 
commits incest, and afterwards falls by another brother’s hand. 
There is a darling left; he has grown now to be a fine and 
comely person, there is not such another in all Israel — his hair 
is his glory. He is a man of great wit; he is his father’s jewel. As 
you hear David cry, “O my son Absalom, my son, my son 
Absalom! Would God I had died for you! O Absalom, my son, 
my son!” you see most manifestly that our chastening Father 
never sends afflictions which are joyous. He always strikes that 
object which is nearest to the heart, in order that the heart may 
smart. 

Nor is it, my brothers and sisters, joyous in the force of it. 
“Oh,” we are apt to think, “if the trial had not been quite so 
severe, the temptation so strong — if the difficulty had not been 
so great — I could have sustained it; but the north wind has 
come down against me; the Lord has broken me in pieces with 
a terrible hurricane.” My dear friends, you must never expect 
to have the trial joyous in the force of it! God will put just so 
much bitters into the draught that they shall not tickle your 
appedte as some bitters do, but shall really fill you with loathing 
and real misery. He will do it efficiently and effectively in the 
force of it. 

Again, no chastisement ever seems to be joyous as to the 
time of it. We always think it comes at the wrong season. “I was 
not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet trouble 
came,” says Job. And David had a complaint somewhat of the 
same kind. “In my prosperity I said I shall never be moved. 
Lord, by Your favor You have made my mountain to stand 
strong: You did hide Your face, and I was troubled.” The time 
of our afflictions, if it would be left to our choosing — well, I 
suppose we should never have any at all — but if we must have 
them, and had to choose the time, then they would be joyous, 
and so would lose their very meaning. 


829 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Certainly, brothers and sisters, they are very seldom joyous 
as to the instrument. Hear David. “It was not an enemy; then I 
could have borne it.” O yes that is what we always think! “If it 
were not just that, I could have borne it; if I had been poor, 1 
could have borne that, but to be slandered I cannot endure. To 
have even lost my wife — ah, it would have been a dreadful blow! 
But I might have borne it — but to have lost that dear child — 
how can I ever rejoice again?” Have not you, sometimes, heard 
brothers and sisters speak so, when they did not know what 
they said, for God had sent them the very best affliction they 
could have? He turned over all the arrows in the quiver, and 
there was not one which was suited to wound you with but the 
one He used, and therefore that one He fitted to the string, and 
sent it with just as much force as was required — but certainly 
no more! It all goes to prove this, that in no respect — neither 
in the object, nor the instrument, nor the time, nor the force of 
it — can an affliction ever seem to carnal reason to be joyous. 

4 . No, more — dear brothers and sisters, the text assures us 
in the next place that every affliction seems to be grievous. Perhaps to 
the true Christian, who is much grown in divine grace, the most 
grievous part of the affliction is this. “Now,” he says, “I cannot 
see the benefit of it; if I could, I would rejoice. I do not see why 
this trouble was sent to me. Instead of doing good, it really 
seems to do harm.” “Such a brother has been taken away just 
in the midst of his usefulness,” cries the bereaved friend. A wife 
says, “My dear husband was called away just when the children 
most needed his care.” And we say, “Here am I, laid aside upon 
a bed of sickness just when the church needs me, just when I 
proceeded most triumphantly in a career of usefulness.” This 
is always grievous to the Christian because he cannot see, 
though indeed it ought not to be grievous on that account, 
since he should never expect to see — but should walk by faith, 
and not by sight! You know, brothers and sisters, sometimes 


830 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


our afflictions come upon us like ferocious assailants; first of 
all they impede our running — we cannot serve God as much as 
we like while we are under affliction; we feel as if our usefulness 
has been gready and grievously hindered by our bodily sickness 
or temporal cares. “I could have given my whole heart, and 
both my hands to serve my God if it had not been for these 
distractions.” No, the assailant not only hinders us, but 
sometimes he cries, “Stop!” and we are obliged to stop 
altogether. There is a pulling-up time — the man tosses on his 
bed when he would be toiling in the vineyard. A sister 
sometimes has to be weeping at home when she would be 
comforting others’ hearts. We come to a dead standstill, and we 
are apt to say, “Is this joyous to me to have my feet fast in the 
stocks?” Sometimes the assailant even knocks us down — trials 
come so heavily upon us, that we cannot stand; faith reels, hope 
dies, murmuring and discontent trip up our heels, and we say, 
“What? Is this joyous? Is there any good in this? Where can the 
benefit be of an affliction which through the infirmity of my 
flesh drives me to evil, and develops the devil that is in me? 
Can there be any good in this?” No, sometimes it not only 
knocks us down, but wounds us! Ah, there are many Christians 
who in their afflictions have received serious wounds, for they 
have spoken against the Lord, their impatience has prevailed, 
and much of their experience has turned out to be a mere 
figment. No, there are some Christians who are even killed by 
their affliction. 1 do not mean that the spiritual seed within 
them ever dies. God forbid! But 1 mean that the joy and 
apparent life of their religion seem as if they had expired, and 
for a moment they cannot think they are Christians at all. They 
are led to think that they were never bought with blood, and 
never were in the covenant, for the blows of affliction have 
utterly killed them. Ah, my brothers and sisters, it is hard to see 
that such a trial is right. Things are grievous, indeed, when it 


831 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


comes to this point — when not only the temporal — but even 
the spiritual gets marred; when the fine gold becomes dim, and 
the glory departs; when the crown of beauty, once upon our 
head, is cast down in the mire, and we ourselves become like a 
wild bull in a net, kicking against the Lord; having our soul, not 
as a weaned child, but one that is weaning, petulant, and full of 
all manner of ill humor and bad temper! And yet this is often 
the experience of God’s people, and therefore, to them it is that 
it will always seem grievous. 

5. But now let me add, and then I have done with the first 
head, that all this is only seeming do let me keep you to this, all 
this is only seeming. Faith triumphs in trial. When reason is sent 
into the background and has her feet made fast in the stocks, 
then faith comes in and cries, “I will sing of mercy and of 
judgment. Unto You, O Lord, will I sing.” faith pulls the black 
mask from the face of trouble, and reveals the angel beneath. 
Faith looks up at the cloud, and says — 

“It is big with mercy, and shall break 
In blessings on my head.” 

There is a subject for song even in the smarts of the rod! 
For, first, the trial is not as heavy as it might have been. Next, the 
trouble is not as severe as it ought to have been, and certainly the 
affliction is not so terrible as the burden which others have to carry. Faith 
sees that in her worst sorrow there is nothing penal; there is not 
a drop of God’s wrath in it; it is all sent in love. Faith sees love 
in the heart of an angry God. Faith says of her grief, “Why, this 
is a badge of honor, for it is the child who must have the rod,” 
and she sings of the sweet result of her sorrows, because they 
work her to lasting good. “No, more,” says faith, “these light 
afflictions which are but for a moment work out for me a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.” So faith sits down 


832 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


on the black throne, out of which she has expelled reason and 
carnal sense, and she begins, to the praise of divine wisdom, to 
lift up her voice in a joyous song! Well, brothers and sisters, 
that is the first point. 1 have been rather too long upon it, 
perhaps, but I could not help it. 

II. We have spoken of sore afflictions — well, now, next we 
have BLESSED FRUIT-BEARING. 

I want you to notice the word which goes before the fruit- 
bearing part of the text. “No chastisement for the present 
seems to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless. ” Now what does 
that mean? It gives me my first point under the second head, 
that this fruit-bearing is not natural — it is not the natural effect of 
affliction! You will see a man take a mass of metal. It appears 
to you very pure, and very beautiful to look upon. It is alloyed. 
He puts it into his refining pot, he heats the coals, he begins to 
stir it; you will say to him, “Why, what are you doing? You are 
spoiling that precious metal. Look how foul the surface is! 
What a scum floats up.” The natural effect of the fire is to make 
the scum show itself. A hand, a skillful hand is needed, for the 
fire cannot do the refiner’s work — he himself must skim the 
base metal off the top. Affliction only makes the sin rise to the 
surface, it makes the devil in us come up; it makes us, while we 
are boiling in affliction, worse than we were before; it is the 
supernatural work of the Holy Spirit, and of our blessed Lord 
and Master, when He sees it on the top, to skim it off. The 
affliction does not do us any good in itself; the natural fruit of 
affliction is rebellion. If God chastens me, can I love Him for 
that? Not naturally. If He smites me, can I yield Him homage 
for that? No, naturally I rebel against Him, and I say, “Who are 
You that You should smite me thus, and what have I done that 
I should be tormented by You?” To kiss the hand which smites 
is something more than natural, it is divine grace — and the 
aposde seems to hint at this, when he says, “Nevertheless.” Oh, 


833 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


dear friends, no more could we be purged by affliction than 
could the sea be made pure by being stirred up with storm! I 
have sometimes looked at the waves when they seemed a 
delightfully pure blue and then, after a tremendous storm, the 
deep has been moved from the very bottom, and its waves are 
thick and foul with sand and seaweed. Trials breed discontent, 
anger, envy, rebellion, enmity, murmuring, and a thousand 
other ills; but God overrules and makes the very thing which 
would make Christians worse, to minister unto their growth in 
holiness and spirituality! It is not the natural fruit of affliction, 
but the supernatural use to which God turns it, in bringing good 
out of evil. Note that. 

And, then, observe, dear friends, that this fruit is not 
instantaneous. “Nevertheless;” what is the next word? 
“Afterwards.” Many believers are deeply grieved because they 
do not at once feel that they have been profited by their 
afflictions. Well, you do not expect to see apples or plums on a 
tree which you have planted but a week ago! Only little children 
put their seeds into their flower garden, and then expect to see 
them grow into plants in an hour. I would have you look for 
very speedy fruit, but not too speedy fruit — for sometimes the 
good of our troubles may not come to us for years afterwards, 
when, perhaps, getting into a somewhat similar experience, we 
are helped to bear it by the remembrance of having endured 
the like 1 0 or 20 years ago. It is “nevertheless afterwards. ” The 
good of trouble is not generally while we are in trouble, but 
when we get out of trouble! Yet, on the other hand, it 
sometimes happens that God can give us the jewels even before 
we leave Egypt so that we can march out of the house of 
bondage with golden earrings hanging at our ears, and covered 
with all manner of jewelry. For the most part however, “it is 
nevertheless afterwards. ” 


834 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


Well now, you will note in the text a sort of gradation with 
regard to what affliction does afterwards. It brings forth fruit; that 
is one step. That fruit is the fruit of righteousness — here is an 
advance. That righteous fruit is peaceable — this is best of all. 
First, affliction really does to the Christian, when the time 
comes, bring forth fruit. This is the objective of Christ in 
sending it. In His sweet prayer for the elect, He prayed that His 
people might bring forth fruit. He said, “Herein is My Father 
glorified, that you bring forth much fruit.” He assured them 
that every branch of the true vine that brought forth fruit would 
be purged, that it might bring forth more fruit. So far as this 
world is concerned, God gets His glory out of us — not by our 
being Christians — but by our being fruiful Christians. And the 
end and object of divine husbandry is to make our branches 
hang down with fruit! Blessed is that chastening which, being 
fruitful in us, makes us also fruitful! 

It brings forth the fruit of righteousness; not natural and 
therefore impure fruit, but fruit such as God Himself may 
accept — holiness, purity, patience, joy, faith, love, and every 
other Christian grace. It does not make the Christian more 
righteous in the sense of justification, for he is completely so in 
Christ; but it makes him more apparendy so in the eyes of 
onlookers, while he, through his experience, exhibits more of 
the character of his Lord. 

Note again, that this righteous fruit is peaceable. None so 
happy as tried Christians, afterwards. No calm more deep than 
that which precedes a storm. There is a lull in the atmosphere 
after the hurricane which is not known at other times. Who has 
not seen clear skies after rain? God gives sweet banquets to His 
children after the batde. It is after the rod that He gives the 
honeycomb; after climbing the Hill Difficulty we sit down in 
the arbor to rest; after passing the wilderness we come to the 
House Beautiful; after we have gone down the Valley of 


835 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Humiliation, after we have fought with Apollyon, the shining 
one appears to us, and gives us the branch which heals us. It is 
always “afterwards” with the Christian. He has his best things 
last, and he must be expecting, therefore, to have his worst 
things first! It is always “afterwards.” Still, when it does come, 
it is peace, sweet, deep peace. Oh, what a delightful sensation 
it is, after a long illness, once more to walk abroad — though 
perhaps you are still pale to look upon, and feeble in body — 
you walk out of doors, and breathe the air again! You can feel 
your blood leap in your veins, and every bone seems to sing out 
because of the mercy of God. Such is the peace which follows 
long and sharp afflictions. Our enemies are drowned in the Red 
Sea; then is the time to go forth with timbrel and dance! Our 
sorrows have left a silver line of holy light behind them, and 
our spirit is as calm as a summer’s eve. 

III. And now for the third point and that is, FAVORED 
SONS. 

“Nevertheless afterwards it yields the peaceable fruit of 
righteousness in them which are exercised thereby.” I will 
venture to say this, that it does not yield peaceable fruit to 
eveiybody, no, it does not yield peaceable fruit to every “son” 
either. It is not every Christian who gets a blessing from 
affliction, at least not from every affliction that he has. I 
conceive that the last words are inserted by way of distinction, 
and of real difference — “those who are exercised thereby.” 
You know, brothers and sisters, there are some of the Lord’s 
children who, when they get a trouble, are not exercised by it, 
because they run away from it. They imagine and employ rash 
means of avoiding it; they use subterfuges in order to escape 
from it; they are not exercised thereby. Their Father holds the 
rod over them, and they run away from His hand. Perhaps they 
get a tingling smart as they run, far worse than if they had stayed; 
they may get a sorry cuff from His hand, but they are not 


836 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


exercised by it. There are others who, when under trouble, are 
callous and do not yield; they bear it as a stone would bear it; 
they learn the stoics’ art; the Lord may give or take away, they 
are equally senseless; they look upon it as the work of blind fate, 
not as the fruit of that blessed predestination which is ruled by 
a Father’s hand, and so they are like the bullock, which rather 
kicks against the pricks than yields to the driver. They get no 
benefit from tribulation; it never enters into them, they are not 
exercised by it. Now, you know what the word “exercised” 
means. In the Greek gymnasium — the training master would 
challenge the youths to meet him in combat. He knew how to 
strike, to guard, and to wrestle. Many severe blows the young 
combatants received from him, but this was a part of their 
education, preparing them at some future time to appear 
publicly in the games. He who shirked the trial and declined the 
encounter with the trainer received no good from him, even 
though he would probably be thoroughly well flogged for his 
cowardice! The youth whose athletic frame was prepared for 
future struggles was he who stepped forth boldly to be exercised 
by his master. If you see afflictions come, and sit down 
impatiently, and will not be exercised by your trials, then you 
do not get the peaceable fruit of righteousness; but if, like a 
man, you say, “Now is my time of trial, I will play the man; 
wake up my faith to meet the foe; take hold of God, stand with 
firm foot, and slip not; let all my graces be awakened, for here 
is something to be exercised upon.” It is then that a man’s 
bones, sinew and muscles all grow stronger. We know that 
those who strive for the mastery, keep under their body, in 
order that they may come prepared in the day of contest, and 
so must the Christian use his afflictions, exercise himself by 
them to the keeping down of the flesh to the conquest of his 
evil desires, that he may be as strong as if his flesh were iron, 
and his muscles hardened steel! 


837 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


You ask me, what in the Christian is exercised by affliction? 
Everything newborn in the Christian is exercised. The newborn 
seed is exercised by affliction, and that filial spirit which springs 
from it. There is sonship in every believer in Christ who is 
exercised; and the spirit of sonship and the graces of sonship all 
are tried. In fact, affliction, when it does us most good, 
exercises all the man, sets every power to work, strains his 
patience, tests his faith, proves his love, develops his fears, 
glorifies his hopes, and whatever other power there is in his 
spiritual manhood, it exercises all to the uttermost point, and it 
makes every part grow stronger and nearer to perfection, and 
so the peaceable fruits of righteousness are yielded to those 
“who are exercised thereby.” Mark that distinction, because we 
are not all thus favored. We are all sons and daughters, and shall 
all have to bear the trial, yet we may not all be exercised by it! 
Let us pray God to give us to be exercised by affliction when 
we do get it, that so we may possess the practical benefit of it. 

I have done when I have added three practical reflections. 
First, see the happy estate of a Christian. His worst things are good 
things, his smarts are his joys, his losses are his gains. Did you 
ever hear of a man who got his health by being sick? That is a 
Christian! He gets rich by his losses; he rises by his falls; he goes 
on by being pushed back; he lives by dying, he grows by being 
diminished, and becomes full by being emptied! Well, if the bad 
things work him so much good, what must his best things do? 
If his dark nights are as bright as the world’s days, what shall 
be his days? If even his starlight is more splendid than the sun, 
what must his sunlight be? If he can sing in dungeons, how 
sweedy will he sing in heaven! If he can praise the Lord in the 
fire, how will he praise Him before the eternal throne! If even 
a thorn in the flesh only drives him to his God, brothers and 
sisters, where will the convoy of angels carry him? If evil is 
good to him, what will the overdowing goodness of God be to 


838 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


him in another world? Who would not be a Christian? Who 
would not know the transcendent riches of the believer’s 
heritage? 

Secondly, see where the believer’s hope mainly lies. It does not lie 
in the seeming. He may seem to be rich, or seem to be poor, 
seem to be sick, or seem to be in health — he looks upon all that 
as the seeming. He nodces that the thing seen is the thing that 
seems, but the thing that is believed is the thing that is. He knows 
that what his eye catches is only the surface, what his finger 
touches is only the exterior, but what his heart believes, that is 
the depth, the substance, the reality. So, brothers and sisters, he 
finds all his joy in the “nevertheless afterwards.” Sometimes he 
is in great trouble, dark trouble — and the devil tempts him, but 
he spells that word over and repeats it — “Never-the-less, I am 
very poor, but I shall, never-the-less, obtain heaven forever! I 
am very weak, but never-the-less I shall be where the inhabitant 
is never sick! The devil has beaten me — I am on the ground 
and he has his foot on my neck, and says he will make an end 
of me — but I have, never-the-less, eternal security in Christ!” 
Never-the-less, not a grain — not an atom the less, in fact — he 
throws the never-the-less into an always-the-more. He believes 
he shall have always-the-more of bliss and so, looking to the 
afterwards, he rejoices in tribulation, for tribulation works 
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. Why, 
the Christian often learns his best lessons about heaven by 
contrast. If a man should give me a black book printed in the 
old black letters, and should say, “You want to know about 
happiness, that book is written about misery, learn from the 
opposite,” I would thank him just as much for that as if the 
book were on happiness! So the believer takes his daily trials 
and reads them the opposite way. Trial comes to him and says, 
“Your hope is dry.” “My hope is not dry,” he says, “while I 
have a trial I have a ground of hope.” “Your God has forsaken 


839 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you,” says tribulation. “My God has not forsaken me,” he says, 
“for He says in the world you shall have tribulation and I have 
it. I have a letter from God in a black envelope, but, as long as 
it came from Him, I do not mind what kind of envelope it 
comes in; He has not forgotten me — has not given me up — 
He is still gracious to me.” And so the Christian begins to think 
about heaven, “For,” he says, “this is the place of work, that is 
the place of rest; this is the place of sorrow, that is the place of 
joy; here is defeat, there is triumph; here is shame, there glory; 
here it is being despised, there it is being honored; here it is the 
hiding of my Father’s face, there it is the glory of His presence; 
here it is absence in the body, there it is presence with the Lord; 
here weeping, and groaning, and sighing, there the song of 
triumph; here death — death to my friends and death to 
myself — there the happy union of immortal spirits in 
immortality.” So he learns to sing not of the seeming, but of 
the “nevertheless afterwards,” with sweet hope, as his harp of 
many golden strings. 

Lastly, brothers and sisters, afterwards is just the point where the 
unconverted feel the pinch. “Nevertheless afterwards.” I walk round 
your gardens — you are rich. How beautifully they are laid out! 
What rare flowers! What luxuries! And as I look at them all, if 
I remember that you will die, I say to myself, “Nevertheless 
afterwards. This poor man who has a paradise on earth can 
have no paradise in the world to come.” Do I see you riding 
gaily along the street? You have abundance of wealth and 
honor, but you are without God, and without Christ; then I see 
close behind you a grim executioner, bearing this motto, 
“Nevertheless afterwards.” You wear a smiling face this 
morning, for though you have neither riches nor honor, still 
you are young, and have health and beauty, and are looking out 
on the pleasures of this world. I want you to take a telescope in 
your hand and look a little further — “Nevertheless afterwards!” 


840 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


528 Chastisement - Now and 
Afterwards - Heb. 12:11 


You are thinking about this present life, and hoping you will 
prosper in it; and up to now you have not needed any 
religion — you say you have been happy enough without Christ, 
and you dare say you will get on without Him, but I want you 
to remember, “Nevertheless afterwards. ” When you come to die, 
when you stand before an angry God, when you rise amid the 
terrors of the day of judgment, when you have to meet the open 
book, and the burning eyes of the great Judge, when you hear 
the sentence, “Come, you blessed,” or “Depart, you cursed,” 
you will think of “Nevertheless afterwards.” I wish you would 
bring these eternal things before your mind, and reckon with 
your conscience concerning them. Soul, if your joy is in earth, 
and your trust in self, you may spread yourself like a green bay 
tree — you may become as a bullock fattened for the 
slaughter — but nevertheless afterwards, beware lest He tear 
you in pieces and there be none to deliver! Believe in Christ. 
Trust your soul with Him, and then whatever is to come 
afterwards, whatever “Nevertheless afterwards” may come, 
you may always be sure of this — that there is for you an eternal 
and exceeding weight of glory! 

May my Master give you an interest in that “Nevertheless 
afterwards,” and then I shall not fret, nor will you, either, if you 
have to have an interest in the rod of the covenant which is for 
the present, at least in seeming, not joyous but grievous. 


841 



529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 104:16 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, September 13th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“The trees of the Lord are full of sap, the cedars of Lebanon, 
which He has planted.” - Psalm 104:16 

IF SOLOMON were here this morning, who spoke of all 
trees, from the hyssop on the wall to the cedar that is in 
Lebanon, he would gready instruct us in the natural history of 
the cedar and, at the same time, uttering allegories and proverbs 
of wisdom, he would give us apples of gold in baskets of silver! 
But since the Lord Jesus Christ has said, “Lo, I am with you 
always, even to the end of the world,” we can dispense with the 
company of Solomon, for if Christ is present, behold, a greater 
than Solomon is here! Solomon probably would confine his 
remarks simply to the physical conformation and botany of the 
wonderful tree, but our Lord, I trust, will speak to our hearts, 
this morning, concerning those who are “planted in the courts 
of the Lord,” and therefore, flourish like cedars. May our 
communications, this morning, be blessed to us while we talk 
of those trees of the Lord, those plants of His own right hand 
planting which grow in the garden of the Lord! I shall have to 
say some things, this morning, which are not for beginners in 
the gospel school; I shall have to handle some lofty matters 
which belong to the most advanced of the Lord’s family, for 
Lebanon is a high hill, and the ascent is very craggy. The 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


pathway to the summit is not for the feet of babes — it is rather 
fit for those lion-like men, those men of experience — who, by 
reason of use, have had their feet made like hind’s feet that they 
may stand on the high places. Follow me, as I may be led of the 
Spirit, to climb that arduous pathway! Let us stand, this 
morning, under the venerable shadow of those ancient cedars 
which, to this very day, are the Lord’s witnesses, and are, as 
before, full of sap — the cedars of Lebanon, which the Lord has 
planted! 

There are three things I shall bring before your attention, 
this morning, in the cedars of Lebanon; first of all, the absence of 
all human cultivation; secondly, the presence of divine culture; and 
thirdly, the fullness of vital principle. 

You may not see all this at first, but remember that our 
translation is not exactly correct. You will observe that the 
word “sap,” is inserted in italics — it is not there in the Hebrew. 
“The trees of the Lord are full,” or rather, which gives the 
meaning clearly, “The trees of the Lord are satiated — are 
satisfied — the cedars of Lebanon, which He has planted.” 

I. That rendering of the text gives me my first point. We 
see in yonder venerable trees, crowning the ridge of the 
Lebanese range, THE ABSENCE OF ALL HUMAN 
CULTIVATION. 

1. Note first, that these trees are peculiarly the Lord’s trees, 
because they owe their planting entirely to Him: “The cedars of 
Lebanon, which He has planted.” No diligent hands dug the 
soil, no careful farmer dropped in the fruitful cone. How those 
ancient giants of the grove came there, no tongue can tell; it 
must be left among the mysteries. Perhaps the waters of the 
tremendous deluge washed up the cones, and laid them safely 
upon the ledge of rock at the top of the hill, and there, they 
sprouted and grew. That would be but a guess; we must leave 
the early planting of those mighty trees among the secrets 


843 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


which belong to God! It is certain that they owe nothing to 
men, that there is not a tree of Lebanon of which we may not 
safely say, “This is one of the cedars which the Lord has planted 
Beloved, it is also true of every child of God. The Lord uses 
instrumentality, but the instrument has no real power except as 
God puts power into it; if we have been converted, we were 
not converted of ourselves, of the energy of our own free will; 
we are not self-planted, but God-planted! If we have been 
turned from Nature’s darkness to the marvelous light of God, 
it was not through the oratory or eloquence of the minister; if 
so, our religion would be in vain — it was God whose decree 
said, “Let the light be,” and light was; it was He who said, “Let 
that dried branch be planted in My garden,” and planted we 
were — and grow we must — and shall, while He supports us! 
The mysterious finger of the divine Spirit dropped the living 
seed into a heart which He had Himself prepared for its 
reception, and there it sprang up and continued to grow from 
the tender shoot until it towered aloft as a goodly cedar of 
mighty girth! Every true heir of heaven, like the cedar, 
acknowledges the Great Husbandman as his planter. 

2. As I look upon those noble trees, I note that they are not 
dependant upon man for their watering. Yonder trees in the plain are 
fertilized by little canals running at their roots, and therefore, 
are they green, but these on the top of Lebanon, who shall find 
a stream for them? Who shall bring the rivers of water to their 
feet? How shall the gardener empty his bucket that they may 
drink? No, there they stand on the lofty rock, not moistened by 
human irrigation, and yet, your heavenly Father supplies them. 
The clouds, those wandering cisterns of the sky, arrested by 
their branches, hover round them, and at last pour down in 
deluges the fructifying rain; or the ledges of the rock retain the 
streamlets which trickle from Lebanon’s snowy peaks, and then, 
the roots of the cedar drink up the nourishment which they 


844 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


require, but man has nothing to do with it. Man’s cultivation 
withers in the plain below; when autumn comes, the fields are 
all dry and parched. Man only preserves to himself a litde spot 
of green by perpetually using the processes of irrigation, but 
these cedars owe not a single drop to the power and energy of 
man! Well, now, so is it to the Christian who has learned to live 
by faith. He can say — 

“My trust is in the Lord alone, 

My rock and refuge in His throne! 

In all my fears, in all my straits, 

My soul on His salvation waits!” 

He is independent of man, even in temporal things, 
because he has learned to trust in his God; he believes the 
promise — “Your bread shall be given you, and your water shall 
be sure.” And the bread and the water are sure to him. In 
spirituals, though he uses the means, though he loves the pastor 
after God’s own heart, though he loves the pastures where he 
feeds, and is made to lie down, yet, still he sings, ,r The Lord is 
my shepherd; therefore, I shall not want. He leads me beside 
the still waters; He makes me to lie down in green pastures.” 
On no priest does he rely, on no persuasions of eloquent 
tongues does he depend, for his full and his continued 
maintenance, he looks to the Lord his God, and to Him alone! 
The dew of heaven is his portion, and the God of heaven is his 
fountain! Every Christian, thus, is a tree of the Lord, in His 
planting, and in His watering. 

3. Furthermore, if your eyes look attentively at yonder 
cedars, you will see that no mortal ??iight protects them. They are 
planted on a mountain ridge no less than 6,000 feet above the 
level of the sea; the snow frequently lies upon their branches in 
enormous masses; they are in the most exposed position 


845 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


conceivable. When the cedars were as yet but young, the 
browsing goat might have destroyed them; as they grew up, the 
heavy falls of snow must have completely buried the young 
trees. Afterward, they were subjected to many dangers. Up 
there, the lightning is at home; there, the callow tempests try 
their young wings. Lebanon’s towering peaks must be a 
frequent mark for the thunderbolts of God, and sometimes, 
when the time has come, the voice of the Lord, that makes the 
hinds to calve, also rends the cedars of Lebanon, and the hoary 
prince of the forest bows humbly at the touch of the scepter of 
his King! These trees owe nothing — for their preservation 
from storm, wind and tempest — to man! There is no hedge set 
about them; there are no means used to shore up the limbs as 
they begin to drop by weight — man does not even keep the 
goat from them. They are left there unprotected in the pitiless 
storm and terrible blast, and yet, the veterans survive! The 
cedars of Lebanon have not all fallen even beneath the 
insatiable axe of man — still they stand — God’s trees, kept and 
preserved by Him, and by Him alone! It is precisely the same 
with the Christian. He is not a hot-house plant, sheltered from 
temptation; he does not live in a world of holy and hallowed 
influence, preserving him from sin; he stands in the most 
exposed position, on yonder bare rock, where winds of 
mysterious Satanic influence, and dreadful earthquakes of his 
own doubts and fears daily try him; where terrific thunderbolts 
from God’s right hand, the thunderbolts of desertion and stern 
affliction all come against him; he has no shelter, no protection, 
except this — that the broad wings of the Eternal God always 
cover the cedars which He Himself has planted! Oh, it is 
magnificent to think how the Christian bears up! Weak, feeble, 
less than nothing in himself, yet so mighty that all hell cannot 
crush him, and the united hosts of the world, the flesh, and the 
devil, cannot prevail against him! I think I hear the cedars, as 


846 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


the trees of the woods clap their hands, shouting aloud — “In 
all these things we are more than conquerors,” as they 
remember lightning, and snow, and storm; and so with the 
cedars of the Lord, when tribulation, and trial, and distress 
come upon them — “We are more than conquerors through 
Him who has loved us.” Brothers and sisters, forget not that 
our refuge is in the Lord alone! 

4. Fourthly, as to their inspection — they also preserve a 
sublime indifference to human gaze. Perhaps for thousands of 
years, they may not have been looked upon by human eyes at 
all. Moses desired to see “that goodly land and Lebanon.” 
David often saw them, and he sang of that handful of corn 
whose fruit shall shake like Lebanon, but I cannot find that the 
cedars have become a whit more green now that they are visited 
by pilgrims, nor, on the other hand, that they lose anything of 
their verdure because the evil eyes of man may have glanced 
upon them! Solomon spoke of one who was “excellent as the 
cedars.” Sacred to God, they stand high up in lonely grandeur, 
indifferent to mortal judgment. When the virgin snows of 
Lebanon were untouched by man’s polluted foot, and the 
Eternal walked in tempest, stepping from crag to crag, or when 
in the cool eventide, the LTnseen One trod their hallowed aisles, 
these trees were God’s trees, and God’s trees alone, stretching 
out their broad branches for Him to gaze upon, quite content 
if at high noon, or in the deep gloom of midnight, the Great 
Planter in solitary glory looked down upon them! It is just so 
with the Christian. He stands, like the cedars, in a conspicuous 
position, but he courts not observation; he is like a city set upon 
a hill, yet, still consciously he walks before the Lord in the land of 
the living; he owes nothing to the smiles of men, and he cares 
as little for their frowns! I mean that true believer who has so 
grown in faith that he no longer leans upon an arm of flesh, but 
understands how to stand upright; I mean that advanced 


847 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Christian who has not one foot upon the sea, and the other on 
the land, but has put both his feet on the rock of ages, and lets 
earth reel if it will, and bids the storms come, and the winds 
blow, unmoved, possessing a deep calm within, because he looks 
to God ! This is his joy and his only joy, “You, God, see me, my 
Father who is in heaven knows my needs, He looks upon me, 
and regards me.” Out with the piety which depends upon the 
public eye! Away, away, away with the religion that needs to be 
watched, and guarded lest it desert the standard. I am not to 
have religion like a dog collar, which I may slip off and on, and 
feel glad to be rid of it; it must be part and parcel of my being! 
My religion must be a thing which lives in the notice of God, 
in my closet, and in my secret heart; a religion which I bring 
into public because I cannot leave it behind. It must not be the 
Pharisees’ paint and tinsel which he puts on in the public place, 
and privately laughs at when he gets alone! Ah, my brothers 
and sisters, we need to be like the cedars, caring only for God, 
minding little whether we are praised or blamed by any of 
human shape! If you cannot feel it sufficient honor to be 
known of Him who sees in secret, you have need to begin to 
live aright! 

5. Nor have we finished here the glorious independence of 
the cedar. I would I had a tongue to tell it all out, it is a theme 
for poet or bard. We need a Coleridge or a Milton to sing the 
majesty of those grand old trees in their solitary glory. Note 
that their exultation is all for God and not for man. When the fig 
tree yields its figs, it may well say, “Thanks to the cultivator 
who has taken so much care of me.” When the vine gives up 
her luscious clusters, she has to thank the vinedresser who has 
used the pruning knife. When you walk your gardens, all your 
plants praise you as well as God, because of your care for them. 
But what say the cedars? Who has planted the cedars, or who 
has watered them? Who has pruned them — who has hedged 


848 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


them about and kept them in the day of storm? The Lord, even 
the Lord, alone, has been everything unto the cedars and, 
therefore, David very sweetly puts it in one of the last Psalms, 
“Praise you the Lord, fruitful trees and all cedars.” The cedars 
have not a green leaf to magnify man with, nor a single cone 
with which to make him proud; the cedar’s silent song is, “Let 
Jehovah, God of Israel, be praised, and when we fall, let our 
split timbers build a temple to His praise, for unto Him, and 
unto Him alone we grow.” They fell, you know, many of them, 
beneath the axe of Hiram, and floated on the sea to Joppa; and 
then again were carried to Jerusalem; but it was that they might 
make the holy place, and build the pillars of the temple of God! 
So, Christians, is it with you! There is nothing in you that can 
magnify man. If you understand yourselves aright, you give 
unto the Lord glory and strength, for your only thanks are due 
to Him. Your praise, your gratitude shall ascend to Him who 
chose you before ever the earth was; to Him who bought you 
with His precious blood; to Him who quickens and preserves 
you by His Spirit; and when you die, this is your hope and joy — 
that you shall be pillars in the temple of your God, and go no 
more out forever! You are the Lord’s trees from first to last; if 
you know yourselves aright, the Author and Finisher of your 
Faith is your Divine Redeemer! 

6. 1 do not know that there is a cedar upon Lebanon which 
is not also independent of man in its expectations. They never expect 
to be fenced about and hedged; they never reckon upon being 
preserved and watered by man. We have many schemes, but I 
have heard of none for preserving the cedars! Speculations are 
rife every day, and one would scarcely be astonished by a 
projected railroad to the moon, but as yet, I have never heard 
of anyone who has attempted to purchase the cedars of 
Lebanon, to preserve them, or make them his private property. 
Arabs and Turks do their best to ruin the whole grove, but yet 


849 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


there they stand, expecting as little from man as they have ever 
received from him, giving him their shadow, yielding him their 
fragrance, but getting nothing, and expecting nothing from him 
in return! That is your example, O Christian! You are to live 
expecting nothing from man, and you shall never be 
disappointed; you are to live looking upon the Lord alone, and 
there again disappointment shall never come; you are to 
understand that one of God’s objectives with you is to knock 
away every prop from you, to take away every buttress and to 
make you lean upon Him alone! There is the round world, what 
bears it up? He hangs the world upon nothing. If you are what 
you should be, you are just like that earth — you have no visible 
support — there is nothing upon which you can depend that the 
carnal eye can see; but yet, as the earth moves not and falls not 
from her orbit, so you, by the power of faith, shall be 
maintained and kept just where you are! “The young lions do 
lack and suffer hunger, but they who wait on the Lord shall not 
want any good thing.” It is a life’s work to learn independence 
of the creature, and almost another life’s work to learn 
dependence upon the Creator! To wean us from the breasts of 
this world is a long and painful process; to get us clean rid of 
that walking by sight, which is the disease of man, and to bring 
us to walk by faith in the Spirit, which is the glory of a Christian — 
this is a work well worthy of a God — and blessed is the man 
who has this work to a great extent accomplished in himself! I 
do feel, brothers and sisters, more and more that my soul must 
wait only upon the Lord, and that my expectation must be from 
Him alone. You, too, must come here and learn that the Lord 
will provide, but it is only in the mountain of the Lord that this 
sweet truth of God can be seen! 

II. Now for the next point. The cedars of Lebanon are a 
GLORIOUS DISPLAY OF DIVINE CARE. 


850 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


1. First, in the abundance of their supply. No river, as I have 
observed, rolls at their feet; no canals keep their leaf from 
withering — man uses no labor and employs no skill to irrigate 
the steeps of Lebanon — and yet, do the cedars need anything? 
Look at them! Stand under their shadow and see if they need 
any good thing. The text tells us, that so far from needing, they 
are saturated — “The trees of the Lord are full.” Man’s trees 
may sometimes be ready to perish for lack of moisture; they 
may be frostbitten and their shoots may be nipped — but the 
trees of the Lord are full — there is never any need there; there 
is no need to them who fear Him! Dear friends, those believers 
who have learned most to live by faith possess the richest part 
of the land of promise! Other believers live in the land of Egypt, 
and are often making bricks without straw, but these dwell in 
the land which flows with milk and honey. They have passed 
the wilderness, and having believed, they have entered into rest. 
The lot of the truly fullgrown believer, who stays himself upon 
his God alone, is well set forth in the promise, “His soul shall 
dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the earth.” He has his 
troubles, but faith makes them light; he has Iris needs, but faith 
never permits him to call them needs, for they are always 
supplied before the necessity begins to pinch him! Other men 
may, with all their watching and wisdom, come to nothing; they 
may rise up early and sit up late, and eat the bread of carefulness, 
and yet be poor; but they who stay upon God in temporals and 
spirituals, if heaven should shake, and if the pillars of the earth 
should be moved, and the sea should be dried up, yet their place 
of defense shall be munitions of rocks. “Their bread shall be 
given them, and their water shall be sure.” See this on a large 
scale in the case of our dear brother Muller’s institution at 
Bristol. We often see institutions sending out fresh begging 
appeals — there is some new claim upon their funds; the 
Lancashire distress has been given very many contributions 


851 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


from this object and that society. Of course, it is so — these 
societies usually lean on man, and rest upon an arm of flesh; 
but our Bristol brother, by prayer and faith, makes known his 
needs unto God, and when does he lack any good thing? When 
needs he issue a begging appeal? Verily, I do believe that if all 
England were in famine, the orphan house at Bristol would 
have sufficient supplies! Whatever may happen, the Lord has 
promised to hear prayer, and He will honor faith — the cedars 
of Lebanon shall be full if all the trees of the plain are famished! 
I would to God we could exhibit still more and more of the 
same principle of faith in the conduct of our college; and in that 
case, too, I am persuaded that whatever may occur and 
whatever may happen, as that is God’s work, it can never lack! 
My confidence in that matter is in my God. I am glad that so 
many of the Lord’s people are made the instruments to supply 
the needs of the college, but still, I look far higher. Sometimes, 
when friends say, “Mention it to the people,” 1 do not like to 
do it, lest I should lean too much on you. God’s own work shall 
be carried on by God’s own means, and I am sure He will send 
what it requires, and in a way which shall be for the glory of 
His name! They are happy — I am a witness that they are — 
brothers and sisters, they are well supplied, who, like the cedars, 
exhibit divine Care and independence of man. 

2. Again, note concerning these cedars that they are not 
only well supplied, but they are always green. Other trees refreshed 
with rivers, if they have the whole Nile at their roots, must drop 
their leaves once every year at the command of winter — and 
then, they stretch out their bare limbs, as if they prayed for the 
return of spring! The oaks of Bashan languish, the fig tree casts 
her leaves, the ash and the elm are ashamed, but you, O cedar, 
you live in perpetual spring! The green lawns of your horizontal 
branches fail not even in the year of drought; the birds always 
sing in your branches, and the storks make their nests in due 


852 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


season among your boughs. Dear brothers and sisters, it is so 
with the man who lives upon Christ alone! He has not the 
changes of other men; he has his trials, but he sings through 
them. The reason why many of us sink so low in spirit, and 
hang our harps on the willows, is only this — lack of faith! But 
if— 


“Our faith is in the Lord alone, 

Our rock and refuge is His throne,” 

so that we can say with Habakkuk, “Though the fig tree 
shall not blossom,” and so on, “yet will I rejoice in the Lord.” 
Let our faith be vigorous and unstaggering; let us be planted up 
there where God has put us — on the rocky side of Lebanon — 
in the midst of all kinds of difficulties and dangers, yet, our leaf 
shall be always green, and we shall not know when drought 
comes! 

3. Observe the grandeur and si^e of these trees. I have found 
upon reference to Mr. Thompson’s work, The Laud and the Book, 
that several of the trees measure 41 feet in girth, so that they 
are real giants of the forest! Think of it and admire — never 
watered by man, never cared for by him — depending upon 
God, and upon God alone — and yet, they have grown to the 
height of 1 00 feet and 40 feet in girth! Ah, and what 
magnificent Christians those are who come to rest upon God 
alone! You think, perhaps, that they, having so litde supply 
from second causes, would be feeble! But, dear brothers and 
sisters, it is often that supply from beneath which makes us 
feeble; I believe it is our riches which make us poor, and our 
strength which makes us weak, for when I am weak, then am I 
strong; when I am brought down to feel that all the creatures 
put together could not help me the turn of a penny, when I 
know that all my power and wisdom, and strength is not worth 


853 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


so much as a rusty nail, if I put it altogether and strain it to the 
utmost, O then it is so blessed to get a grip of God — to strike 
one’s root down to the heart of the rock of ages, and to rest 
alone on Him! The best Christians, the most splendid 
specimens of divine husbandry, are those who are most 
delivered from confidence in the creature! You shall read all 
biographies and you shall find in proportion as men become 
little in self, and litde in creature love, and creature trust, they 
become great and mighty in their doings for the Lord! 

4 . Note next, the fragrance of these venerable trees. Hosea 
speaks of the smell of Lebanon, and we know that cedar wood 
was among the aromatic substances burned upon the altar of 
the sanctuary. Travelers tell us that when they stand under the 
cedars of Lebanon, the smell is most delightful; the fragrant 
cedar wood perfumes all the air. Now, few of men’s trees do 
that; some of them do; the citron and the orange, and lemon 
load the air with sweets, but many others, cultivate them as we 
may, and nurture them with the greatest care, never can or will 
perfume the air. How sweetly do God’s trees sweeten all about 
them! If your piety comes from God, and if you wait in spirit 
upon God, and lean only upon Him, there will be about you 
such a sweet fragrance that you shall be acceptable unto God 
in Christ Jesus, and acceptable to your brothers and sisters, and 
even an ungodly world shall perceive that there is in you the 
smell of a field that the Lord has blessed! No man will yield so 
delightful a perfume as the man who is much with Christ. The 
scented piece of clay declared that it owed its perfume to 
sleeping with a rose — and if we have learned to rest upon the 
bosom of the Savior, if we have taught our soul to say, “My 
soul, wait only upon God, for my expectation is from Him” — 
our companionship and confidence in God will yield a sweet 
fragrance both to our words, to our actions, and to everything 
to which we set our hands! 


854 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


5 . Attentively think upon the perpetuity of these cedars. Do you 
remember how carnal men said, concerning certain works of 
faith which we ourselves attempted, “Ah, well, it may be all very 
well, it will last for a time; it is a sort of spurt of enthusiasm; it 
will last for a time, and then die out like a candle wick.” 
Societies that are blessed with patrons, vice-presidents, 
secretaries, directors, subscribers, and that use flute, harp, 
sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of music — those will 
get on; there is something to look at there; there is something 
tangible; but a scheme which lives only upon God?! The 
business man says, “I do not see it; I look at the pounds, 
shillings and pence; I have not learned to look at things unseen, 
I cannot confide in these visionary ideas.” Now, every year 
somebody has said, “Muller, of Bristol, will come to nothing; 
Mr. So-and-So has died, that old gentleman who used to give 
him 2,000 pounds and 3,000 pounds a year. Now, he is dead, 
now, it will come to an end and cannot keep on.” After his 
death somebody else was going to die, and that somebody died, 
but the orphans were still fed and housed! Even at this moment, 
the men of sight are prophesying evil against that marvel of 
faith in the same way they might tremble for the cedars and talk 
thus. Now, here are these cedars of God upon the top of 
Lebanon, with nobody to take care of them — they will surely 
be destroyed. What? No society pledged to guarantee their 
preservation? Why, there will not be one of them left in three 
weeks! They will be cut down for the sake of their timber, or 
carried off piecemeal by tourists. Ah, but my dear brothers and 
sisters, there are some of those cedars that can be reckoned to 
be at the very least, 3,500 years old, and some of them are 
doubtless older; and we cannot, of course, except by cutting 
them down, discover their precise age by counting the rings. 
But, there they stand, and have stood all those hundreds and 
thousands of years with no ranger of the forest to look after 


855 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


them — just God Himself to be the husbandman and keeper of 
them all! Depend upon it Christian, if you rest upon God, your 
simple faith is a principle which you may use, not only for 10 
or 20 years, but all your threescore years and ten! It serves you 
in your youth to be your joy — it shall serve you in your old age 
to be your staff; if you could outlive Methuselah, yet still you 
would find that God would keep the cedars full, and preserve 
you among them safely even to the end. 

6. 1 conclude this head by noticing that these cedars are very 
venerable. A traveler declares that often as he has stayed beneath 
their shadow, he has never done so without feeling a solemn 
awe. Mr. Thompson has slept under their shade on one or two 
occasions, and as he has looked up and seen the stars, and 
sometimes climbed up the cedars, and marked how they spread 
out all their branches horizontally, making a series of green 
lawns one above another, he says he has never gazed upon 
them without feeling there was something holy in the spot. The 
mountain tribes treat them with superstitious reverence, calling 
them saints, and giving to each a name. They command, for 
their antiquity and glory, the veneration of man. Scarcely could 
even the brute pass them, one would think, without looking up 
with something of respect. It is most evidently so with the 
Christian who lives wholly upon God! Your common sort of 
Christians who have very little faith and live by feelings — your 
ordinary sort of Christians who live half by faith, and half by 
works — mere professors who have never entered into the 
secret place of the tabernacle of the Most High, and think all I 
am talking about to be mere mysticism; these, I say, who do 
not understand the word “faith” to be so broad that it 
encompasses the whole of human life, so deep that it penetrates 
to the depths of the heart, and yet so high that hope cannot 
desire anything greater than faith can give — those who have 
not fully learned faith, have no respect from among men, but 


856 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


those who can act upon the supernatural principle of 
depending upon God, sooner or later will get the respect even 
of the most careless! The day is coming when these cedars of 
God shall be honored in the eyes of the most ungodly — in that 
great day when the wicked shall rise to shame and everlasting 
contempt, then these cedars of God shall have their time of 
honor, and the whole world shall know them to be plants of 
the Lord’s right-hand planting! I leave this point. I wish, dear 
friends that you and I knew more and more what it was to live 
upon the Lord alone. I believe it is the safest way of life, and I 
am certain it is the happiest. Let the cedar’s lot be my lot, let 
me have my God to be my sole stay and my support, and I shall 
be rich to all the intents of bliss! 

III. Now, for the third and last point. Taking the text as it 
stands, and reading it, “The trees of the Lord are full of sap,” 
which, although it is not in the original, is not, after all, violence 
to it. It is not a literal translation, but still, it is a free translation 
that does not violate the sense of the Hebrew. Taking our 
version, I get my third particular, FULLNESS OF LIVING 
PRINCIPLE. 

1. “The trees of the Lord are full of sap,” of which, I shall 
notice first, that this is vitally necessary. Without sap, the cedar is 
no tree, it becomes a dead post and nothing more; sap is 
necessary to make it flourish and exist. Without the life of God 
in the heart, a man is no Christian; he may attend his church 
twice every Sunday, or he may go to chapel; he may read his 
Bible regularly, and have family prayers in his house; he may 
subscribe his guineas to all sorts of societies; he may be very 
kind to the poor; he may be one whose outward life and 
conversation are quite beyond rebuke, and yet, unless he has 
been bornagain and has been made a partaker of the mysterious 
Spirit of the living God, he is not one of the Lord’s trees! 
Vitality is essential to a Christian. We call not dead ones, sons, 


857 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and if you have not been quickened, you cannot be children of 
God. It is not likely that Christ is married to a dead corpse, and 
if you have not been quickened by divine grace, you are not His 
bride, nor even a member of His family! The body always ejects 
dead substances; with great pain and difficulty, a decayed bone 
is pushed out from the flesh, through an ulcer, perhaps — but 
out it must come. Even so, there are no dead members of 
Christ’s body — painfully would the body strive to eject such a 
member. There must be life — a vital principle infused into us 
by God the Holy Spirit. The trees of the Lord are, without 
exception, full of sap. 

2. Next, essentially mysterious. I do not understand the sap — 
I suppose the botanist may. The sap is the blood of the tree, 
and in the tree there is a circulation very much like the 
circulation of the blood through our veins and heart. But who 
understands the circulation of the blood — it is a great 
mystery — by what force it rises, and by what power it descends 
again? Who shall tell how that river of life is guided? It is a 
divine mystery. So is it with the life within us — it is a greater 
mystery still. You may discover the sea, and understand it, but 
never the life of God in a Christian! This is God Himself in a 
Christian, God infused into the Christian’s soul as a divine 
principle. How shall I set this forth? Regeneration is the Holy 
Spirit coming into a man, and becoming that man’s life; and the 
life in a believer afterward feeds upon the flesh and blood of 
Christ — like sustaining like — divine life being sustained by 
divine food! Do you know anything about this mystery? “The 
wind blows where it wishes, and you hear the sound thereof, 
but cannot tell where it comes and where it goes: so is everyone 
who is born of the Spirit.” Everyone who is a tree of the Lord 
must be full of this essential mystery — “The trees of the Lord 
are full of sap.” 


858 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


3. Thirdly, it is radically secret; note that. Who knows how 
the roots get their sap? They go searching through the soil with 
their little roots, looking for that food which is exacdy suitable 
to the constitution of the tree. But how they transmute the 
mineral into the vegetable, how they suck out the various gasses, 
or draw out the particles they need, who can tell? Now, our 
root is Christ, our life is hid in Him. This is the secret of the 
Lord! The root of the Christian is as secret as the life itself; who 
can comprehend the mystery of the life within the believer, and 
the root of that life, that vital union with Christ, that reception 
of divine grace — no, of his very soul out of the wounds of the 
Savior — who shall explain this? We can only say this, however 
divine grace flows there from Jesus, it must be there, and it 
must come from Christ — for all the trees of the Lord are full 
of sap. 

4. Then, again, it is permanently active. In the Christian, the 
divine life is always active — not in fruit-bearing, but in some 
operation within. The sap in the cedar never lies still; the sap in 
common trees is still in the winter, and if you cut a tree in the 
early spring, as I unfortunately did, then the sap comes 
streaming down in great white streams from the wound you 
have made, because the sap has begun to flow. The tree should 
be cut at some other period of the year — but the cedar always 
has its sap active; perforate it when you may, a gum begins to 
exude at all times. So is it with the Christian! His divine graces are 
not all of them active, but the life is always active. My hand is 
not always moving, but my blood is. I am not always working for 
God, but my heart is always living upon God. The essential life 
of the Christian never dies — never ceases from being in active 
operation. There is a seed in him which cannot sin, because it 
is born of God, but which must still go towards holiness, 
because it comes from God. I do not understand this 


859 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


permanent activity, but still, I know it is in everyone of you, if 
you are Christians, for “The trees of the Lord are full of sap.” 

5. I shall almost have finished when I notice, in the next 
place, that it is externally operative. A traveler tells us that in the 
wood, the bark, and even the cones of the cedar, there is an 
abundance of resin. They are saturated with it so that he says 
he can scarcely touch one of the cedars of Lebanon without 
having the turpentine or resin of them upon his hands! That is 
always the way with a truly healthy Christian — his divine grace 
is externally manifested. There is the inner life within, it is active, 
and by-and-by, when it is in a right state, it saturates everything. 
You talk with the gracious man, he cannot help talking about 
Christ; you go into his house, you will soon see that a Christian 
lives there; you notice his actions, and you will see he has been 
with Jesus! He is so full of sap that the sap must come out. He 
has so much of the divine life within that the holy oil and divine 
balsam must flow from him. I am afraid this cannot be said of 
all of us. It is because we get to be dependent upon man, and 
not on God, and therefore have little of this sap; but if we are 
independent of man, and live wholly upon God, we shall be so 
full of sap that every part of us will betray our piety! 

6. And then, let me say lasdy, that this sap is abundantly to 
be desired. Oh, when I think what glory a full grown Christian 
brings to God, what honor the faith of a believer puts upon 
Jesus, when I think what a knowledge of God and divine things 
an advanced believer possesses, when I contemplate his joy and 
peace of mind — I could wish that everyone of you, (though it 
is well to be hyssops on God’s wall) — could be cedars upon 
God’s Lebanon! Oh, that we would grow in grace and in the 
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! There is 
something of the sap in us, let us pray for more. We live upon 
Christ. If our hearts do not awfully deceive us, you and I can 
say — 


860 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


529 The Cedars of Lebanon - Ps. 

104:16 


“On Christ the solid rock I stand, 

All other ground is sinking sand.” 

The Lord knows our hearts and He Himself knows that we 
can say as Peter did, “Lord, You know all things: You know 
that I love You.” But oh, is there one among you who is 
content with himself? I am not — I am ashamed of myself — 
forgetting the things that are behind, I would press forward to 
that which is before; not as though I had already obtained, 
either were already perfect. Ah, brothers and sisters, there is 
such a height of glorious independence of man, and a confident 
dependence upon God, and there is such a blessed internal joy 
and peace, such a divine fullness of sap which we may yet have 
that I pray none of you rest till you obtain it to the praise and 
the glory of His grace, who has made you accepted in the 
Beloved! 

Sinner, that which I have been holding up as the strength 
and beauty of a Christian, must be life to you. Come, every man, 
and woman, and trust in the Lord, for if you trust in Him, you 
shall never be confounded! The Lord now add a blessing upon 
you, for Christ’s sake. Amen. 


861 



530 The Chief of Sinners - 1 Tim. 1:15 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, September 13th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Sinners; of whom I am chief.” - I Timothy 1:15 

WHO AMONG ALL the Scriptural writers can compare with 
Paul in the fullness of his testimony to the grace of God? Upon 
the doctrines of grace, upon the experience of divine grace, 
upon everything that has to do with the exceeding abundant 
grace of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Paul is the mighty 
master and the great teacher. If it were right to look at him from 
an exclusively human point of view, and speak of his genius 
rather than his inspiration, I might say of him that so mighty, 
so clear, so eloquent a teacher of the truth of God has never 
existed since the days of our Lord Jesus Christ! Though 
Augustine was a particularly bright star, and Calvin in later 
generations rivaled, if he did not even excel Augustine, Paul far 
excels both in the brilliance with which he exhibits every quality 
of grace, and grace in everything that has a good quality. Or, to 
use another figure, Paul towers aloft above them all in the great 
mountain range, though many of their summits are lofty. One 
reason for his clearness about divine grace was that he was 
himself a very pattern and model of its power. In him God had 
expressly, as much as in any other man, and perhaps more, 
shown forth the super-abundant power of His love in passing 
by transgression, iniquity and sin — and in making the very man 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


who had been a ringleader of mischief — to become the leader 
of the hosts of the Lord! Paul calls himself in our text the chief 
of sinners. It is possible that he literally exceeded every other 
sinner, dared more, and sunk deeper in crime than any of his 
fellows among the sons of men. If so, let no man who lives 
despair of mercy! If the gate of heaven is wide enough for the 
chief of sinners to go through, then there must in that respect 
be room enough for those who must be less than the chief, 
who, though very great, yet cannot be quite so great as Paul. I 
say, though I hardly think so, that it is just possible that, taking 
certain circumstances into consideration, Paul really was in such 
sense the very chief of sinners. And yet I hardly think so, 
because he himself, in another place, calls himself less than the 
least of all saints, which was the modest apprehension of one 
who in another place affirmed that he was not a whit behind 
the very chief of the aposdes! Might it not, then, rather have 
been that his deep view of his own sinfulness, and his clear 
sense of his guilt made him consider himself to be the chief of 
sinners, though, probably, there have been tens of thousands 
even greater than he? 

Tonight my business is to find out the chiefs of sinners, and 
endeavor to describe them; and then to inquire how it is that so often the 
very chiefs of sinners are saved. 

I. First, dear friends, as Saul hunted out believers; I have, 
tonight, TO TRY AND HUNT OUT THE CHIEFS OF SINNERS! 

Now who are they? They come under various characters, 
and may be classified in different lists. We will begin with those 
who directly oppose themselves to God and to His Christ. These are 
chiefs among sinners. Paul did join their ranks. He set himself 
determinately against the name of Christ, and thought with 
himself that he ought to do very much against that name. Now 
those who direcdy attack the person of God come, first, under 
the head of blasphemers. Paul says he was such. He had, no doubt, 


863 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


used expressions quite as strong as those sometimes used by 
unbelieving Jews when they are much irritated by Christians. 
He had said some foul things about the impostor crucified upon 
Mount Calvary — things, perhaps, more vile than he ever cared 
to remember — much less to repeat. He had been exceedingly 
mad, and when men are mad they say exceedingly mad things. 
He had been a blasphemer, and a blasphemer challenges the 
vengeance of the Almighty with no common effrontery. Have 
1 one here whose mouth is foul with oaths? Has there strayed 
into this house of prayer tonight one who has cursed God, and 
dared in his angry moments to lift his puny hand of rebellion, 
and curse the Most High God? Have I the misfortune — no, I 
will not call it so — have I the hopeful privilege of talking to one 
who has spoken against Jesus of Nazareth, and who is 
determined to quench His religion, or to oppose it to the 
utmost of his power? Is it so? Then indeed, friend, you are one 
of the chief of sinners, and I am glad that you are here, that I 
may tell you that there is mercy even for such as you are, for 
“all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men.” 
No matter how often or how foully you have cursed the Most 
High, and damned yourself, He will not damn you if you will 
turn from the error of your ways, and seek mercy through the 
blood of Him whom you have despised! 

Others come under the same class. For instance, we must 
here put the infidel, for although his words may not take the 
form of blasphemy, yet the very thought that there is no God 
is blasphemy, and he who dares to vent that thought is not only 
a fool, but one of the chief of sinners! And so you have tried 
to suppress your conscience, and to silence its monitions by 
pretending to believe that there is no God? You have tried to 
rake up the stale arguments of Tom Paine and of Voltaire, and 
you have chuckled when one who called himself a bishop of 
God’s heritage dared to vent some strong things against the 


864 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


Book of His divine inspiration. You know in your heart that 
there is a God! Your conscience tells you that He is a just God; 
you expect to be punished for your sins. That start the other 
night when you were alone, that cold shiver when someone 
spoke of death — all these prove that your infidelity is not so 
stout and brave a thing as you have dreamed it was. A poor, 
cowardly thing it is, who turns pale at a sickbed and flies, with 
coward paleness on its cheek, when once it thinks of judgment 
to come! Oh, if you are here, you Atheist, you Deist, you 
disbeliever in Christ Jesus, you are one of the chief of sinners, 
and I am glad you are here, that I may tell you that a God of 
love waits to embrace you, and that He still declares this to be 
true — that He is able to save to the uttermost all them who 
come unto God by Him! Fling down your weapons! You 
cannot fight the Most High! End this unequal quarrel. Have 
neither truce nor parley, but consider how you may be at peace 
with Him! The hand of His love is stretched out to accept the 
hand of your submission. Oh, be reconciled to God through 
the death of His Son! 

And here I ought to include those who hold views derogatory of 
the Deity and the person of Christ. Faithfulness to you, my hearers, 
compels me to put down the Socinian; I will not call him 
Unitarian, for we all hold the unity of the Godhead. Trinitarians, 
but Unitarians are we still. Far otherwise the Socinian and the 
Arian — I put them down here — the men who say that Christ is 
not God, that the Redeemer of the world was but the son of 
Mary, that He who walked the waters of the deep, chained the 
winds, cast out evil spirits, and made even Hades startle with 
His voice when the soul of Lazarus came back — that He was 
but a prophet, a creature, a mere man! Surely, sir, you are one 
of the chief of sinners to have talked thus of Him who is “very 
God of very God,” the express image of His Father’s person! 
But even to you is Jesus gracious, and He bids you still believe 


865 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


in Him. You shall bow the knee to Him one day, and worship 
Him, for, “At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, and every 
tongue confess that He is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” 
Bow your knee, NOW, and kiss the Son lest He be angry and 
you perish from the way when His wrath is kindled but a litde. 
He bids you come to Him, then will He blot out your sins like 
a cloud, and like a thick cloud your iniquities. The chiefs of 
sinners, we are sure, are found among those who direcdy attack 
the person of Jehovah’s Christ; yet even to these is the gospel 
of salvation sent! 

Another group of princes and peers in the realm of evil 
may be described as those who attack Christ’s people and who seek to 
pervert them from the right way. This sin pressed heavily upon the 
conscience of Paul. He had not only put them in prison, which 
was bad enough, but he had taken the saints into the synagogue, 
and probably they had been beaten before the assembly, and 
compelled to blaspheme. You, perhaps, know what that 
means — compel them to blaspheme. The Roman way of doing 
it was to say, “Curse Christ.” Often did the Roman Emperor 
command the martyrs to curse Christ, and you remember 
Polycarp’s answer? — “How can I curse Him? Sixty years have 
I known Him; He never did me a displeasure, and I cannot and 
I will not curse Him.” Then the whip was applied, or the hand 
was held over burning coals, or the flesh was pinched with hot 
irons, and then the question was put again — “Will you curse 
Christ now?” Paul says that he, though probably using milder 
means, compelled the professors of Christ’s faith to blaspheme. 
And there may be some such here — the husband who 
persecutes his wife for Christ’s sake; the father who charges his 
child, upon his obedience, never to go to the sanctuary of the 
Lord again; the employer who plagues his employees, mocks 
and jeers, and can never be content except when he is saying 
hard things against them. Have I not many here who still 


866 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


practice the device of cruel mocking? You abhor Christ and His 
people; you fight against God in His little ones. Beware! Beware! 
For this is a high sin! Nothing puts a man on his mettle like 
meddling with his children, “Touch me, if you will,” the father 
says, “if you are a man, and smite me if you dare.” But touch 
his children, and the blood is in his cheeks, and the metde is up, 
and there is no knowing what a man will do when he sees the 
offspring of his own heart ill-treated! So God will avenge His 
own elect that cry day and night unto Him, though He bears 
long with them. To you who thus rank with the chiefs of 
sinners, I say that Paul the persecutor “obtained mercy,” and 
so may you! “This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all 
acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners, of whom” persecutors rank among the chief! 

There is another group whom you will all acknowledge to 
be of the chiefs of sinners — those who have sinned foully in the 
world’s esteem — violating the instincts of nature, and outraging 
the common sense of morality and decency! It scarcely needs 
that I should mention the harlot who infests the streets, and 
pollutes society; or that worse wretch, the whoremonger, who 
first leads her astray! I speak plain words, such as I find in 
Scripture. Such God shall judge when He comes at the last day, 
for this temptation is a deep ditch, and the abhorred of the 
Lord shall fall into it. This crying sin of our land needs to be 
sternly rebuked! Other sins are outside the body, but this 
pollutes both body and soul, and often sends down to 
generations yet unborn a horrid curse — at the very thought of 
which the soul is sick! Of all sins, young man, young woman, 
take care that you stand aloof from this! Pass not by the house 
of the strange woman if you love your life, for her gates lead 
down to death, even to the chambers of the damned! Yet, glory 
be to divine grace! There is mercy, mercy for such — and 
multitudes of these chiefs of sinners have become as the very 


867 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


brightest stars in heaven — snatched by the strong arm of Jesus 
from the miry clay, and out of that horrible pit of hell! They are 
now clothed, and in their right mind, they have gone to sit at 
the feet of Jesus, to sing of redeeming love. There was that 
Mary, that Mary whom Jesus had forgiven. Well might she love 
much! And many a loving spirit do I know, and there are some 
very dear to God’s Church here, who love their Lord, and often 
shame some of us who stand more prominent than they who 
once drank deep of that bitter cup, and once went to the very 
depths of that sin. Publish it in your streets! Tell it wherever 
you meet with the most loathsome and most defiled! Jesus is 
able to save to the uttermost! He was the friend of publicans 
and sinners. “This man receives sinners,” is Jesus Christ’s 
motto! Other men reject the sinner; they turn aside from her — 
woe unto her if she comes between the wind and their nobility! 
But, ‘This titan receives sinners” — receives them to His heart, 
and to His bosom — to His kingdom, and to His throne! You 
chiefs of sinners, rejoice that if you believe in Jesus there is 
mercy for you! 

And surely I may find another class of the chiefs of sinners 
among those who have become not only sinners themselves, but the tutors 
to others in the school of evil. Satan has a university, and there are 
many who have fairly won their diplomas as first-class 
professors there. They have learned to sin with a high hand, 
and with an outstretched arm — until they not only sin 
themselves — but delight in the sins of others! Have we not seen 
the old drunkard, and how he gloats when he sees another man 
won to the army of the bestial? Have you not seen the eyes of 
some base old demon in a country village twinkle when he sees 
that fair-haired boy for the first time pander to the infamous 
customs in which he has long reveled? Have we not known 
some of those foul-mouthed masters of all baseness whose very 
talk is enough to make a whole parish sick with the pestilence 


868 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


of vice — men that you had rather go over hedge and ditch 70 
miles than meet? There are such. You have seen them, I dare 
say. And, mark you, when that being is a woman, if anything, it is 
then worse! The softer sex, usually by far more apt to teach, 
instills the secret vice of evil, and wraps it up in insidious 
enchantments, by reason of which many a strong man has 
fallen when Delilah has been his charmed tutor in sin! I may 
not, oh, I hope I may not have one such being within earshot 
now; yet, it is possible, amidst the thousands who this house 
now contains, but what there must be some of you who roll sin 
under your tongue as a sweet morsel, and talk of it with a gusto 
till you tickle the fancies of others — and lead them into 
defilements which otherwise they never might have touched! 
You artfully conceal the book while putting the bait in the 
young man’s way, and thrusting the knowledge of new vices 
upon those who should have shunned them! Oh, you are the 
chief of sinners with a vengeance, and you shall be hung up like 
Haman upon the lofty gallows forever if you repent not! Yet, 
O sovereign grace! How can I tell Your heights? O sea of love, 
how can I ever fathom Your depths! There is even mercy 
proclaimed for such! Turn, turn, why will you die, O house of 
Israel? Why will you perish? — 

“While the lamp holds out to burn 
The vilest sinner may return!” 

I find no exception in the offer of mercy. All are included 
in the invitation of welcome, “Whoever will, let him come and 
take of the water of life freely.” “Though your sins are as scarlet 
they shall be as wool, though they are red like crimson they 
shall be whiter than snow.” Here is a full, a free, a perfect, and 
a complete pardon for all your past offenses! 


869 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Though I have not yet finished the list, I would rather 
change the note for a minute. I have another class of the chiefs 
of sinners to find out. I, myself, belong to them, and I therefore 
speak with feeling. In this section we include those who have had 
much light, and jet have sinned against it; who have been taught better, 
who have had a knowledge of the waj of the truth of God, and jet have 
turned aside to crooked paths. To have been nursed upon the lap of 
piety, and bounced upon the knee of Christian affection is no 
small privilege. To be lighted to one’s cradle by the lamps of 
the sanctuary, and to be hushed to sleep with a lullaby in which 
the name of Jesus comes as a sweet refrain — this involves an 
awful responsibility! No man can go to hell over a mother’s 
tears without accumulated vengeance; no son can rebel against 
a father’s affectionate and tearful admonitions without 
perishing 10 times more frightfully than as if he had never been 
thus privileged. Ah, my hearers, alas, alas, for the hardness of 
your hearts — there are many such here now! I would charitably 
suppose that very few of you belong to the other classes I have 
been speaking of, but the great mass of you who are 
unconverted belong to this class. Do you remember young man, 
how your mother put her arms around your neck, and wooed 
you to turn to Christ? Do you remember that little Bible when 
you first went to school, and that verse she inscribed as a 
motto — she watered it with her tears as she wrote it! Do you 
recollect those letters she addressed to you? She is now in 
heaven, is she? Then let them be the more sacred to your 
recollection. And do you remember that Sunday school teacher? 
Was he not a father to you? Was not that excellent woman who 
used to entreat you to turn from the error of your ways a very 
mother to you in Israel? 

Do you not remember, young woman, some of you, the 
earnest exhortations that my beloved sister, Mrs. Bardett, has 
addressed to you? If ever there was a woman that could, under 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


God, move the heart and soul, she is that woman! And yet, 
there are some of you that listen to her voice, and yet you are 
unconverted! You have the light of God shining upon your 
eyes, and yet they are still sighdess! You live in the land of 
mercy, where its bell summons you to come to its assembly of 
divine grace, but you still will not come! You have the light, but 
you shut your eyes against it! Remember, young man, young 
woman, when you sin, you sin with seven-fold atrocity, because 
you know better! No — seventy sins are rolled into one in your 
sin of daring deliberate willfulness! Within that egg of sin there 
sleeps the seed of your greater damnation because you know 
the right, and yet you choose the evil. Have I not now the 
privilege of speaking to some whose old familiar associations 
are awakened up by these feeble glances at your life story? Do 
you not feel just now, as if you were kneeling down again in 
that little room, and heard the native accents of your mother’s 
prayer, while your lips hardly refrain from repeating afresh the 
words of your own prayer, which she taught your lips to frame 
before she put you to your rest? Do you not remember it? And 
do you not remember sometimes, when your conscience was 
awakened, and your heart was almost broken, and your soul 
said, “I could almost be a Christian,” but you excused yourself 
with a frivolous delay — “Go your way for this time; when I 
have a more convenient season I will send for you”? But, alas, 
that convenient season has yet to come! And your conscience 
grows seared. Drugged with the opiates of sin, you grow less 
and less tender of the affectionate appeal. Woe will be the day 
of your visitation, for it shall be cloudy indeed, unless you turn 
at the voice of reproof. But even to you, O chief of sinners is 
the word of this salvation sent! 

There are those, too, who sit under an earnest ministry and jet go on 
in sin — they surely belong to the class of chief sinners. O, my 
hearers, how I would to God that I could be as earnest with 


871 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


you as I want to be! The Lord knows there are times when I 
am not in the pulpit, when I feel that I could weep you to a 
Savior; but sometimes when standing here, the influence of this 
mighty throng seems rather to distract me, than to bring my 
whole soul into play; and yet, the Lord knows how earnesdy I 
long for you in the heart of the Lord Jesus Christ. I have not 
shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God as far 
as I have known it. I know I have failed in knowledge, but never 
in honesty; yet, I know there are some of you who come here, 
and yet you live in sin. The world says, “So-and-So goes to 
Spurgeon’s Tabernacle,” and they expect you to be better for 
going there; and yet they say, “Ah, how they drink!” or, “Hear 
how they will swear!” Where are you? You used to have your 
shop open on Sunday morning, but it is now shut. I am glad 
you have got as far as that. Still, let me tell you, you only 
compound your sin, and make a covenant with hell if you 
outwardly pay respect to the Sabbath, and secredy indulge in 
other profanities! Drunkenness may destroy you without 
Sabbath-breaking! It is not giving up one sin; it is giving up the 
whole! It is not the barter of one sin for another to quiet your 
conscience, which will satisfy justice or rescue you from 
destruction. Man, there must be a divorce between you and 
your sins! Not a mere separation for a season, but a clear 
divorce! Cut off the right arm; pluck out the right eye, and cast 
them from you, or else you cannot enter into eternal life. Are 
there not some of you who have for years listened to my 
ministry, and yet you are none the better? And some of you are 
rather the worse, I fear. You are getting gospel-hardened by it 
all! Well, by God’s grace, there is mercy for you, too! You are 
the chief of sinners, but the red flag is not run up yet — the 
white flag still floats mast-high — the flag of invitation — the flag 
of love — the flag of mercy. Come to it! Come to Jesus now! 
You may never have another invitation. Soon may this tongue 


872 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


be cold in death, or your ears may be deaf forever, like claycold 
marble. Turn you, at this rebuke, for if after being often 
reproved, you harden your necks, you shall suddenly be 
destroyed, and that without remedy. To you, even to the chief 
of sinners, is the word of this salvation sent! 

Drawing the bow at a venture, there is another class I 
would single out — those who are gifted from their childhood with a 
tender conscience. There are men and women who seem to be born 
without a conscience. So hard and dull of impression are they, 
that if they have any faculty of distinguishing between good and 
evil, it is as though they had eyes and saw not, and ears but they 
hear not! And if it ever speaks, the voice is so weak, you can 
never hear it. But there are those, on the other hand, who have 
a naturally quick understanding, a delicate sensitiveness, a ready 
perception of right and wrong, a strong and vigorous 
conscience. They never sin without being aware of what they 
are doing, and they are troubled and pestered, as they say, about 
it. They cannot sleep at night after they have been committing 
any serious breach of propriety. Even when they are walking 
the streets, or when they are busy, they are quickly startled at 
the recoil of their own transgressions! Oftentimes there is a 
certain uneasiness and fretfulness which comes over them 
because they are conscious that they are not pursuing the right 
course. Now, if you are gifted with this tender conscience, and 
yet you constantly violate it and directly act in the face of your 
own convictions, you are the chief of sinners! But still, still Paul, 
the chief of sinners, found mercy — and so may you! 

And again — if you have had warning in sickness, and 
especially if on your sick bed you have vowed unto the Lord 
that you would turn to Him, then you are covenant-breakers, 
you that violate vows made to the Most High — you must also be put 
among the first and foremost of transgressors! When the 
cholera was here some nine years ago, you vowed that if God 


873 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


would spare you, things would be different. He did spare you, 
but things are no better now than they were before. When the 
fever prostrated you, what promises you made, and where are 
they now? You have lied unto the Eternal God! Is it little for 
you that you should have promised, and not have paid — have 
vowed unto Him, and not performed? Now, sinner, you are a 
liar, as well as anything besides; you are a rogue, a dishonest 
one against God, with whom the compact was made; but the 
invitation is still freely tendered unto you — come unto the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and believe in Him — and you shall be made whole! 
The chiefs of sinners comprise so numerous a body; I believe 
every one of us must be included in the list in some shape or 
other, and I know this — if ever you and I are saved, if God shall 
give us very great mercy, we shall feel that we were the greatest 
sinners. When Paul saw how kindly his Master treated him, it 
seemed to break his heart — “What? Did I ever curse that Christ 
who has blessed me? He that is so rich in loving-kindness did 
I ever spurn Him?” Verily, now, I think I have had the blackest 
sight of sin when I have had the brightest sight of mercy! When 
my dear Lord and Master has privileged me, by allowing me to 
come near Him in prayer, and I have felt His love shed abroad 
in my heart — then it is that I have felt as if I could bring 
imprecations upon myself for ever having been a traitor to Him! 
What? Could I spit in Your face, my Redeemer and my Lord? 
Could I ever crown Your head with thorns, which now it shall 
be my life’s task to crown with jewels? What? Did You love me 
so? Did You forgive me so, and could I ever speak against You? 
It is great mercy that sets forth our great sin, for we only come 
to reckon ourselves the chief of sinners when we see the great 
love of God. So then, without amplifying any longer, I will put 
the invitation thus — whoever among you have sinned against 
the Most High, you are all on a level, and the invitation of 
mercy is put to you, each and all, and this is the gospel — “ He 


874 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


who believes and is baptized shall be saved, he who believes 
not shall be damned.” May you be led to believe, and to profess 
your faith according to God’s way! 

II. Well, now, but a few minutes remain to me, and I will 
endeavor to be brief while I try to answer the question, WHY 
ARE THOSE WHO ARE PROVERBIALLY THE CHIEF OF 
SINNERS VERY FREQUENTLY SAVED? 

One reason is to illustrate divine sovereignty. There is no jewel 
of His crown of which God is more jealous than His 
sovereignty. “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and 
1 will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.” 
Now, when He saves the harlot, when He calls the persecutor 
by sovereign grace, then all men see that this is the finger of 
God, and that He dispenses His love and kindness according 
to the purposes of His own absolute and uncontrollable Will. 
He chooses the chief of sinners that He may show to all men 
that He will take the base things of the world, and the things 
which are not, and things which are despised, to bring to 
nothing the things that are — that no flesh may glory in His 
presence! 

Another reason is that He may show His great power. Oh, how 
hell is made angry when some great champion falls! When their 
Goliaths are brought down, how the Philistines take to their 
heels! How heaven rings with songs when some chief of sinners 
becomes a trophy of the divine power! And how men talk, with 
glib tongues, of the great and mighty deeds of God, when the 
drunkard and the swearer, and the prostitute are washed, and 
made saints! What a noise it made at Elstow, when they said at 
the public-house on the green — “You know John Bunyan?” 
“Oh, yes, we know him! You mean the fellow who was always 
first at a game of tip-cat — he who could always drink the 
longest! Oh, yes, we know him. ” “Well, do you know, he was 
preaching over at Bedford yesterday?” “What?” said one, 


875 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“preachings Bedford? I would as soon have thought of the devil 
preaching as John Bunyan! What a wonderful thing the gospel 
must be, to change such a man as that!” And yet it was true! 
John Bunyan, who frequented the ale-house; who knew more 
about the county jail, and more about the Celestial City that is 
on the other side the flood, than most men of his times. It 
shows the power and the sovereignty of God when such men 
are saved. 

And next, how it shows His grace! When I have sometimes sat 
to see inquirers, I have seen a number come in one after the 
other who have been born and brought up in the midst of piety, 
and I have blessed God for them. But, by-and-by there has 
come in one whose tale has been terrible to tell, and it was not 
easily told — except with many sighs, and sobs, and tears, yet, 
when it was disclosed, there have sat two weeping together — I 
scarcely know which wept more — he who wept because of 
divine grace illustrated in him, or the other because he saw in 
another the divine grace which he had tasted for himself. Oh, 
when great sinners tell out their tales, they are so 
straightforward, so explicit! There is no muddle about it, no 
questions about when they were converted, or how, but there 
they are. They say — “Ah, sir, it must be divine! Such a change 
has been worked in me that nothing could have thus turned the 
lion to a lamb, the raven to a dove, but the grace of God.” In 
great sinners, then, the grace of God is made conspicuous! 

Again — great sinners are very frequendy called by God for 
the purpose of attracting others. You know that when some great 
transgressor finds mercy, straightway many hearts say — “Ah, 
then there is mercy for me. ”1 am glad, I am very glad that there 
was a Manasseh, that there was David, that there was a Saul of 
Tarsus, and I am glad they are in the Bible. The wicked cut the 
stories out, and they laugh at us and say, ‘These are your saints? ” 
Ah, we can bear that, while we can say — “No, this is what they 


876 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


were by nature, but they were saved, for all that, by the 
distinguishing grace of God, who saves men through faith, and 
not by their works.” Now, I believe that that case of David has 
been a solace to thousands, if not to millions. The hurt he did 
in his lifetime was certainly very great — but the immeasurable 
benefit which has flown to the universal Church from the 
penitential Psalms — puts altogether into the shade the damage 
which the fall of David did to the Church in his own time! Not 
that there is less shame to the sinner, but that there is more 
glory to the Savior where sin abounded in the first instance, and 
divine grace did much more abound in the sequel! We can well 
bear this spot, for the sake of the light of God which comes 
from the sun. Sinners! All of you! If you would put yourselves 
among the little ones, if your lives have never been grossly vile 
(I am glad if they have not) — let the fact that the great sinner 
enters, and is washed, attract you! I have heard it said of the 
elephant, that sometimes before he crosses a bridge, he puts his 
trunk and perhaps one foot, upon it. He needs to know if it is 
quite safe, for he is not going to trust his bulky body to things 
that were built only for horses and men. Well, after he has tried 
it, if he finds it strong enough, away he goes, and his great 
carcass is carried right across the stream. Now, suppose you 
and I sat on the other side, and said we were afraid the bridge 
would not bear us? Why, how absurd our unbelief would be! 
So when you see a great elephantine sinner, like the aposde Paul, 
go lumbering over the bridge of mercy, and not a timber creaks, 
and the bridge does not even strain under the load — why then, 
I think you may come rushing in a crowd and say — “It will bear 
us, if it will bear him; it will carry us across, if it can take the 
chief of sinners to heaven!” 

And then, dear friends, the saving of the chiefs of sinners 
is useful, because, when they are saved they generally make the fieriest 
zealots against sin. Have we not a proverb that, “The burnt child 


877 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


dreads the fire”? I noticed my host, on one preaching excursion, 
particularly anxious about my candle. Now, as everybody ought 
to know how careful I am, I was a litde surprised, and I put the 
question to him why he should be so particular. “I had my 
house burned down once, sir,” he said. That explained it all. 
No man is so much afraid of fire as he, and they who have been 
in sin, and know the mischief of it, protest against it the most 
loudly. They can speak experientially! They talk of what they 
have tasted and handled to their own smart and ruin! Oh, what 
revenge there seems to be in the apostle’s heart against his sin! 
He seems to bring out the great battle-axes and weapons of war 
against it — and wherever he can see sin, he smites right and 
left — anywhere! Persecution, death, martyrdom — all these are 
nothing to him if he can but get a blow at sin! He always seems 
to have the gun charged to the muzzle, and no devil comes in 
his way but what he has a shot at him! There are no ramparts 
or hellish bulwarks but what Paul thinks he must take them, 
whether they are in Asia, or Italy, or Spain! This great knight- 
errant of the cross is everywhere the great antagonist of sin, and 
so must those always be who are saved out of great iniquity! 

And then, again, they always make the most jealous saints. I have 
said and it will come true, though I am no prophet nor the son 
of a prophet — I have said that the Lord will deliver this city, 
and deliver this age, not by ministers from colleges — not by the 
sons of gentlemen or the inheritors of titles; but He will yet 
shake London, and bring about a religious revival with the men 
who will come from St. Giles’s, and from Whitechapel — from 
the slums, and from the dens and familiarities of infamy! God 
will take such men by-and-by, and He is beginning to work it 
already! There are one or two names that will come to your 
recollection — illustrious names in connection with the 
preaching in theatres — God will raise up more such, and you 
shall see that when human wisdom and creature devices have 


878 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


done their utmost to make the Church of God the dull lethargic 
thing it now is, God, in the plenitude of His might, will raise up 
some who have tasted that He is gracious, and have drunk 
deeply of the cup of His love who will turn the world upside 
down! It is all an idle and a wicked tale, that our places of 
worship in the City of London cannot be supported. I see them 
building new places in the suburbs, and leaving the City itself 
destitute of the means of divine grace. Were the right men 
found, the churches in the City of London might be as crowded 
as those in the suburbs! Only put into their pulpits men who 
know the guilt of sin, and who know that gospel in which is 
revealed the righteousness of God — men who know and 
preach Christ — then the effect would be tangible! Give us the 
men who do not talk as botanists might do upon botany, when 
they had not seen a flower, or as some might speak of various 
lands who have never traveled a league; but give us men who 
know experientially those things that they labor to teach, and let 
their tongues be set on fire by the Holy Spirit, and you shall 
then see London as full of the glory of the Lord as was 
Jerusalem of old! May this come to pass! May it begin to come 
to pass tonight! May the Lord find out, as He moves among this 
mass, some stray, strange being who has given himself up to 
desperation, to work mischief with both his hands — and may 
He say to him tonight, “I have need of you, and I will have you.” 
Oh, mighty grace, do it tonight! He will have you, man! Your 
will must be subdued! Your pride must come down! That 
proud temper of yours shall yield! “I am your Master; I made 
you; I bought you with My blood, and do you think I will lose 
you? I am mighty to save; do you think that you can overcome 
Me? I came forth on purpose to redeem you! Saul, Saul, why 
do you persecute Me?” O that the Lord would speak thus 
personally to some individual now! 


879 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


And now I have done when I have just put this before you. 
My hearers, here is life and death. If you despise Christ, there 
is death for you; if you turn aside from the love and mercy 
which streams from the wounds of Jesus, the angry God shall 
find you in your sin, and cut you in pieces, and there is none 
who can deliver you. If you go on in your sin, you will soon 
meet with death. But a few Sundays ago, we had to mark how 
sudden death thinned our ranks. Sometimes it is a working man. 
There was one, you know, some weeks ago, who lost his life in 
building the great bridge at Blackfriars, who was often a hearer 
here; and there is scarcely a day passes but we hear of someone 
gone out of this great assembly. We are going one after another; 
and the pastor may go soon, but perhaps before he goes he may 
see many of you carried to your graves — he cannot tell. But, oh, 
why will you remain without God, and without Christ? If you 
had a lease of your lives, you might go on in sin until the lease 
was out; but even then, you would be foolish to be enemies to 
God and enemies to yourselves so long. But as you may die 
today, God help you to repent tonight! On the other hand, I 
set mercy before you — no man can say he has not been 
invited — no soul can say that I did not set the gate open wide 
enough! You are without excuse in the day of judgment. When 
the trumpet peals through heaven and Earth, and awakes the 
slumbering dead — when Christ shall come in the clouds to 
judge the earth, I must give an account of the gospel I have 
preached to you tonight! 1 would to God I could preach it 
better, but I cannot. You know what it is. You are without 
excuse. You have been invited; you have been entreated; you 
have been bid to come to the marriage supper. All things are 
ready; the oxen and the fadings are killed — come to the supper! 
You who are in the highways and hedges, we compel you to 
come in, that God’s house may be filled! Come! “The Spirit and 
the bride say, Come. And let him who hears say, Come. And 


880 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


530 The Chief of Sinners - I Tim. 1:15 


let him that is thirsty, come. And whoever will, let him take the 
water of life freely.” But if you come not, I must be a swift 
witness against you at the last. I am clear of your blood; I am 
clear of the blood of you all! 

God save you, for Christ’s sake. Amen. 


881 



53 i The Warrant of Faith -I John 3:23 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, September 20th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“And this is His commandment, that we should believe on 
the name of His Son Jesus Christ.” - I John 3:23 

THE OLD LAW shines in terrible glory with its ten 
commandments. There are some who love that law so much 
that they cannot pass over a Sunday without its being read in 
their hearing, accompanied by the mournful petition, “Lord, 
have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.” 
No, some are so foolish as to enter into a covenant for their 
children, that, “They shall keep all God’s holy commandments, 
and walk in the same all the days of their life.” Thus, they early 
wear a yoke which neither they nor their fathers can bear, and 
daily groaning under its awful weight, they labor after 
righteousness where it never can be found! Over the tables of 
the law in every Church, I would have conspicuously printed 
these gospel words, “By the deeds of the law shall no flesh 
living be justified.” The true believer has learned to look away 
from the killing ordinances of the old law. He understands that 
“As many as are of the works of the law are under the curse, 
for it is written: Cursed is everyone who continues not in all 
things which are written in the book of the law to do them.” 
He, therefore, turns with loathing from all trust in his own 
obedience to the ten commandments and lays hold with joy 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


upon the hope set before him in the one commandment 
contained in my text, “This is His commandment, that we 
should believe on the name of His Son Jesus Christ.” We sing, 
and sing rightly, too — 

“My soul, no more attempt to draw 
Your life and comfort from the law,” 

for from the law death comes and not life, misery and not 
comfort. “To convince and to condemn is all the law can do.” 
O, when will all professors, and especially all professed 
ministers of Christ, learn the difference between the law and 
the gospel? Most of them make a mingle-mangle, and serve out 
deadly potions to the people, often containing but one ounce 
of gospel to a pound of law — whereas even a grain of law is 
enough to spoil the whole thing! It must be gospel and gospel 
only! “If it is of grace, it is not of works, otherwise grace is no 
more grace; and if it is of works, then it is not of grace, 
otherwise work is no more work.” 

The Christian, then, turning his attention to the one 
command of the gospel, is very anxious to know first, what is 
the matter of the believing here intended? And secondly, what is the 
sinner’s warrant for so believing in Christ? Nor will he fail to consider 
the mandate of the gospel. 

I. First then, THE MATTER OF BELIEVING, or what is it 
that a man is to believe in order to eternal life? Is it the 
Athanasian creed? Is it true that if a man does not hold that 
confession whole and entire, he shall, without doubt, perish 
everlastingly? We leave those to decide who are learned in 
matters of bigotry! Is it any particular form of doctrine? Is it 
the Calvinistic or the Arminian scheme? For our own part, we 
are quite content with our text — believing on “His Son Jesus 


883 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Christ.” That faith which saves the soul believes on a person, 
depending upon Jesus for eternal life! 

To speak more at large of the things which are to be 
believed in order to justification by faith, they all relate to the 
person and the work of our Lord Jesus Christ. We must believe 
Him to be God’s Son — so the text puts it — “His Son.” We 
must grasp with strong confidence the great fact that He is 
God — for nothing short of a divine Savior can ever deliver us 
from the infinite wrath of God! He who rejects the true and 
proper Godhead of Jesus of Nazareth is not saved and cannot 
be, for he believes not on Jesus as God’s Son. Furthermore, we 
must accept this Son of God as “Jesus,” the Savior; we must 
believe that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, became man out of 
infinite love to man, that He might save His people from their 
sins according to that worthy saying, “Christ Jesus came into 
the world to save sinners,” even the chief. We must look upon 
Jesus as “Christ,” the anointed of the Father, sent into this 
world on salvation’s errand, not that sinners might save 
themselves, but that He, being mighty to save, might bring 
many sons unto glory. We must believe that Jesus Christ, 
coming into the world to save sinners, did really effect His 
mission; that the precious blood which is shed upon Calvary is 
almighty to atone for sin, and therefore, all manner of sin and 
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, since the blood of Jesus 
Christ, God’s dear Son, cleanses us from all sin. We must 
heartily accept the great doctrine of the atonement — regarding 
Jesus as standing in the place of sinful men, bearing for them 
the terror of the law’s curse until justice was satisfied, and could 
demand no more. Moreover, we should rejoice that Jesus 
Christ, by His dying, put away forever the sin of His people, so 
by His living, He gave unto those who trust in Him a perfect 
righteousness, in which, despite their own sins, they are 
“accepted in the beloved.” We are also taught that if we heartily 


884 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


trust our soul with Christ, our sins, through His blood, are 
forgiven, and His righteousness is imputed to us. The mere 
knowledge of these facts will not, however, save us, unless we 
really and truly trust our soul in the Redeemer’s hands! faith 
must act in this wise — “I believe that Jesus came to save sinners, 
and therefore, sinner though I am, I rest myself on Him; I know 
that His righteousness justifies the ungodly; I, therefore, 
though ungodly, trust in Him to be my righteousness; I know 
that His precious blood in heaven prevails with God on the 
behalf of them who come unto Him; and since I come unto 
Him, I know by faith that I have an interest in His perpetual 
intercession.” 

Now, I have enlarged the one thought of believing on 
God’s Son Jesus Christ. Brothers and sisters, I would not 
darken counsel by words without knowledge. “Believing” is 
most clearly explained by that simple word, “Trust.” Believing 
is pardy the intellectual operation of receiving divine truths, but 
the essence of it lies in relying upon those truths! I believe that, 
although I cannot swim, yonder friendly plank will support me 
in the flood — I grasp it, and am saved — the grasp is faith. I am 
promised by a generous friend that if I draw upon his banker, 
he will supply all my needs — I joyously confide in him, and as 
often as I am in need I go to the bank, and am enriched — my 
going to the bank is faith. Thus, faith is accepting God’s great 
promise, contained in the person of His Son; it is taking God 
at His word, and trusting in Jesus Christ as being my salvation, 
although I am utterly unworthy of His regard. Sinner, if you 
take Christ to be your Savior this day, you are justified — though 
you are the biggest blasphemer and persecutor out of hell — if 
you dare to trust Christ with your salvation, that faith of yours 
saves you! Though your whole life may have been as black and 
foul, and devilish as you could have made it, yet, if you will 
honor God by believing Christ is able to forgive such a wretch 


885 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


as you are, and will now trust in Jesus’ precious blood, you are 
saved from divine wrath! 

II. The WARRANT OF BELIEVING is the point upon 
which I shall spend my time and strength this morning. 
According to my text, the warrant for a man to believe is the 
commandment of God. This is the commandment that you 
“believe on His Son Jesus Christ.” 

Self-righteousness will always find lodging somewhere or 
other. Drive it, my brothers and sisters, out of the ground of 
your confidence! Let the sinner see that he cannot rest on his 
good works, then, as foxes will have holes, this self- 
righteousness will find a refuge for itself in the warrant of our 
faith in Christ. It reasons thus — “You are not saved by what 
you do, but by what Christ did; but then, you have no right to 
trust in Christ unless there is something good in you which shall 
entitle you to trust in Him.” Now, this legal reasoning I oppose! 
I believe such teaching to contain in it the essence of Popish 
selfrighteousness! The warrant for a sinner to believe in Christ 
is not in himself in any sense or in any manner, but in the fact 
that he is commanded then and there to believe on Jesus Christ! 
Some preachers in the Puritan times, whose shoe laces I am not 
worthy to unloose, erred much in this matter. I refer not merely 
to Alleine and Baxter, who are far better preachers of the law 
than of the gospel, but 1 include men far sounder in the faith 
than they, such as Rogers of Dedham, Shepherd, the author of 
The Sound Reliever, and especially the American, Thomas Hooker, 
who has written a book upon qualifications for coming to 
Christ. These excellent men had a fear of preaching the gospel 
to any except those whom they styled, “sensible sinners,” and 
consequently, kept hundreds of their hearers sitting in darkness 
when they might have rejoiced in the light of God! They 
preached repentance and hatred of sin as the warrant of a 
sinner’s trusting to Christ. According to them, a sinner might 


886 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


reason thus — “I possess such-and-such a degree of sensibility 
on account of sin, therefore, I have a right to trust in Christ.” 
Now, I venture to affirm that such reasoning is seasoned with 
fatal error! Whoever preaches in this fashion may preach much 
of the gospel, but the whole gospel of the free grace of God in 
its fullness, he has yet to learn! In our own day, certain 
preachers assure us that a man must be regenerated before we 
may bid him believe in Jesus Christ; some degree of a work of 
grace in the heart being, in their judgment, the only warrant to 
believe. This also is false! It takes away a gospel for sinners, and 
offers us a gospel for saints! It is anything but a ministry of free 
grace! 

Others say that the warrant for a sinner to believe in Christ 
is his election. Now, as his election cannot possibly be known 
by any man until he has believed, this is virtually preaching that 
nobody has any known warrant for believing at all! If 1 cannot 
possibly know my election before I believe — and yet, the 
minister tells me that I may only believe upon the ground of 
my election — how am I ever to believe at all? Election brings 
me faith, and faith is the evidence of my election! But to say that 
my faith is to depend upon my knowledge of my election, which I 
cannot get without faith, is to talk nonsense. 

I lay down, this morning, with great boldness — because I 
know and am well persuaded that what I speak is the mind of 
the Spirit — this doctrine that the sole and only warrant for a 
sinner to believe in Jesus is found in the gospel itself, and in the 
command which accompanies that gospel, “Believe in the Lord 
Jesus Christ and you shall be saved.” I shall deal with that 
matter first negatively, and then positively. 

1. First, NEGATIVELY; and here my first observation is 
that any other way of preaching the gospel-warrant is absurd. If 
I am to preach faith in Christ to a man who is regenerated, then 
the man, being regenerated, is already saved! It is unnecessary 


887 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and ridiculous for me to preach Christ to him, and bid him to 
believe in order to be saved, when he is saved already, being 
regenerate! But you will tell me that I ought to preach it only to 
those who repent of their sins. Very well, but since true 
repentance of sin is the work of the Spirit, any man who has 
repentance is most certainly saved, because evangelical 
repentance never can exist in an unrenewed soul! Where there 
is repentance, there is faith already, for they never can be 
separated. So, then, I am only to preach faith to those who have 
it? Absurd, indeed! Is not this waiting till the man is cured, and 
then, bringing him the medicine? This is preaching Christ to 
the righteous, and not to sinners. “No,” says one, “but we mean 
that a man must have some good desires towards Christ before 
he has any warrant to believe in Jesus.” Friend, do you not 
know that all good desires have some degree of holiness in 
them? If a sinner has any degree of true holiness in him, it must 
be the work of the Spirit — for true holiness never exists in the 
carnal mind — therefore, that man is already renewed, and 
therefore saved! Are we to go running up and down the world, 
proclaiming life to the living, casting bread to those who are 
already fed, and holding up Christ on the pole of the gospel to 
those who are already healed? My brothers and sisters, where 
is our inducement to labor where our efforts are so little needed? 
If I am to preach Christ to those who have no goodness, who 
have nothing in them that qualifies them for mercy, then I feel I 
have a gospel so divine that I would proclaim it with my last 
breath, crying aloud, that “Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners.” Sinners as sinners — not as penitent sinners, or as 
awakened sinners — but sinners as sinners! Sinners “of whom I am 
chief.” 

Secondly, to tell the sinner that he is to believe on Christ 
because of some warrant in himself, is legal — I dare to say it — 
LEGAL! Though this method is generally adopted by the higher 


888 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


school of Calvinists, they are herein unsound, not Calvinistic, 
but LEGAL! It is strange that they who are so bold defenders 
of free grace should make common cause with Baxterians and 
Pelagians. I lay it down to be legal for this reason — if I believe 
in Jesus Christ because I feel a genuine repentance of sin, and 
therefore, have a warrant for my faith, do you not perceive that 
the first and true ground of my confidence is the fact that I have 
repented of sin? If I believe in Jesus because I have convictions, 
and a spirit of prayer, then, evidendy, the first and the most 
important fact is not Christ, but my possession of repentance, 
conviction, and prayer — so that my hope really hinges upon my 
having repented! And if this is not legal, I do not know what is. 
Put it lower. My opponents will say, “The sinner must have an 
awakened conscience before he is warranted to believe on 
Christ.” Well, then, if I trust Christ to save me because I have 
an awakened conscience, I say again, the most important part 
of the whole transaction is the alarm of my conscience, and my 
real trust hangs there. If I lean on Christ because I feel this and 
that, then I am leaning on my feelings and not on Christ alone — 
and this is legal, indeed! No, even if desires after Christ are to 
be my warrant for believing — if I am to believe in Jesus not 
because He bids me, but because I feel some desires after 
Him — you will again, with half an eye, perceive that the most 
important source of my comfort must be my own desires. So that 
we shall be always looking within, “Do I really desire? If I do, 
then Christ can save me. If I do not, then He cannot.” And so 
my desire overrides Christ and His divine grace! Away with 
such legality from the earth! 

Again, any other way of preaching than that of bidding the 
sinner believe because God commands him to believe, is a boasting 
way of faith. For if my warrant to trust in Jesus is found in my 
experience, my loathing of sin, or my longings after Christ, then, 
all these good things of mine are a legitimate ground of boasting. 


889 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


because though Christ may save me, yet, these were the 
wedding dress which fitted me to come to Christ. If these are 
indispensable prerequisites and conditions, then the man who 
has them may truly and jusdy say, “Christ did save me, but I 
had the prerequisites and conditions first, and therefore, let 
these share the praise.” See, my brothers and sisters, those who 
have a faith which rests upon their own experience, what are 
they as a rule? Mark them, and you will perceive much 
censorious bitterness in them. This prompts them to set up 
their own experience as the standard of saintslrip, and this may 
assuredly make us suspicious whether they ever were humbled 
in a gospel manner at all, so as to see that their own best feelings, 
and best repentances, and best experiences in themselves are 
nothing more nor less than filthy rags in the sight of God! My 
dear brothers, we must tell a sinner that foul and filthy as he is, 
without any preparation or qualification, he is to take Jesus 
Christ to be his All in All — that he may find in Him all that he 
can ever need! When we dare on the spot to bid the jailor just 
startled out of sleep, “Believe in Jesus” — we leave no room for 
jqyfglorification — all must be of divine grace! When we find the 
lame man lying at the Temple gates, we do not bid him 
strengthen his own legs, or feel some life in them, but we bid 
him, in the name of Jesus, rise up and walk — surely, here, when 
God the Spirit acknowledges the word, all boasting is excluded! 
Whether I rely on my experience or my good works makes little 
difference, for either of these reliances will lead to boasting 
since they are both legal. Law and boasting are twin brothers, 
but free grace and gratitude always go together! 

Any other warrant for believing on Jesus than that which 
is presented in the gospel is changeable. See, brothers and sisters, 
if my warrant to believe in Christ lies in the melting of my heart, 
and my experiences, then, if today I have a melting heart, and I 
can pour my soul out before the Lord, I have a warrant to 


890 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


believe in Christ. But tomorrow (who does not know this?) 
tomorrow my heart may be as hard as a stone, so that I can 
neither feel nor pray! Then, according to the qualification- 
theory, 1 have no right to trust in Christ! My warrant is gone 
from me. According to the doctrine of final perseverance, the 
Christian’s faith is continual. If so, the warrant of his faith must 
be always the same, or else he has sometimes an unwarranted 
faith, which is absurd! It follows from this that the abiding 
warrant of faith must lie in some immutable truth of God. Since 
everything within changes more frequently than ever does an 
English sky, if my warrant to believe in Christ is based within, 
it must change every hour! Consequendy, I am lost and saved 
alternately. Brothers and sisters, can these things be so? For my 
part I need a sure and immutable warrant for my faith! I need 
a warrant to believe in Jesus which will serve me when the 
devil’s blasphemy comes pouring into my ears like a flood; I 
need a warrant to believe which will serve me when my lusts 
and corruptions appear in terrible array, and make me cry out, 
“O wretched man that I am.” I need a warrant to believe in 
Christ which will comfort me when I have no good frames and 
Holy feelings — when I am dead as a stone and my spirit lies 
cleaving to the dust! Such an unfailing warrant to believe in 
Jesus is found in this precious truth of God, that His gracious 
commandment, and not my variable experience, is my tide to 
believe on His Son Jesus Christ! 

Again, my brothers and sisters, any other warrant is utterly 
incomprehensible. Multitudes of my brothers preach an impossible 
salvation. How often do poor sinners hunger and thirst to 
know the way of salvation, and there is no available salvation 
preached to them? Personally, I do not remember to have been 
told from the pulpit to believe in Jesus as a sinner. I heard much 
of feelings which I thought I could never get, and frames after 
which I longed, but I found no peace until a true, free grace 


891 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


message came to me, “Look unto Me and be you saved, all the 
ends of the earth.” See, my brothers, if convictions of soul are 
necessary qualifications for Christ, we ought to know to an 
ounce how much of these qualifications are needed! If you tell 
a poor sinner that there is a certain amount of humbling and 
trembling, and convictions and heart-searching to be felt in 
order that he may be warranted to come to Christ, I demand of 
all legal-gospellers distinct information as to the manner and 
exact degree of preparation required! Brothers and sisters, you 
will find when these gentlemen are pushed into a corner, they 
will not agree, but will everyone give a different standard, 
according to his own judgment. One will say the sinner must 
have months of law work; another, that he only needs good 
desires; and some will demand that he possess the graces of the 
Spirit — such as humility, godly sorrow, and love to holiness. 
You will get no clear answer from them! If the sinner’s warrant 
to come is found in the gospel itself, the matter is clear and 
plain; but what a roundabout plan is that compound of law and 
gospel against which I contend! And let me ask you, my 
brothers and sisters, whether such an incomprehensible gospel 
would do for a dying man? There he lies in the agonies of death. 
He tells me that he has no good thoughts or feelings, and asks 
what he must do to be saved. There is but a step between him 
and death — another five minutes, and that man’s soul may be 
in hell! What am I to tell him? Am I to be an hour explaining 
to him the preparation required before he may come to Christ? 
I dare not! But I tell him, “Believe, brother, even though it is 
the 11th hour. Trust your soul with Jesus, and you shall be 
saved.” There is the same gospel for a living man as for a dying 
man! The thief on the cross may have had some experience, 
but I do not find him pleading it; he turns his eyes to Jesus, 
saying, “Lord, remember me!” How prompt is the reply, 
“Today shall you be with Me in paradise.” He may have had 


892 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


longing desires, he may have had deep convictions, but I am 
quite sure he did not say, “Lord, I dare not ask You to 
remember me because I do not feel I have repented enough; I 
dare not trust You, because I have not been shaken over hell’s 
mouth.” NO! NO! NO! — He looked to Jesus as he was — and 
Jesus responded to his believing prayer! It must be so with you, 
my brothers and sisters, for any other plan but that of a sinner’s 
coming to Christ as a sinner, and resting on Jesus just as he is, is 
utterly incomprehensible! Or, if it is to be explained at all, will 
require a day or two to explain it; and that cannot be the gospel 
which the aposdes preached to dying men! 

Yet again, I believe that the preaching of alarms of 
conscience and repentance, as qualifications for Christ, is 
unacceptable to the awakened sinner. I will introduce one, as 
Saltmarsh does in his, Flowing of Christ’s Blood freely to the Chief of 
Sinners. Here is a poor brother who dares not believe in Jesus. 
I will suppose him to have attended a ministry where the 
preaching is, “If you have felt this, if you have felt that, then you 
may believe.” When you went to your minister in trouble, what 
did he say to you? “He asked me whether I felt my need of 
Christ. 1 told him I did not think I did; at least I did not feel my 
need enough. He told me that I ought to meditate upon the 
guilt of sin, and consider the dreadful character of the wrath to 
come, and I might in this way feel my need more.” Did you do 
so? “I did. But it seemed to me as while I meditated upon the 
terrors of judgment, my heart grew harder instead of softer, and 
I seemed to be desperately set and resolved in a kind of despair 
to go on in my ways; yet, sometimes I did have some humbling 
and some melting of heart.” What did your minister tell you to 
do to get comfort, then? “He said I ought to pray much.” Did 
you pray? “I told him I could not pray, that I was such a sinner 
that it was of no use for me to hope for an answer if I could.” 
What did he say then? “He told me I ought to lay hold upon 


893 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the promises.” Yes, did you do so? “No. I told him I could not 
lay hold upon the promises; that I could not see they were 
meant for me, for I was not the intended character, and that I 
could only find threats in the Word of God for such as I was.” 
What did he say then? “He told me to be diligent in the use of 
the means, and to attend his ministry.” What did you say to that? 
“I told him I was diligent, but that what I needed was not means, 

I needed to get my sins pardoned and forgiven.” What did he 
say then? “Why, he said that I had better persevere and wait 
patiently for the Lord; I told him that I was in such a horror of 
great darkness, that my soul chose strangling rather than life. 
Well then, he said, he thought I must already be truly penitent, 
and was therefore safe, and that sooner or later I should have 
hope. But I told him, a mere hope was not enough for me, I 
could not be safe while sin lay so heavy upon me. He asked me 
whether I had not desires after Christ. I said I had, but they 
were merely selfish, carnal desires; that I sometimes thought I 
had desires, but they were only legal. He said if I had a desire 
to have a desire, it was God’s work, and I was saved. That did 
prop me up for a time, sir, but I went down again, for that did 
not do for me — I needed something solid to rest on.” And 
sinner how is it now with you? Where are you now? “Well, sir, 

I scarcely know where I am, but I pray you will tell me what I 
must do?” 

Brothers and sisters, my reply is prompt and plain. Hear 
it. — “Poor soul, I have no questions to ask you; I have no 
advice to give you, except this — God’s command to you is, 
whatever you may be, trust to the Lord Jesus Christ, and you 
shall be saved. Will you do it or not?” If he rejects that, I must 
leave him; I have no more to say to him; I am clear of his blood 
and on him the sentence comes, “He that believes not shall be 
damned.” But you will find in 99 cases out of a 100, that when 
you begin to talk to the sinner, not about his repentings and his 


894 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


desires, but about Christ — and tell him that he need not fear 
the law, for Christ has satisfied it; that he need not fear an angry 
God, for God is not angry with believers; tell him that all 
manner of iniquity was cast into the Red Sea of Jesus’ blood, 
and, like the Egyptians, drowned there forever; tell him that no 
matter however vile and wicked he may have been, “Christ is 
able to save unto the uttermost them who come unto God by 
Him,” and tell him that he has a right to come, be he who he 
may, or what he may, because God bids him come — you will 
find that the suitability of such a gospel to the sinner’s case will 
prove a sweet inducement in the hand of the Holy Spirit, to 
lead that sinner to lay hold on Jesus Christ! O my brothers and 
sisters, I am ashamed of myself when I think of the way in 
which I have sometimes talked to awakened sinners! I am 
persuaded that the only true remedy for a broken heart is Jesus 
Christ’s most precious blood! Some surgeons keep a wound 
open too long; they keep cutting and cutting and cutting, till 
they cut away as much sound flesh as proud flesh! Better than 
to half heal it, heal it at once, for Jesus Christ was not sent to 
keep open the wounds, but to bind up the broken in heart! To 
you, then, sinners of every sort and hue — black, hard-hearted, 
insensible, impenitent — even to you is the gospel sent, for 
“Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners,” even the 
chief! 

I might pause here, surely, but I must add yet one other 
point upon this negative mode of reasoning. Any other warrant 
for the sinner’s faith than the gospel itself is false and dangerous! 

It is false, my brothers and sisters, it is as false as God is 
true, that anything in a sinner can be his warrant for believing 
in Jesus! The whole tenor and run of the gospel is absolutely 
contrary to it. It must be false, because there is nothing in a 
sinner until he believes which can be a warrant for his believing. 
If you tell me that a sinner has any good thing in him before he 


895 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


believes, I reply, impossible — “Without faith it is impossible to 
please God.” Ail the repenting, and humbling, and convictions 
that a sinner has before faith, must be, according to Scripture, 
displeasing to God! Do not tell me that his heart is broken, if it 
is only broken by carnal means, and trusts in its brokenness — 
it needs to be broken over again! Do not tell me he has been 
led to hate his sin; I tell you he does not hate his sin, he only 
hates hell! There cannot be a true and real hatred of sin where 
there is not faith in Jesus. All the sinner knows and feels, before 
faith, is only an addition to his other sins, and how can sin 
which deserves wrath be a warrant for an act which is the work 
of the Holy Spirit? 

How dangerous is the sentiment I am opposing. My hearers, 
it may be as mischievous as to have misled some of you. I 
solemnly warn you, though you have been professors of faith 
in the Lord Jesus Christ for 20 years, if your reason for 
believing in Christ lies in this, that you have felt the terrors of 
the law, that you have been alarmed and have been convicted — 
if your own experience is your warrant for believing in Christ — 
it is a false reason, and you are really relying upon your 
experience and not upon Christ! And mark you, if you rely 
upon your frames and feelings — no, if you rely upon your 
communion with Christ in any degree whatever — you are as 
certainly a lost sinner as though you relied upon oaths and 
blasphemies! You shall no more be able to enter heaven, even 
by the works of the Spirit — and this is using strong language — 
than by your own works — for Christ, and Christ alone, is the 
foundation, and “Other foundation can no man lay than that is 
laid, which is Jesus Christ.” Take care of resting in your own 
experience. All that is of nature’s spinning must be unraveled, 
and everything that gets into Christ’s place, however dear to 
you, and however precious in itself, must be broken in pieces, 
and like the dust of the golden calf, must be strewed upon the 


896 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


water, and you will be made sorrowfully to drink of it, because 
you made it your trust! I believe that the tendency of that 
preaching which puts the warrant for faith anywhere but in the 
gospel command, is to vex the true penitent, and to console the 
hypocrite; the tendency of it is to make the poor soul which 
really repents feel that he must not believe in Christ because he 
sees so much of his own hardness of heart. The more spiritual 
a man is, the more unspiritual he sees himself to be, and the 
more penitent a man is the more impenitent he discovers 
himself to be! Often the most penitent men are those who 
think themselves the most impenitent, and if I am to preach 
the gospel to the penitent, and not to every sinner, as a sinner, 
then those penitent persons, who, according to my opponents, 
have the most right to believe, are the very persons who will 
never dare to touch it, because they are conscious of their own 
impenitence, and lack of all qualification for Christ! Sinners, let 
me address you with words of life — Jesus needs nothing from 
you, nothing whatever! Nothing done, nothing felt — He gives 
you work and feeling. Ragged, penniless — just as you are — lost, 
forsaken, desolate, with no good feelings, and no good hopes, 
still Jesus comes to you, and in these words of pity He addresses 
you, “Him who comes to Me I will in no wise cast out.” If you 
believe in Him, you shall never be confounded! 

2. But now, POSITIVELY and as the negative part has been 
positive enough, we will be brief here. The gospel command is 
a sufficient warrant for a sinner to believe in Jesus Christ. The 
words of our text imply this — “This is the commandment.” My 
brothers and sisters, do you need any warrant for doing a thing 
better than God’s command to do it? The children of Israel 
borrowed jewels of silver, and jewels of gold from the 
Egyptians. Many, as they read the Bible, find fault with this 
transaction; but, to my mind, if God bade them do it, that was 
enough of justification for them! Very well — if God bids you 


897 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


believe — if this is His commandment — that you believe, can you 
need a better warrant? I say, is there any necessity for any other? 
Surely the Lord’s Word is enough! 

Brothers and sisters, the command to believe in Christ 
must be the sinner’s warrant, if you consider the nature of our 
commission. How runs it? “Go you into all the world, and 
preach the gospel to every creature.” It ought to run, according 
to the other plan, “Preach the gospel to every regenerate person, 
to every convicted sinner, to every sensible soul.” But it is not so. 
It is to “every creature.” But unless the warrant is a something 
in which every creature can take a share, there is no such thing 
as consistently preaching it to every creature. Then, how is it 
put? — “He who believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; he 
who believes not shall be damned.” Where is there a word 
about the prerequisites for believing? Surely the man could not 
be damned for not doing what he would not have been 
warranted in doing! Our preaching, on the theory of 
qualifications, should not be, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and you shall be saved,” but, “qualify yourselves for faith, be 
sensible of your sin, be regenerated, get marks and evidences, 
and then believe.” Why, surely, if I am not to sow the good 
seed on the stony places, and among the thorns, I had better 
give up being a sower, and take to plowing, or some other work! 
When the aposdes went to Macedonia or Achaia, they ought 
not to have commenced with preaching Christ; they should 
have preached up qualifications, emotions, and sensations, if 
these are the preparations for Jesus! But I find that Paul, 
whenever he stands up, has nothing to preach but, “Christ and 
Him crucified.” Repentance is preached as a gift from the 
exalted Savior, but it is never as the cause or preparation for 
believing on Jesus. These two graces are born together, and live 
with a common life — beware of making one a foundation for 
the other! I would like to carry one of those who only preach 


898 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


to sensible sinners, and set him down in the capital of the 
kingdom of Dahomey. There are no sensible sinners there! 
Look at them, with their mouths stained with human blood, 
with their bodies smeared all over with the gore of their 
immolated victims — how will the preacher find any 
qualification there? I know not what he could say, but I know 
what my message would be! My word would run thus — 
“Brothers and sisters, God, who made the heavens and the 
earth, has sent His Son Jesus Christ into the world to suffer for 
our sins, and whoever believes in Him shall not perish, but have 
everlasting life.” If Christ crucified did not shake the kingdom 
of Dahomey, it would be its first failure! 

When the Moravian missionaries first went to Greenland, 
you remember that they spent months and months teaching the 
poor Greenlander about the Godhead, the doctrine of the 
Trinity, and the doctrine of sin, and the law — and no converts 
were forthcoming. But one day, by accident, one of the 
Greenlanders happening to read that passage, “Behold, what 
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we 
should be called the children of God,” he asked the meaning, 
and the missionary, hardly thinking him advanced enough to 
understand the gospel, nevertheless, ventured to explain it to 
him — and the man became converted — and hundreds of his 
countrymen received the Word! Naturally enough, they said to 
the missionaries, “Why did you not tell us this before? We knew 
all about there being a God, and that did us no good; why did 
you not come and tell us to believe in Jesus Christ before?” O 
my brothers and sisters, this is God’s weapon, God’s method — 
this is the great battering ram which will shake the gates of hell; 
and we must see to it that it is brought into daily use! 

I have tried, on the positive side, to show that a free grace 
warrant is consistent with the text — that it accords with 
apostolic custom, and is, indeed, absolutely necessary, seeing 


899 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the condition in which sinners are placed. But, my brothers and 
sisters, to preach Christ to sinners, as sinners, must be right, for 
all the former acts of God are to sinners, as sinners! Whom did 
God elect? Sinners! He loved us with a great love, even when 
we were dead in trespasses and sins. How did He redeem us? 
Did He redeem us as saints? No, for while we were yet enemies. 
He reconciled us unto God by the death of His Son. Christ 
never shed His blood for the good that is in us, but for the sin 
that is in us! “He laid down His life for our sins,” says the 
aposde. If, then, in election and redemption, we find God 
dealing with sinners, as sinners, it is a marring and nullifying of 
the whole plan if the gospel is to be preached to men as 
anything else but sinners! 

Again, it is inconsistent with the character of God to 
suppose that He comes forth and proclaims, “If, O My fallen 
creatures, if you qualify yourselves for My mercy, I will save 
you; if you will feel holy emotions — if you will be conscious of 
sacred desires after Me, then the blood of Jesus Christ shall 
cleanse you.” There would be litde which is godlike in that! But 
when He comes out with pardons full and free, and says, “Yes, 
when you lay in your blood, I said unto you, Live” — when He 
comes to you, His enemy and rebellious subject, and yet cries, 
“I have blotted out your sins like a cloud, and like a thick cloud 
your iniquities” — why, this is divine! You know what David 
said, “I have sinned.” What did Nathan say? “The Lord has put 
away your sins, you shall not die.” And that is the message of 
the gospel to a sinner as a sinner! “The Lord has put away your 
sins; Christ has suffered; He has brought in perfect 
righteousness; take Him, trust Him, and you shall live.” May 
that message come home to you this morning, my beloved. 

I have read with some degree of attention a book to which 
I owe much for this present discourse — a book by Abraham 
Booth, called Glad Tidings to Perishing Sinners. I have never heard 


900 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


53> The Warrant of Faith - I John 3:23 


anyone cast a suspicion upon Abraham Booth’s soundness; on 
the contrary, he has been generally considered as one of the 
most orthodox of the divines of the last generation. If you want 
my views in full, read his book. If you need something more, 
let me say, among all the bad things which his revilers have laid 
at his door, I have never heard anyone blame William 
Huntingdon for not being high enough in doctrine. Now, 
William Huntingdon prefaced in his lifetime a book by 
Saltmarsh, with which he was gready pleased; and the marrow 
of its teaching is just this, in his own words, “The only ground 
for any to believe is, He is faithful who has promised, not 
anything in themselves, for this is the commandment, That you 
believe on His Son Jesus Christ.” Now, if William Huntingdon 
himself printed such a book as that, I marvel how the followers 
of either William Huntingdon or Abraham Booth, how men 
calling themselves Calvinistic divines, and high Calvinists, can 
advocate what is not free grace, but a legal, graceless system of 
qualifications and preparations! I might here quote Crisp, who 
is pat to the point, and a high doctrine man, too. I mention 
neither Booth nor Huntingdon as authorities upon the 
subject — to the law and to the testimony we must go! But I do 
mention them to show that men holding strong views on 
election and predestination, yet, did see it to be consistent to 
preach the gospel to sinners as sinners — no — felt that it was 
inconsistent to preach the gospel in any other way! 

I shall only add that the blessings which flow from 
preaching Christ to sinners as sinners are of such a character as 
prove it to be right. Do you not see that this levels us alii We 
have the same warrant for believing, and no one can exalt 
himself above his fellow. 

Then, my brothers and sisters, how it inspires men with 
hope and confidence! It forbids despair! No man can despair if 
this is true; or if he does, it is a wicked, unreasonable despair, 


901 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


because if he has been ever so bad, yet, God commands him to 
believe! What room can there be for despondency? Surely if 
anything could cut off Giant Despair’s head, Christ preached 
to sinners is the sharp two-edged sword to do it! 

Again, how it fnakes a man live close to Christ! If I am to come 
to Christ as a sinner every day, and I must do so, for the Word 
says, “As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk you 
in Him;” if every day I am to come to Christ as a sinner, why 
then, how paltry all my doings look! What utter contempt it casts 
upon all my fine virtues, my preaching, my prayers, and all that 
comes of my flesh! And though it leads me to seek after purity 
and holiness, yet, it teaches me to live on Christ and not on 
them — and so it keeps me at the fountain head! 

My time flies and I must leave the last head, just to add, 
sinner, whoever you may be, God now commands you to 
believe in Jesus Christ! This is His COMMANDMENT — He 
does not command you to feel anything, or be anything, to 
prepare yourself for this. Now, are you willing to incur the great 
guilt of making God a liar? Surely you will shrink from that — 
then dare to believe! You cannot say, “I have no right.” You 
have a perfect right to do what God tells you to do! You cannot 
tell me you are not fit — there is no fitness needed — the 
command is given and it is yours to obey, not to dispute. You 
cannot say it does not come to you — it is preached to every 
creature under heaven; and now, soul, it is so pleasant a thing 
to trust the Lord Jesus Christ that I would gladly persuade 
myself you need no persuading! It is so delightful a thing to 
accept a perfect salvation, to be saved by precious blood, and 
to be married to so bright a Savior, that I would gladly hope 
the Holy Spirit has led you to cry, “Lord, I believe! Help You 
my unbelief!” 


902 



532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 65:11 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, September 27th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“You crown the year with Your goodness, and Your paths 
drop fatness.” - Psalm 65:11 

POSSIBLY OBJECTIONS might have been raised to a day of 
thanksgiving for the abundant harvest if it had been ordered or 
suggested by Government. Certain brethren are so exceedingly 
tender in their consciences upon the point of connection 
between Church and State, that they would have thought it 
almost a reason for not being thankful at all if the Government 
had recommended them to celebrate a day of public 
thanksgiving! Although I have no love to the unscriptural union 
of Church and State, 1 would on this occasion have hailed an 
official request for a national recognition of the special 
goodness of God. However, none of us can feel any objection 
arising in our minds if it is now agreed that today we will praise 
our ever-bounteous Lord, and as an assembly record our 
gratitude to the God of the harvest. We are probably the largest 
assembly of Christian people in the world, and it is well that we 
should set the example to the smaller Churches. Doubtless 
many other believers will follow in our footsteps, and so a 
public thanksgiving will become general throughout the 
country. I hope to see every congregation in the land raising a 
special offering unto the Lord, to be devoted either to His 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Church, to the poor, to missions, or some other holy end. Yes, 
I would have every Christian offer willingly unto the Lord as a 
token of his gratitude to the God of providence. I had almost 
forgotten that today we have to ask your contributions for the 
support of two ministers of our own body laboring in Germany; 
it is well that it so happens, because it furnishes an objective 
for the practical expression of the thanks which we feel to 
Almighty God; while as the sum required for this objective will 
at once be raised, our beloved college will be a worthy objective 
for friends at a distance to assist with their freewill offerings. 

Without any preface, we will divide our text as it divides 
itself. Here we have crowning mercies calling for crowning gratitude; 
and in the same verse, paths of fatness, which should be to us wajs of 
delight. When we have talked upon these two points, we may 
meditate for a few moments upon the whole subject and 
endeavor, as God shall help us, to see what duties it suggests. 

I. First of all, we have here CROWNING MERCIES, 
SUGGESTING SPECIAL AND CROWNING THANKSGIVING. 

All the year round, every hour of every day, God is richly 
blessing us — both when we sleep and when we wake His mercy 
waits upon us. The sun may leave off shining, but our God will 
never cease to cheer His children with His love! Like a river His 
loving-kindness is always flowing with fullness as inexhaustible 
as His own nature, which is its source. Like the atmosphere 
which always surrounds the earth, and is always ready to 
support the life of man, the benevolence of God surrounds all 
His creatures — in it, as in their element, they live and move, 
and have their being. Yet as the sun on summer days appears 
to gladden us with beams more warm and bright than at other 
times, and as rivers are at certain seasons swollen with the rain, 
and as the atmosphere itself on occasions is fraught with more 
fresh, more bracing, or more balmy influences than before, so 
is it with the mercy of God — it has its golden hours, its days of 


904 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


overflow when the Lord magnifies His grace, and lifts high His 
love before the sons of men! 

If we begin with the blessings of the nether springs, we 
must not forget that for the race of man, the joyous days of harvest 
are a special season of excessive favor. It is the glory of autumn 
that the ripe gifts of providence are then abundantly bestowed; 
it is the mellow season of realisation, whereas all before was but 
hope and expectation. Great is the joy of harvest! Happy are 
the reapers who fill their arms with the generosity of heaven. 
The Psalmist tells us that the harvest is the crowning of the year. 
What if I compare the opening spring to the proclamation of a 
new prince, the latest born of Father Time? With the musical 
voices of birds, and the joyful lowing of herds, a new era of 
fertility is ushered in. Every verdant meadow, and every leaping 
brook, hears the joyful proclamation and feels a new life within. 
The little hills rejoice on every side; they shout for joy; they also 
sing. Throughout the warm months of summer the royal year 
is dressing itself in beauty, and adorning itself in sumptuous 
array. What with the plates of ivory, yielded by the lilies, the 
rubies of the rose, the emeralds of the meads, and all manner 
of fair colors from the many flowers, we may well say that, 
“Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.” 
No studs of silver or rows of jewels can vie with the ornaments 
of the year. No garments of needlework of different colors can 
match the glorious vesture of Time’s reigning son. But the 
moment of the coronation, when earth feels most the sway of 
the year, is in the fullness of autumn. Then it is when the fields 
are covered with a dose of gold, and fruits are glowing with the 
rich hues of ripeness, and the leaves are burnished with 
inimitable perfection of tint and shade, then with a wreath of 
divine goodness, amidst the glad shouts of toiling lads, and the 
songs of rejoicing maidens, the year is crowned! Upon a throne 
of golden corn, with the peaceful sickle for his scepter, sits the 


905 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


crowned year bearing the goodness of the Lord as a coronet 
upon his placid brow! Or, what if we compare the year to a 
conqueror, striving at first with stern winter, wrestling hard 
against all his boisterous attacks, and at last joyfully conquering 
in the fair days of spring? He rides in triumph throughout the 
summer along a pathway strewed with flowers, and at last, 
mounting the throne amidst the festivities of harvest, while the 
Lord in loving kindness puts a diadem of beauty and goodness 
upon his head — 

“Cheerfulness and holy pleasure 
Well become our happy isle, 

When our God in copious measure 
Deigns to bless us with His Smile! 

Joyful, then, all people come, 

Celebrate the harvest home.” 

We may forget the harvest, living as we do, so far from rural 
labors, but those who have to watch the corn as it springs up, 
and track it through all its numberless dangers until the blade 
becomes the full corn in the ear, cannot, surely, forget the 
wonderful goodness and mercy of God when they see the 
harvest safely stored! My brothers and sisters, if we require any 
considerations to excite us to gratitude, let us think for a 
moment of the effect upon our country of a total failure of the 
crops. What if today it were reported that as yet the corn was 
not carried, that the continued showers had made it sprout and 
grow till there was no hope of its being of any further use, and 
that it might as well be left in the fields? What dismay would 
that message carry into every cottage? Who among us could 
contemplate the future without dismay? All faces would gather 
blackness; all classes would sorrow, and even the throne itself 
might tidy be covered with sackcloth at the news! At this day 


906 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


the kingdom of Egypt sits trembling; the rejoicing and 
abounding land trembles for her sons; the Nile has swollen 
beyond its proper limit, the waters still continue to rise, and a 
few more days must see the fields covered with devastating 
floods! If it is so, alas for that land, in other years so favored as 
to have given us the proverb of “Corn in Egypt.” My brothers 
and sisters, should we not rejoice that this is not our case, and 
that our happy land rejoices in plenty? If the plant had utterly 
failed, and the seed had rotted under the clods, we would have 
been quick enough to murmur — how is it that we are so slow 
to praise? Take a lower view of the matter — suppose even a 
partial scarcity — at this juncture, when one arm of our industry 
is paralyzed, how serious would have been this calamity! With 
a staple commodity withdrawn from us, with the daily peril of 
war at our gates, it would have been a fearful trial to have 
suffered scarcity of bread! Shall we not bless and praise our 
covenant God who permits not the appointed weeks of harvest 
to fail? Sing together all you to whom bread is the staff of life, 
and rejoice before Him who loads you with benefits! We have 
none of us any adequate idea of the amount of happiness conferred 
upon a nation by a luxuriant crop. Every man in the land is the 
richer for it. To the poor man the difference is of the utmost 
importance. His three shillings are now worth four; there is 
more bread for the children, or more money for clothes. 
Millions are benefited by God’s once opening His generous 
hand. 

When the Hebrews went through the desert, there were 
but some two or three millions of them, and yet they sang 
sweetly of Him who fed His chosen people; in our own land 
alone we have ten times the number, have we no hallowed 
music for the God of the whole earth? Reflect upon the 
amazing population of our enormous city — consider the 
immense amount of poverty — think how greatly at one stroke 


907 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


that poverty has been relieved! A generous contribution, equal 
to that made for the Lancashire distress, would be but as a drop 
in a bucket to the relief afforded by a fall in the price of bread! 
Let us not despise the bounty of God because this great benefit 
comes in a natural way. If every morning when we awoke we 
saw fresh loaves of bread put into our cupboard, or the 
morning’s meal set out upon the table, we would think it a 
miracle; but if our God blesses our own exertions, and prospers 
our own toil to the same end, is it not equally as much a ground 
for praising and blessing His name? I would I had this morning 
the tongue of the eloquent, or even my own usual strength to 
excite you to gratitude, by the spectacle of the multitudes of 
beings whom God has made happy by the fruit of the field! My 
sickness today makes my thoughts wander, and, makes me unfit 
for so noble a theme, yet my soul pants to set your hearts on 
fire! O for heaven’s own fire to kindle your hearts! O come, let 
us worship and bow down; let us exalt the Lord our God, and 
come into His presence with the voice of joy and thanksgiving! 

But how shall we give crowning thanksgiving for this 
crowning mercy of the year? We can do it, dear friends, by the 
inward emotions of gratitude. Let our hearts be warmed; let our 
spirits remember, meditate, and think upon this goodness of 
the Lord. Meditation upon this mercy may tend to nourish in 
you the tenderest feelings of affection, and your souls will be 
knit to the Father of spirits, who pities His children. Again, 
praise Him with your lips; let Psalms and hymns employ your 
tongues today — and tomorrow, when we meet together at the 
prayer meeting, let us turn it rather into a praise meeting, and let 
us laud and magnify His name from whose bounty all this 
goodness flows! But I think, also, we should thank Him by our 
gifts. The Jews of old never tasted the fruit either of the barley 
or of the wheat harvest till they had sanctified it to the Lord by 
the feast of ingathering. There was, early in the season, the 


908 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


barley harvest. One sheaf of this barley was taken and waved 
before the Lord with special sacrifices, and then afterward the 
people feasted. Fifty days afterward came the wheat harvest, 
when two loaves, made of the new flour, were offered before 
the Lord in sacrifice, together with burnt-offerings, peace- 
offerings, meat-offerings, drink-offerings, and abundant 
sacrifices of thanksgivings to show that the people’s 
thankfulness was not stinted or mean. No man ate either of the 
ears, or grain, or corn ground and made into bread, until first 
of all he had sanctified his substance by the dedication of some 
unto the Lord. And shall we do less than the Jew? Shall he, for 
types and shadows, express his gratitude in a solid manner, and 
shall not we? Did he offer unto the Lord whom he scarcely 
knew, and bow before that Most High God who hid His face 
amidst the smoke of burning rams and bullocks? And shall not 
we, who see the glory of the Lord in the face of Christ Jesus, 
come unto Him and bring to Him our offerings? The Old 
Testament ordinance was, “You shall not come before the 
Lord empty.” And let that be the ordinance of today! Let us 
come into His presence, each man bearing his offering of 
thanksgiving unto the Lord. But, enough concerning this 
particular harvest; it has been a crowning mercy this year, so 
that the other version of our text might aptly be applied as a 
description of 1 863, “You crown the year with Your goodness.” 

Furthermore, beloved, we have heard of heavenly harvests, 
the out-flowings of the upper springs, which, in days of yore, 
awakened the Church of God to loudest praise. There was the 
harvest of Pentecost. Christ having been sown in the ground 
like a grain of wheat sprang up from it and in His resurrection 
and ascension was like the waved sheaf before the Lord. Let us 
never forget that resurrection which crowned the year of God’s 
redeemed with goodness! It was a terrible year, indeed; it began 
in the howling tempests of Christ’s poverty, want, shame, 


909 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


suffering, and death; it seemed to have no spring and no 
summer, but yet it was crowned with an abundant harvest when 
Jesus Christ rose from the dead. Fifty days after the 
resurrection came the Pentecost. The barley harvest had been 
passed wherein the wave-sheaf was offered; then came the days 
of wheat harvest. Peter and the 1 1 who were with him became 
the reapers, and 3,000 souls fell beneath the gospel sickle! 
There was great joy in the city of Jerusalem that day — no, all 
the saints who heard were glad, and heaven itself, catching the 
divine enthusiasm, rang with harvest joy! It is recorded that the 
saints ate their bread with gladness and singleness of heart, 
praising God. Pentecost was a crowning mercy, and it was 
remembered by the saints with crowning thanks! 

May I not say that we have had the like crowning mercy 
shown to this, our highly-favored land, in the revivals which a 
few years ago were so plentiful among us and which even now 
hover over our heads? The Spirit of the Lord suddenly fell 
upon many a city and village — where the gospel had been 
preached with dull and heavy tones, suddenly the minister 
began to glow — the cords which bound his tongue were 
snapped, and like a seraph full of heavenly fire, he began to tell 
of the love of Jesus! Souls were moved as the trees of the forest 
are moved in the wind — spirits long dead in sin’s tremendous 
sepulcher woke up at the quickening breath; they stood upon 
their feet as a great army — they praised the Lord! Other towns 
and other villages received the like Pentecostal shower, and we 
had hoped — O that our hopes had been realized — that all 
England would have been filled with the same divine 
enthusiasm, and that the effects would have continued among 
us. To a great extent the revival has departed, and many of our 
Churches are more stolid and cold than ever; and our 
denomination — never too zealous, seldom guilty of excessive 
heat, seems to have now, I think, as little earnest life as it ever 


910 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


had! Back to their old beds of slumber — back again to their old 
dens of routine — downward again to Laodicean lukewarmness 
have they stolen. Their goodness was as a morning cloud, and 
as the early dew it passes away. O that the Lord would once 
again crown the year with His goodness, and send us revivals 
from the right hand of the Most High! 

Here it is O well-beloved flock of my care and love, that I 
ask your gratitude, mainly and chiefly. My brothers and sisters, 
how the Lord has cheered and comforted our hearts while He 
has crowned our years with His goodness! Here these 10 years 
have I, as He has enabled me, preached the gospel among you. 
We have seen no excitement, no stirrings of an unwarranted 
fanaticism — no wildfires have been kindled — and yet see how 
the multitude have listened to the gospel with unceasing 
attention; and the surging crowds at yonder doors prove that, 
as in the days of John the Baptist, so it is now — the kingdom 
of heaven suffers violence, and every man presses into it. As 
for conversions, has not the Lord been pleased to give them to 
us as constandy as the sun rises in his place? Scarcely a sermon 
without the benediction of the Most High — many of them 
preached in weakness, which none of you have known but the 
speaker — preached at times with throbs of heart, and partings 
of anguish, which have made the preacher go home mourning 
that he ever preached at all! And yet success has come and souls 
have been saved! And the preacher’s heart has been made to 
sing for joy, for the seed rots not, the furrows are good, the 
field has been well prepared, and where the seed falls it brings 
forth a hundredfold, to the praise and honor of the Most High! 
Beloved, we must not forget this; we might have preached for 
nothing; we might have plowed the thankless rock and gathered 
no sheaves. Why then does He bless us? Is it our worthiness? 
Ah, no; is it for anything in the preacher or in the hearers? God 
forbid that we should think such a thing! It has been the 


911 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sovereign mercy of God which has prospered His own truth 
among us, and shall we not, for this, praise and bless His name? 

If we, as a Church, do not continue to be as prayerful and 
as earnest as we have been, the Lord may jusdy make us like 
Shiloh, which He deserted, until it became desolation, where 
not one stone was left upon another. No, I venture to say if we 
do not progress in earnestness; if you, my Hearers, do not 
become more than ever devoted to the Lord’s cause; if there is 
not more and more of an earnest missionary spirit stirred up 
and nurtured among us, we may expect the Lord to turn away 
from us and find another people who shall more worthily repay 
His favors. Who knows but you may have come to the 
kingdom for such a time as this. Perhaps the Lord intends, by 
some of you, to save multitudes of souls, to stir up His 
Churches, and to awaken the slumbering spirit of religion. Will 
you prove unworthy? Will you say, “I pray You excuse me.” 
Will you not rather, in looking back upon the plentiful harvest 
of souls reaped in this place, consider that you are in debt to 
God, and therefore give to Him the fullest consecration that 
believers can offer, because of the crowning mercies which we 
as a Church receive? “You crown the year with Your goodness.” 

Beloved, one more remark here: we are looking forward to 
a time when this world’s year shall be crowned with God’s 
goodness in the highest and most boundless sense. Centuries 
are flying, and yet the darkness lingers — time grows old, and 
yet the idols sit upon their thrones. Christ does not yet reign; 
His unsuffering kingdom has not come; the scepters are still in 
the hands of despots, and slaves still fret in iron bonds. In vain, 
in vain, O earth, have you expected brighter days, for still the 
thick and heavy night rests over your sons. But the day shall 
come — and the signs of its coming are increasing in their 
brightness — the day shall come when the harvest of the world 
shall be reaped! Christ has not died in vain; He redeemed the 


912 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


world with His blood, and the whole world He will have. From 
eastern coast to western, Christ must reign; yet will the seed of 
the woman chase the powers of darkness back to their evil 
habitations; yet shall He pierce the crooked serpent, and cut 
leviathan that is in the depths of the sea; yet shall the trumpet 
ring, and the multitudes represented in Him when He rose as 
the great wave-sheaf rise from the dead from land and sea! And 
yet, in the day of His appearing, shall the kings of the earth yield 
up their sovereignty, and all nations shall call Him blessed! 
Tarry awhile, beloved; wait yet a little season, and when you 
shall hear the shout, “Hallelujah, hallelujah, the Lord God 
omnipotent reigns,” then shall you know that He crowns the 
year with His goodness! 

II. But we must leave this point and turn to the next. 

PATHS OF FATNESS SHOULD BE WAYS OF DUTY. “And Your 
paths drop fatness.” 

When the conqueror journeys through the nations, his 
paths drop blood — fire, and vapor of smoke are in his tracks, 
and tears and groans, and sighs attend him. But where the Lord 
journeys, His “paths drop fatness.” When the kings of old 
made progress through their dominions, they caused a famine 
wherever they tarried, for the greedy courtiers who swarmed in 
their camp devoured all things like locusts, and were as greedily 
ravenous as palmer- worms and caterpillars. But where the great 
King of kings journeys, He enriches the land — His “paths drop 
fatness.” By a bold Hebrew metaphor — and the Hebrew poetry 
certainly seems to be the most sublime in its conceptions — the 
clouds are represented as the chariots of God — “He makes the 
clouds His chariot” — and as the Lord Jehovah rides upon the 
heavens in the greatness of His strength, and in His excellence 
in the sky, the rains drop down upon the lands, and so the 
wheel tracks of Jehovah are marked by the fatness which makes 
glad the earth! Happy, happy are the people who worship such 


9H 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a God, whose coming is always a coming of goodness and of 
divine grace to His creatures! 

We see, then, dear friends, that in providence, wherever the 
Lord comes, His “paths drop fatness.” He may sometimes 
seem to pinch His people, and bring them into need, but if 
there is not a fatness of outward good, there will be a fatness 
of inward mercy. Even the trials which the Lord scatters like 
coals of fire in His path, do but burn up the weeds, and warm 
the heart of the soil. Do but trust the Lord, and appeal to Him 
in all your straits and difficulties, and you shall find that when 
He comes forth out of His hiding place for your help, His paths 
shall drop fatness; your poverty shall be removed, and your 
dejection of spirit shall be cheered. 

Beloved, we believe that our text has a fullness of meaning 
if it is viewed in a spiritual sense — “His paths drop fatness.” In 
the use of the means, the sinner will find God’s paths drop with 
fatness. Are you hungry and thirsty? Does your soul faint 
within you? Are you longing to be satisfied with favor? Then, 
sinner, wait upon the Lord, and listen diligendy unto the 
message of His gospel; be constantly searching the Scriptures, 
or listening to His truth as it is proclaimed in your ears. 
Especially, sinner, remember that the ways of the Lord are to 
be seen in the person of Christ. Go to those hands which are 
the ways of divine justice; go to those feet which are the 
pathways of infinite love; explore that side where deep 
affection dwells, and you shall find fatness of mercy dropping 
there. No sinner ever came to God and was sent away empty! 
You may attend the means, I grant you, and yet find no comfort, 
for means are not always God’s paths, but you cannot come to 
Christ, you cannot rest in Him and be disappointed. Trust in 
Him at all times, and however deep your poverty, it shall have 
a superabundant supply! “His paths drop fatness.” 


914 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


You also who are His people, I know that sometimes your 
souls grow faint. Weary with the wilderness, worn with its cares, 
torn with its briars, you come up to the house of God, and oh, 
if you come there to see your Master, and not merely to join in 
the routine of service; if you come there seeking after Him, and 
panting for Him as the hart pants for the water brooks, you will 
find that the most common services — poor though the 
minister is, and plain the place, and simple the people — though 
the music may have but little charm for the ear of taste, and the 
words of the speaker may have none of the trappings of oratory, 
yet sweet to you shall be the worship of God’s house, and you 
shall find that “His paths drop fatness”; so too in the use of 
those precious ordinances — Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. 
You who know the truth, and are made free by it, shall find that 
those paths drop fatness. I believe many of you are lean and 
starved because you are not obedient to your Lord’s command 
in Baptism. You know what He bids you do, but you stand back 
from it; you comprehend your duty, and perhaps you say you 
are Baptists in principle, forgetting that this very principle of 
yours is that which will condemn you unless you carry it out! 
In keeping that commandment there is a great reward; and 
many besides the Ethiopian noble of Queen Candace’s empire, 
have gone on their way rejoicing from the baptismal stream! It 
is peculiarly so at the Lord’s Table. I would not give up the 
Lord’s Supper as a means of divine grace for anything that 
could be devised! To the godless it must always be a 
condemnation; but to the saint of God who comes there, 
desiring to be fed with the flesh of Christ, it becomes a feast, 
indeed! I do trust, dear friends, that in a very short time we shall 
celebrate the Lord’s Supper every Sunday. I am convicted that a 
weekly celebration is Scriptural, and I see more and more the 
need of it. I think it is an ordinance to which we ought not to 
prescribe our own times, and our own seasons, where the Word 


915 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of God is so very express and so plain. Such was apostolic 
custom — search for yourselves and see. Indeed, if there were 
no apostolic precedent, I think the sweetness of the service and 
the delightful nature of the ordinance might suggest to 
Christians that it was well to have it frequendy. We cannot be 
satisfied once a month with communion with Christ, and I 
think we hardly ought to be satisfied with the sign itself so 
seldom. God’s paths drop fatness — happy are they who 
diligently walk in them! 

Beloved, the Lord has other paths besides those of the 
open means of grace, and these, too, drop fatness. Especially 
let me mention to you the path of prayer. No believer ever says, 
“My leanness, my leanness! Woe unto me,” who is much in the 
closet. Starving souls generally live at a distance from the mercy 
seat. Close access to God in wrestling prayer is sure to make 
the believer strong — if not happy. The nearest place to the gate 
of heaven is the throne of the heavenly grace. Much alone, and 
you will have much assurance — little alone with God, your 
religion will be very shallow; you shall have many doubts and 
fears, and but little of the joy of the Lord. Let us see to it, 
beloved, that since the soul-enriching path of prayer is open to 
the very weakest saint; since no high attainments are required; 
since you are not bid to come because you are an advanced 
saint, but freely invited if you are a saint at all, let us see to it, I 
say, that we are often in the way of private devotion! Be much 
on your knees, for so Elijah drew the rain upon famished 
Israel’s fields. 

The like, certainly, I may say of the secret path of communion. 
Oh, the delights which are to be had by that man who has 
fellowship with Christ! Earth has no words which can set forth 
the holy mirth of the soul that leans on Jesus’ bosom! Few 
Christians understand it, they live in the lowlands and seldom 
climb to the top of Nebo; they live outside; they come not into 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


the holy place; they take not up the privilege of priesthood. At 
a distance they see the sacrifice, but they sit not down with the 
priest to eat their portion, and to enjoy the fat of the burnt 
offering. Brother, sister, sit always under the shadow of Jesus! 
Come up to that palm tree, and take hold of the branches; let 
your beloved be unto you as the apple tree among the trees of 
the woods, and you shall find a never-failing fruit which shall 
always be sweet to your taste! 

I must not forget that the path of faith, too, is a path that 
drops fatness. It is a strange path — few walk in it, even of 
professors; but they who in temporals and in spirituals have 
learned to lean on God alone, shall find it a path of fatness. As 
we spoke the other morning concerning the cedars up there 
upon that stormy ridge, unwatered by a single river, and yet 
always green, so shall the Christian be who lives alone upon his 
God! (see Sermon #529) Wait only upon God; let your 
expectation be from Him! The young lions may lack and suffer 
hunger, but you shall not need any good thing, for the paths of 
the Lord shall drop fatness for you! 

O my dear hearers, I would to God the Lord would come 
into the midst of our Churches and congregations by His 
Spirit — then would His path drop fatness! We have a multitude 
of complaints at different times of the dullness and lethargy of 
the Churches; but what we need is more of the presence of the 
Holy Spirit — more of the holy baptism of His sacred influences. 
In a very quaint sermon by Matthew Wilkes, 1 remember he 
said that ministers were like pens — some of them were 
common goose quills, writing very heavily, and often requiring 
sharpening; others of them, he said — the college men — were 
like steel pens, and while they could make good fine up strokes, 
they could not make such heavy down strokes as some of the 
quills could; but, he said, neither the one pen nor the other 
could do anything without ink; and therefore, he said, our 


917 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


ministers need more ink. The ink is the Holy Spirit — “written, 
not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God.” And so Mr. 
Wilkes suggested that people, instead of finding fault with the 
minister, would do well to pray, “Lord, give him more ink — 
give him more ink!” There is much in that prayer, for we need 
often to be dipped in that ink, or else we cannot make a mark 
on your hearts! However experienced we may be in sacred 
service, you and I cannot serve God effectually, nor see any 
power resting on our ministry except as we get more of the 
Spirit of the living God. I would that the Churches laid to heart 
more and more the real need of the times. We have been 
building hosts of chapels lately, and raising thousands of 
pounds, and because there were revivals, and we hear of them 
every now and then, we have been thinking that we are in a 
good state. Now, I venture to say that all our denominations 
are in a bad state. There is one which I mention with profound 
respect, whose statistics cause me sincere sorrow. I believe that 
in that large, wealthy and most earnest body of Christians, the 
Wesleyans, the clear increase of all the Wesleyan Chapels in the 
whole metropolis, including a wide district around London, for 
the whole of this year, is far from equal to the annual increase 
of this one Church! If I am not mistaken, the increase 
throughout the whole of the Linked Kingdom is about 4,500, 
being scarcely two per cent upon the whole body! If our Baptist 
denomination could have as good and clear statistics, I 
exceedingly much question whether we should be found, taking 
the whole of us together, to be in a much better state. The fact 
is, denominations, when they are poor and despised, and live 
upon God, and are all earnest, always increase and have many 
conversions; but we are getting, all of us, so respectable, 
building fine Chapels, and looking after schools, and all sorts 
of things, that the Spirit of God is departing from us — we are 
losing the divine anointing and the blessed unction — we are 


918 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


congratulating ourselves upon an enlightenment which does 
not exist, and upon an advancement that is all moonshine! 

Look at the journals for last week, and see with horror a 
picture of superstition worthy of the dark ages exhibited in a 
country village, where, to my knowledge, there is both an 
Independent and Baptist Chapel, and yet the people still believe 
in witchcraft! Is this; is this the effect of religion? Why, our 
places of worship do not operate as they should upon the 
people. They are, in most places, mere clubs where good people 
spend their Sundays, but the outlying mass is not touched. To 
a great extent we have lost the old fire, the divine enthusiasm, 
the Pentecostal furor; that sacred flame of the first aposdes 
which is so much needed if we are ever to startle a dying world, 
is almost extinct! And in this place, where God has favored us 
with much of His presence, we are getting into very much the 
same condition. How many of you who once were earnest are 
now as cold as slabs of ice? Some of you do hardly anything for 
my Lord and Master. Converted, I trust, you are — but where is 
your first love? Where is the love of your espousals, which 
made some of you talk of Jesus by day and dream of Him by 
night? O for a return to God’s paths — O for a revival once 
again in the midst of the Churches! Ten years ago we could 
speak honesdy that the Churches were almost dead, but I think 
they are worse now, because they have cherished the idea that 
they are not as dead as they were! We are as bad as ever, with a 
name to live, whereas we are dead! O that some trumpet voice 
could wake our sleeping Churches once again! Can you live 
without souls saved? If you can, I cannot! Can you live without 
London being enlightened with the light of God? If you can so 
live, I pray my Master let me die! Can you bear to fight and win 
no victories? Sow and reap no harvests? Brethren, if you are 
right, you cannot endure it, but you must endure it, till the Lord 
comes forth; let us pray, therefore, with might and main, with 


919 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a holy violence which will take no denial! Let us pray the Lord 
to come forth out of His hiding place, for His “paths drop 
fatness,” and there is fatness to be found nowhere else besides! 

III. And now I close. The whole subject seems to give us 
one or two suggestions as to matters of duty. “You crown the 
year with Your goodness.” One suggestion is this — some of 
you in this house are strangers to God, you have been living as 
His enemies, and you will probably die so. But what a blessing 
it would be if a part of the crown of this year should be your 
conversion! “The harvest is past, and the summer is ended, and 
you are not saved.” But oh, what a joy, if this very day you 
should turn to God and live! Remember, the way of salvation 
was freely proclaimed last Sunday morning, it runs in this 
style — “This is the commandment, that you believe on Jesus 
Christ whom He has sent.” (see Sermon #531) Soul, if this day 
you trust in Christ, it shall be your spiritual birthday; it shall be 
unto you the beginning of day! Emancipated from your chains, 
delivered from the darkness of the valley of the shadow of 
death, you shall be the Lord’s free man or woman. What do 
you say? O that the Spirit of God would bring you this day to 
turn to Him with full purpose of heart! 

Another suggestion. Would not the Lord crown this year 
with His goodness if He would move some of you to do more 
for Him than you have ever done before? Cannot you think of 
some new thing that you have forgotten, but which is in the 
power of your hands? Can you not do it for Christ today? — 
some fresh soul you have never conversed with — some fresh 
means of usefulness you have never attempted? 

And lasdy, would not it be well for us if the Lord would 
crown this year with His goodness by making us begin from 
this day to be more prayerful? Let our prayer meetings have 
more at them, and let everyone in his closet pray more for the 
preacher, pray more for the Church. Let us, every one of us, 


920 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


532 Thanksgiving and Prayer - Ps. 

65:11 


give our hearts anew to Christ! What say you today, to renew 
your consecration vow? Let us say to Him, “Here, Lord, I give 
myself to You once more. You have bought me with Your 
blood, accept me again; from this good hour I will begin a new 
life for a second time if Your Spirit is with me. Help me, Lord, 
for Jesus Christ’s sake.” Amen. 


921 



533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 12:42 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, October 4th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with 
this generation and condemn it, for she came from the ends of 
the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and indeed a greater 
than Solomon is here.” - Matthew 12:42 

OUR SAVIOR, in this chapter, administered a rebuke to two 
sorts of people. He reproved those who hear the gospel, but 
who are not brought to humiliation and repentance; He 
rebuked them by the example of the Ninevites, who, having 
but one short and terrible warning from the prophet J onah, 
clothed themselves in sackcloth, turned unto God in penitence, 
and so preserved their city. He, then, rebukes another class — 
those who have not curiosity enough to care to hear the gospel, 
or who, if they hear it, give it no attention, as though it were 
not worthy of human thought. First, He rebukes those who 
hear and despise the Word, and then, those who are of so stolid 
a heart as to refuse to give it an honest and candid hearing; 
these are shamed by the example of this Queen of the South, 
who came from the ends of the earth, enticed by fame, to listen 
to the wisdom of King Solomon. He declares that her hallowed 
curiosity which led her to journey so far to profit by the wisdom 
of a man, will, in the day of judgment, condemn us, if we refuse 
to hear the voice of the Son of God, and are not moved to 
inquire concerning the heavenly wisdom which He reveals. 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


Will you kindly open your Bibles at the 10th chapter of the 
First of Kings; for I shall have to constandy refer to the 
historical narrative in order to bring out in full relief the 
conduct of the ancient queen. O that the Spirit of God may 
convince some of you of sin, by the example of that wise- 
hearted woman! 

The three points we shall consider, this morning, with 
regard to the Queen of Sheba, are these — first, let us commend 
her for the possession of an inquiring spirit; then, let us observe how 
she conducted her inquiry; and, in closing, let us remark the result of 
an inquiry so well conducted. 

I. First, LET US COMMEND HER FOR HER INQUIRING 

SPIRIT. In this point, she will rise up in judgment against many 
here present. She was a queen. Queens have many cares, 
multitudes of occupations and engagements, but she neither 
considered it beneath her dignity to search into the wisdom of 
Solomon, nor a waste of valuable time to journey to his 
dominions. How many offer the vain excuse that they cannot 
give due attention to the religion of Jesus Christ for want of 
time? They have a large family, or a very difficult business to 
manage. This woman rebukes such, for she left her kingdom, 
and threw off the cares of State to take a long journey that she 
might listen to the royal sage. How much rather ought men to 
be willing, if it were absolutely necessary (and I believe it never 
is), to neglect their business for a season, that they might find 
out the way of salvation for their souls? “What shall it profit a 
man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul?” And, 
on the other hand, of what account would be his loss, though 
he should lose his all, if he did but find his soul, and were saved 
at the last? You cannot say, any of you, that you have an excuse 
in the shortness of your time, or in the difficulties of your 
position! If the Queen of the South can come to Solomon, you 
also can consider the teaching of Christ. 


923 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Her royal court was, doubtless, already stored with wisdom. 
The princes of the eastern realms were always careful to gather 
to themselves a band of wise men who found in their patronage 
both subsistence and honor. In the court of so great a lover of 
learning as was the Queen of Sheba, there would certainly be a 
little congress of magi and wise men — and yet, she was not 
content with what she already knew — she was determined to 
search after this wisdom, of which she had heard the fame. In 
this, she rebukes those of you who think you know enough — 
who suppose that your own home-spun intelligence will suffice, 
without sitting at the feet of Jesus! If you dream that human 
wisdom can be a sufficient light without receiving the brighter 
beams of revelation; if you say, “These things are for the 
unintelligent, and for the poor, we will not listen to them,” this 
queen, whose court was full of wisdom, and yet, who leaves it 
all to find the wisdom which God had given to Solomon, 
rebukes you! The wisdom of Jesus Christ as much surpasses all 
human knowledge as the sun outshines a candle. Comparison 
there can be none, contrast there is much. He who will not 
come to the Fountain which brims with wisdom, but trusts to 
his own leaking cisterns, shall wake up too late and find himself 
a fool! 

Consider, too, that the queen came from a very great distance to 
hear the wisdom of Solomon. The journey from Arabia Felix, 
or from Abyssinia, whichever the country may have been, was 
a long and dangerous one — a much more serious matter than 
it would be in these times; and performed by the slow process 
of traveling by camel, the journey must have occupied a very 
long season. Coming, as Matthew says, “From the ends of the 
earth,” there were doubtless mountains to be climbed, if not 
seas to be navigated, and deserts to be crossed; but none of 
these difficulties could keep her back. She hears of wisdom, and 
wisdom she will have. So she boldly ventures upon the journey 


924 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


with her numerous train; no matter how far she may have to 
travel. Very many have the gospel brought to their doors, and 
yet, will not leave their chimney corners to listen to it! We have 
thousands in London who have but to walk across the street 
and hear the Word, and yet, they lie about at home; and there 
are hundreds of others, who when they do come, are inattentive 
under the ministry, or, if they listen, pay no more real attention 
to it than though it were some old worn-out story which it is a 
respectable custom to hear, but which could not possibly be of 
any service to them! The Queen of Sheba, toiling across the 
desert, of the weaker sex though she was, shall rise up in 
judgment against those who neglect the great salvation, and 
treat the Savior as though it were nothing to them that Jesus 
should die! 

Do not forget, too, that this woman was a foreigner to 
Solomon, and that she already had a religion — probably one of 
the older forms of idolatry — perhaps the Sabean worship of 
the sun. Now, many persons argue in these times, “Would you 
have me change my religion?” It is supposed to be an 
impertinence to imagine that a Roman Catholic could give any 
considerations to the claims of the religion of free grace, or that 
men belonging to another church should listen with anything 
like candid attention to a doctrine at variance with that which 
they have heard from their youth! “Would you have me change 
my religion?” Yes, that I would, if your religion is false! If your 
religion has not changed you, I would that you would change 
your religion — for a religion which does not renew a man’s 
character and make him holy — which does not change his 
confidence, and make him rest upon Christ — a religion which 
does not make altogether a new man of him, from top to 
bottom, is a religion of no value, and the sooner he gives it up 
the better! Because my mother or my grandmother happened 
to be blind, am I to be blind, too, if there is sight to be had? 


925 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Suppose they dragged a heavy chain behind them all their days, 
am I to drag the same, because, indeed, I sprang of their loins? 
Hereditary godliness, if it is not personal godliness, is a thing of 
small value; but hereditary ungodliness is a most damnable 
heritage — get rid of it, I pray you! Remember, to your own 
master you stand or fall on your own account; each soul enters 
through the gate of life alone, and through the iron gate of 
death it departs alone; every man should search in solitary 
earnestness, apart from all the rest of the world, to know what 
the truth of God is, and knowing it, it is his to come out alone 
on the Lord’s side! Yes, we would have you give attention to 
the things of God, even though you should have been brought 
up in other customs, and should have honesdy espoused 
another form of religion. Prove the spirits whether they are of 
God! If your soul has been deceived, there is yet time to be set 
right — God help you that you may find out His truth. 

It is worthy of observation that this woman coming from 
afar, made a journey which was very expensive. She came with a great 
train of camels bearing spices and very much gold and precious 
stones. She looked upon the treasures of her kingdom as only 
valuable because they would admit her into the presence of the 
keeper of the storehouse of wisdom! Now, our Lord Jesus 
Christ asks nothing of men except their hearts. He does not sell 
the truth to any of them, but gives it freely without money and 
without price! And what if men will not have it, if they refuse 
to lend their ears, and to give their thoughts to divine things, 
shall they not be utterly inexcusable when this heathen queen 
shall rise up and shall declare that she gave her rubies and her 
pearls, her spices and her camels to King Solomon, that she 
might learn his human wisdom? O sirs, should we lose the light 
of our eyes, and the use of our limbs, yet were it better to enter 
into life blind and lame, than having those eyes and limbs to be 
cast into hell fire! “Skin for skin, yes, all that a man has will he 


926 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


give for his life.” And if he would give all that for his temporal 
life, oh, how much more cosdy is the spiritual life, and how 
cheap were the price if he could give a thousand martyrdoms 
to redeem his soul? But nothing of this kind is asked — the 
gospel presents freely to every needy soul just that which he 
requires. It cries — “He who has no money, let him come, buy 
wine and milk without money, and without price.” O my dear 
hearers, if you have refused the invitation of Christ’s gospel, 
well may you tremble at the thought that the Queen of Sheba 
shall rise up in judgment against you! 

Note that this queen had received no invitation; King Solomon 
never bade her come; she came unsought for, unexpected. You 
have been bid to come — hundreds of times in this house of 
prayer has the voice been heard crying, “The Spirit and the 
Bride say, Come!” Even you, who are strangers to this house, 
in every corner of the streets of this city you may hear the 
invitation of Christ! The Bible, which is God’s written 
invitation, is in all your houses, and you may search it if you 
will. Therefore, if you, followed with invitations, and urged 
with line upon line, and precept upon precept, will not come 
when God’s providence brings the gospel to your very gates; if 
you will not seek King Jesus, then shall you be condemned 
indeed, by this Queen of Sheba! Uttle had she ever heard of Solomon, 
remember that — nothing but a rumor of his fame. Some of his 
ships which went to Tarshish for gold had probably been 
driven by stress of weather to the Abyssinian coast, or possibly 
they may have gone the way from the head of the Red Sea 
round to the Indies, where probably Tarshish was situated, and 
so they made a common practice of calling at one of the ports 
of Southern Arabia or Abyssinia. From these sailors, her 
subjects had heard strange stories of the mighty king; they had 
heard of his throne of gold and ivory, of the glory of his army, 
and the multitude of his chariots; above all, they had heard 


927 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


something concerning the temple and his God. She, influenced 
merely by rumor, comes that distance! Well, but we have a sure 
word of testimony brought to us by prophets and priests 
innumerable; we have it here in this Book, written by the Holy 
Spirit, and stamped with the eternal seal. We, ourselves, know 
that there is divine wisdom in Christ, our own consciences tell 
us that He is no deceiver — that His gospel is most true and 
precious. What fools are we, what fools twice told, if, with this 
certainty of gaining so much, we yet shrink from the glorious 
adventure, and will not go to Him who will give us His wisdom 
and eternal life! 

One might continue, thus, to show the excellence of this 
woman’s inquiring spirit, but we have only space to notice that 
the objective which she journeyed after was vastly inferior to that which is 
proposed to our inquiy. We bid the careless soul think of the Son 
of God; she went that distance to see a son of man, a mere man, 
who, with all his wisdom was a fool. She journeyed all that way 
to see one who was wise himself, but who had power to impart 
but a very small portion of his wisdom, whereas we invite the 
sinner to come to One who is made of God unto us wisdom, 
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption! We tell him that 
all Christ has He is ready to bestow, that His abundance is only 
abundance for others, and His fullness is that out of which all 
of us have received. She went to hear a man who had 
wisdom — we bid you come to one who is wisdom — wisdom 
itself consolidated! Talk you of the royalty of Solomon? We 
invite you to a greater King than he, who is Lord of heaven and 
earth, and hell! Speak you of his riches? — we tell you of one 
who has unspeakable riches of divine grace and glory. True, she 
might gain by the journey, it was but a probability — but whoever 
comes to Christ becomes rich to all the intents of bliss! No soul 
ever trafficked with our Solomon without being at once 
enriched; if he came empty-handed, poor, feeble, naked, and 


928 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


sinful to accept from our Jesus His great salvation, he was never 
sent away empty! You who despise the gospel, who go in and 
out of the place of worship as those doors turn upon their 
hinges, take heed, lest this Queen of the South rise up in 
judgment against you to condemn you! 

II. Let us observe to this queen’s worthy commendation, 
HOW SHE CONDUCTED THE INQUIRY. 

Observe that she did it in person. She did not send an 
ambassador to go and search into the matter, but personally, 
and on her own account, she set out to see Solomon himself. 
Was it not the Duke of Wellington who, on one occasion 
rebuked one of his officers for railing against the Bible, by 
asking him if he had ever read it, and when the other frankly 
confessed he had not, showed him how base it was to find fault 
with that which he did not understand? Most persons who 
object to the religion of Christ have never investigated it! This 
I am sure of, no man has ever had an intelligent idea of the 
person of the Savior, of the graciousness of His work, whoever 
could think or speak against Him afterward. Watts is correct 
when he says — 

“His worth, if all the nations knew, 

Sure the whole world would love Him, too.” 

To know, to comprehend the character and office and 
work of Jesus Christ is the road to obtaining an earnest faith in 
Him and love towards Him; nor can I think that any man did 
ever honesdy inquire at the hand of Christ what that gracious 
mystery is that He came to teach, without receiving from Him 
a gracious smile of encouragement. Whoever will be converted, 
let him become as a litde child, and becoming as a litde child, 
and sitting at the feet of Jesus, he shall get the treatment of all 
other litde children — he shall hear the Master say, “Of such is 


929 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the kingdom of heaven.” The honest seeker after the Lord 
Jesus, who personally draws near in earnest prayer, and humble 
entreaty, shall find peace and good. 

Remember, in the next place, that the queen went first of all to 
Solomon. She went, and she went to Solomon. The way to learn 
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ is to go to Him. Some people 
want to begin at the doctrine of election, and so they stumble 
at the stumbling stone. Some must learn, first of all, where 
predestination meets free Will — and if they cannot see that, 
they turn aside with disgust. Others would remove the 
difficulties of the Pentateuch, or solve the problems of geology, 
but if they were wise, they would go at once to the Master 
Himself! I find not that she inquired of the butlers of Adoniram, 
who was over the tribute, or even of the king’s mighty men, the 
Cherethites and Pelethites, but she sought Solomon; from his 
own lips, from him immediately and directly, she will get the 
resolution of her knotty questions, and understand his wisdom. 
Go to God, poor soul, in Christ Jesus! Straightforward makes 
the best runner; there are things which will puzzle you, there 
are depths too deep for you, but go to God in Christ Jesus 
hanging upon yonder cross, reflect upon the mystery of His 
great atonement, and yield your faith up to it — and you shall, 
then, begin to understand the wisdom of our mighty Solomon. 
If you cannot comprehend all teaching, may the Spirit enable 
you to grasp His person, and that is enough! 

When she had obtained an audience with the king, observe 
what she did — “She told him all that was in her heart. ” This is the 
way to know the Lord: tell Him all that is in your heart; your 
doubts, your fears, your hardness of heart, and impenitence — 
confess the whole! That man is near to knowing Christ who 
begins to know himself, and he who will confess as much as he 
knows of his own corruption, depravity, sinfulness, necessities 
and inabilities, shall soon have a gracious answer of peace! 


930 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


Tarry not because your heart is vile, it is viler than you think it 
is — but go with it just as it is, and tell Jesus all. Are you like the 
woman with the issue of blood? I pray you tell Him all the truth, 
and He will say, “Your faith has made you whole.” Why do you 
try to hide anything from omniscience? He knows the corners 
of your heart, the deep places, and the dark places there are in 
His Hands. If you should tell Him, He will know no more! Why 
then do you hesitate? Tear off the veil from your heart, and 
then, you shall find mercy. 

Moreover, she proposed to Solomon her hard questions. I do not 
know what they were, and I do not particularly care. The Jewish 
rabbis have invented a few very stupid ones, which they say 
were her hard questions. But I know, if you come to our 
Solomon, to Christ , these will be your hard questions, “My Lord, 
how can mercy and justice kiss each other? How can God 
forgive sin and yet punish it?” Jesus will point you to His 
wounded hands and feet, He will tell you of His great 
atonement, how by a substitution, God is dreadful in His justice 
and boundless in His love. Then, you will put to Him the 
question, “How can a sinful creature be accepted in the sight 
of a holy God?” He will tell you of His righteousness, and you 
will see how, covered with the imputed righteousness of the 
Redeemer, a sinful soul is as acceptable before the Lord as 
though it had never offended! You will say to Him, “Can you 
tell me, Jesus, how it is that a weak soul with no power shall yet 
be able to fight with the devil and overcome the world, the flesh, 
and Satan?” And Jesus will answer, “My grace is sufficient for 
you; My strength shall be perfect in your weakness,” and so, all 
the knotty questions will be answered. No, if you are puzzled 
about electing love, or anything else in Scripture, if you will tell 
Him all that is in your heart, and be willing to learn from Him, 
there is no hard question which your soul can suggest, but Jesus 
Christ will answer it! 


93i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


This good woman, in pursuing her inquiry, listened carefully 
to what Solomon told her. It is said he answered all her questions. 
Oh, there is a blessed communion between Christ and a 
trembling soul! If you will tell Him all your failings, He will tell 
you all His merit; if you will tell Him your weakness, He will 
tell you all His strength; if you will tell Him your distance from 
God, He will tell you His nearness to God; if you will show 
Him how hard your heart is, He will tell you how His heart was 
broken that you might live. Be not afraid, only make a clear 
confession to Him, and trust in Him, and He will make a sweet 
revelation to you! 

When she had gone thus far, she went on to notice 
everything in connection with Solomon. The Queen of Sheba 
saw “The wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built. ” 
She did not notice the house first, you see, she went to Solomon 
first. A seeking soul goes to Christ first, tells Him her heart, 
learns the love of Jesus, and then, afterwards, sets to work to 
learn everything else about Jesus. Now, it is very pleasant to a 
seeking soul to find out the house which Christ has built — His 
glorious Church built of costly stones purchased by His own 
blood; built of great stones — great sinners made into great 
trophies of His love — made of hewn stones, stones hewn out 
of the quarry of sin, cut and shaped by His own grace to lie in 
our predestined niche forever! It is a glorious thing to 
understand Christ’s Church — to know the foundations of it — 
laid in the covenant of grace; the pinnacles of it towering to the 
highest heaven; the great Master who reigns in it, Jesus Christ, 
who is head over all things to His Church — her glorious 
windows letting in the light of God through the ordinances and 
the preaching of the Word — her doors that admit in the 
saints — her gates of brass and bars of steel shutting out the 
devils of hell, and all the thieves and robbers that would break 


932 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


in. There is enough to occupy a soul for years in understanding 
the house which Jesus has built! 

Then, she observed “the meat of his table.” “For My flesh is 
meat, indeed, and My blood is drink, indeed.” Oh, how 
ravishing to a poor soul to discover that Christ, who is our life, 
is also the staff of life — “I am that living bread. Your fathers 
did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead; he who eats of 
the bread that I shall give him, shall never hunger and shall 
never thirst.” Oh, the meat of His table! What luxuries! Men, 
indeed, did eat angels’ food, but — 

“Never did angels taste above, 

Redeeming grace and dying love.” 

What sweet food — what satisfying food — what abundant 
food — what constant provisions — what rare provisions, too! 
In the same book of Kings, you will find how many fallow deer 
and roebucks, and bushels of fine corn, and fat oxen, and birds, 
King Solomon had to put upon his table every day. But my 
Lord and Master places the infinite treasures of His own person 
upon His table every day and sends out the summons to His 
children — “All things are ready; My oxen and fadings are killed; 
come you to the supper.” Happy soul that knows concerning 
the meat of His table! 

She looked next to “the sitting of his servants. ” See how we sit 
to learn at the feet of Jesus — how we sit to commune at the 
feet of Jesus, as Mary did — no, how some of the servants today 
are sitting up yonder in glory — no, all of them are there — for He 
has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly 
places in Christ Jesus. Oh, if the soul ever comes to know what 
“sitting in heavenly places” means — what being in heaven 
means while we are on earth — then, the sitting of the servants 
will be a marvel! 


933 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


And the next were “his ministers.” Well, and Christ has 
ministers everywhere. Streams and tempests are His Servants — 
clouds and darkness are His slaves. “Remember that 
omnipotence has servants everywhere.” Think of His ministers 
that are in heaven — “He makes His angels spirits, His ministers 
a flame of fire.” And then, there are His ministers here on earth, 
who may be called His cupbearers. There are those whom He has 
called out from among men, and gifted to preach the Word, 
who take the cup of salvation in their hands and bear it to 
fainting souls, and in the name of Jesus act as His butlers, for so 
it is in the margin — like good stewards bringing out of His 
treasury things new and old. There is a near connection 
between faithful ministers and Christ, for when John saw 
Christ, He walked among the candlesticks — that is, in the 
Churches; but He had the stars in His right hand. So are His 
ministers always there, and thus, their being taught and 
acknowledged of the Lord is a subject worthy of wonder. 
Happy soul who has learned to see the beauty of Christ in His 
ministers and cupbearers! And their apparel — ah, here is a subject! 
Why, this is the apparel of all His saints — the white linen of the 
righteousness of Christ; and then, those priestly garments with 
which He girds His people, so that they, as the high priest of 
old, make music as they walk, while the sweet bells of faith, and 
the pomegranates of good works sweetly smite together, and 
give forth golden notes. “Her clothing shall be of worked gold,” 
says the sweet psalmist, when he sings of the Church. “She shall 
be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework.” Now, 
such is the apparel of every child of God, and it is little wonder 
if an inquiring soul, like the Queen of Sheba, should be made 
to marvel at it! 

There remained one thing more — the most wonderful of 
all — it was “his ascent to the house of the Lord, ” the gigantic viaduct 
from the palace to the temple. She looked at that. “Why,” she 


934 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


said, “I never thought that such a valley could be bridged, I 
never dreamed that ever two such mountains as those, so wide 
apart, could be brought so close together.” As she saw the king 
and his royal train walk along the viaduct, her soul was utterly 
astonished! I think 1 see my King’s ascent to the house of the 
Lord. There was the mountain of our fall and ruin, and yonder 
the great mountain of God’s love and a valley of divine justice 
went between. Jesus Christ has built a noble viaduct; He first 
trod it Himself, opening for us a new and living way of access 
between man and God; He Himself ascends up on high, with 
trumpets’ joyful sounds, and opens the gate of heaven to all 
believers, by thus making an ascent to the house of the Lord. 
You and I may ascend unto His holy hill, may climb to the 
seventh heaven, and sit down with Christ upon His throne, 
even as He has overcome and has sat down with the Father 
upon His throne. Oh, glorious ascent to the house of the Lord! 
I think the Septuagint version reads it, “And his thank-offerings in 
the house of the Lord. ” Well, that is the same thing, because our 
Savior’s Sacrifice is the living way by which we ascend into the 
holy hill of the Lord. If nothing else can fill one with wonder, 
we must be amazed even in eternity, to think of His matchless 
offering. He gave His body to be wrung with anguish, and His 
soul to be torn with grief — “Who, though He was rich, for our 
sakes became poor, that we through His poverty might be 
made rich.” The first-born sons of light desire in vain to know 
the depth of this love, they cannot reach the mystery, the length 
and height of this glorious ascent to the house of the Lord! 

Do note that the queen did not begin with all this. You see, 
she began with Solomon. She did not begin with the ascent to 
the house of the Lord, much less with the ministers and 
buders — she began with the king himself. Sinner, begin with 
Jesus! Let your first inquiry be, “Is there balm in Gilead? Is 
there a physician there?” Let your cry be that of the startled 


935 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


jailer, “What must I do to be saved?” Like he, obey the 
apostolic injunction, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and you 
shall be saved.” May the Holy Spirit bring you to this, and then, 
afterwards, He shall lead you into all the truths of God. He shall 
take the keys, and open room after room, and cabinet after 
cabinet, and casket after casket, till He has shown you all the 
crown jewels, and revealed to you the regalia of the King of 
kings, and let you into the secret of the heart of God in Christ 
Jesus your Lord. Only be willing, like the Queen of Sheba, to 
search; for, if not, her wisdom in her inquiry shall rise up in 
judgment against you to condemn you! 

III. And now, thirdly, let us note THE RESULT OF OUR 
INQUIRY. 

The first result was a confession of faith. “It was a true report 
that I heard in my own land, of your acts and of your wisdom.” 
She did not hold her tongue and go slinking back to Abyssinia 
without a single word of confession — but having tested and 
being convicted — she could not refuse giving her testimony to 
the truth of the rumor. Soul, if you shall come to Jesus Christ 
and try Him, when you shall have joy and peace in believing, 
you will say it was a true report. Why, I have seen hundreds and 
thousands who have given their hearts to Jesus, but I never did 
see one that said he was disappointed in it, never met with one 
who said Jesus Christ was less than He was declared to be! I 
remember when first these eyes beheld Him, when the burden 
slipped from off my heavy-laden shoulders, and I was free! 
Why, I thought this, that all the preachers I had ever heard had 
not half preached, they had not half told the beauty of my Lord 
and Master! So good! So generous! So gracious! So willing to 
forgive! It seemed to me as if they had almost slandered Him; 
they painted His likeness, doubdess, as well as they could, but 
it was a mere smudge compared with the matchless beauties of 
His face! You, who have ever seen Him, will say the same. I go 


936 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


back many a time to my home, mourning that I cannot preach 
my Master even as I, myself, know Him — and what I know of 
Him is so litde compared with the matchlessness of His grace. 
Would that I knew Him more, and that I could explain it better! 
Instead of thinking that your trust in Christ has been an 
unprofitable speculation, you will exclaim with joy, “The half 
has not been told me.” She expressed, then, her faith in 
Solomon, and oh, if you have any faith and have found Him to 
be true, out with it! Be not secret believers, but stand forward 
for your Lord and Master! 

Next, she made a confession of her unbelief “Howbeit I 
believed not the words until I came and my eyes had seen it: 
and, behold, the half was not told me: your wisdom and 
prosperity exceeds the fame which I heard.” “I did not believe 
it,” she said, “until I came and saw.” It is the way with you. We 
have to cry, “Who has believed our report?” Men will not 
readily believe our report, but when you once come and try it, 
you will think, “How could I have doubted, how could I ever 
have been unbelieving?” God forgives your unbelief, but you 
will never forgive yourselves. You will say, I think, even in 
heaven, “How could I have been so foolish as to doubt the 
message which came to me from the Most High.” Does not 
faith always lead to a sense of unbelief? And when, most of all, 
we have learned not to stagger, is it not then we discover more 
and more how vile a thing it is to doubt the Word of the Most 
High? 

Having done this, she declared that her anticipations were 
exceeded. Upon that, we will say no more, and only add that next 
she spoke a kind word for his servants — “Happy are your men, 
happy are these, your servants, which stand continually before 
you, and who hear your wisdom.” Why she thought that every 
little page in Solomon’s court was more honored than she was! 
She was a queen, but then, she was a queen of a distant land, 


937 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and so she seems to have drunk in the spirit of David when he 
said, “I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, 
than dwell in the tents of wickedness.” She seemed almost 
willing to give up Sheba and all its spices and its gold, if she 
might but be a maid of honor in the court of King Solomon! 1 
am sure that is the way with any of us who have ever been to 
Jesus. How we love His people! You are no lover of Christ if 
you do not love His children; as soon as ever the heart is given 
to the Master of the house, it is given to the children of the 
house. Love Christ and you will soon love all who love Him. 
Do you not, dear friends, esteem the people of God to be the 
excellent of the earth? Are they not all your delight? Time was, 
if they dropped into your house, you looked at the clock for 
fear they should talk too long upon religious subjects. But now, 
if they will but talk of your Master, they may stay all night if 
they like! Now, you feel it so pleasant to speak of His name, 
that if you meet a Christian, you feel a love to him — and if he 
is despised and his character is slandered, you feel you must 
stand up for him! I know some of you wish you could always 
be in God’s house; there are some children of God in this place 
who are here whenever the door is opened; they wish there 
were seven Sundays in the week that they could always sit and 
hear the name of Jesus; they delight to see His minister, and 
rejoice that sometimes the cupbearer brings forth the spiced 
wine of the Lord’s pomegranate, and bids His children drink of 
it even to the full! 

This good woman next blessed Solomon’s God in these 
beautiful words — “Blessed be the Lord your God, which 
delights in you, to set you on the throne of Israel: because the 
Lord loved Israel forever, therefore made He you king to do 
judgment and justice.” She blessed his God. So we are drawn 
to a sweet union of heart to God through a knowledge of Christ, 
and as our love flows downward from Christ to His people, so 


938 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


it goes upward from Christ to His Father. You will notice that 
she avowed her love to Him because of His everlasting love to 
His people. Notice she does not say anything about 
Abyssinia — she is thinking about Israel, about the chosen — 
she sees distinguishing, discriminating, electing love — and she 
perceives the everlastingness of this love — “Because He loved 
Israel forever, therefore, He has made you king.” O brothers and 
sisters, may we so grow in divine grace that we may love the 
Father because He has made Christ to be the anointed — 
because He loved His Church and gave His Son for it, that He 
might cleanse it from all sin by His own precious blood! 

Once more, she then did what was the best proof of her 
truthfulness, she gave to Solomon of her treasures — “She gave the 
king 120 talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and 
precious stones: there came no more such abundance of spices 
as these which the Queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.” 
And so souls that know the beauty of Christ give Him all they 
have! There are no such spices as those which come from 
newly-converted souls. Nothing gives Christ greater delight 
than the love of His people. We think our love to be a very 
poor and common thing, but He does not think so — He has 
set such a store by us that He gave His heart’s blood to redeem 
us, and now, He looks upon us as being worth the price He 
paid. He will never think that He had a bad bargain of it, and 
so He looks upon every grain of our love as being even choicer 
spices than archangels before the throne can render to Him in 
their songs! What are we doing for Christ? Are we bringing 
Him our talents of gold? Perhaps you have not 120, but if you 
have one, bring that! You have not very much spices, but bring 
what you have — your silent, earnest prayers, your holy, 
consistent life, the words you sometimes speak for Christ, the 
training up of your children, the feeding of His poor, the 
clothing of the naked, the visitation of the sick, and those in 


939 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


prison, the comforting of mourners, the winning of His 
wanderers, the restoring of His backsliders, the saving of His 
blood-bought souls — all these shall be like camels laden with 
spices — an acceptable gift to the Most High! 

When she had done this, Solomon made her a present of his royal 
bounty. She lost nothing. She gave all she had, and then Solomon 
gave her quite as much again, for I will be bound to say King 
Solomon would not be outdone in generosity, such a noble- 
hearted prince as he and so rich! I tell you, Jesus Christ will 
never be in your debt. Oh, it is a great gain to give to Christ; we 
give Him pence and He gives us pounds; we give Him years of 
labor, and He gives us an eternity of rest; we give Him days of 
patient endurance, and He gives us ages of joyous honor; we 
give Him a little suffering, and He gives us great rewards. “I 
reckon that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to 
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.” 
Besides what He gives us in the covenant of grace, you note, 
He does for us what Solomon did for her, He gives us all that is 
in our heart, all that we can desire! What a King is our Savior 
who will not let His people have one ungratified wish, if that 
wish is a good one! Knock and the gate shall open! “Open your 
mouth wide and I will fill it,” says the Lord. “According to your 
faith so be it done unto you.” “Whatever you ask in prayer 
believe that you have it, and you shall have it.” What precious 
promises! And all these are given to those who come with a 
humble inquiry, willing to get Christ first and then to get the 
rest afterward. 

Well, beloved, we are told that this Queen went home to her 
nation, and tradition says that she was the means of proselytising 
the Abyssinian people. I do not know whether that was true or 
not. It is remarkable that in the apostles’ days, there should 
have been a eunuch, a man of great authority under Candace, 
Queen of Ethiopia. It looks as if there may have lingered 


940 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


533 The Queen of the South - Matt. 

12:42 


something of the divine light in this woman’s dominions right 
on to the day of the Savior, so that there was found another 
queen there at that time, and another noble personage who 
would come all that distance to Jerusalem to worship. Well, 
whether she did or not, 1 know what you ought to do! If you 
have come to King Solomon, and searched and found for 
yourselves, go and spread the fame of it; talk about Him 
everywhere! It was the fame of Him that first brought you — 
grow that fame and others will come! Talk of Him when you 
stay in your house, and when you go by the way, when you sit 
down, and when you rise up; count no place to be an unfit place 
to talk of Jesus; bear Him in your bosom in your business; carry 
Him in your heart in your pleasures; wear His name as a frontlet 
between your eyes, and write it on the doorposts of your 
house — for He is worthy for whom you shall do this! His name 
shall be remembered as long as the sun and men shall be 
blessed in Him — yes, all men shall call Him blessed, all kings 
shall fall down before Him; the kings of Sheba and Seba shall 
offer gifts, the whole earth shall be filled with His glory. Amen 
and amen! The prayers of David, the son of Jesse, were ended; 
and so shall ours be, too, when that consummation shall have 
really taken place. 


941 



534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1 : 19-23 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, October 11th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“The exceeding greatness of His power toward us who 
believe, according to the working of His mighty power, which 
He worked in Christ when He raised Him from the dead and 
seated Him at His own right hand in the heavenly places, far 
above all principality and power and might and dominion, and 
every name that is named, not only in this age but also in that 
which is to come. And He put all things under His feet, and 
gave Him to be the head over all things to the church, which is 
His body, the fullness of Him who fills all-in-all.” - Ephesians 
1 : 19-23 

To BELIEVE on the Lord Jesus Christ with all our heart is 
one of the simplest things imaginable. To trust Christ, to 
depend upon His power and faithfulness, is such a childlike act 
that one sees no extraordinary difficulty in it. Yet, to bring the 
human mind to exercise simple faith in Jesus is a work of the 
most astounding power! To bring down the pride of man, to 
subjugate his will, and to captivate his passions so that he shall 
cheerfully accept that which God presents to him in the person 
of Christ Jesus, is a labor worthy of God! How strangely vile 
are they who cannot be brought to know their own mercies, 
except by an omnipotent power! The blessed Spirit of God is 
always the secret Author of faith; it is not of us, it is the gift of 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


God. Our text twice over uses the strongest words which could 
be employed to set forth the Almighty power exhibited in 
bringing a soul to believe injesus, and in bringing that believing 
soul onward till it ascends to heaven. You will carefully notice 
we have first of all this expression, “The exceeding greatness 
of His power,” and then we have on the other side of the word 
“Believe,” lest it should escape from the sacred barrier, these 
words, “According to the working of His mighty power.” Now, 
the first expression is a very amazing one. It might be read 
thus — “The superexcellent, sublime, overcoming, or 
triumphing greatness of His power.” And the other is even 
more singular — it is a Hebrew mode of speech forced to do 
duty in the Greek tongue — “The effectual working of the 
might of His strength,” or, “The energy of the force of His 
power,” or some such strong expression as that. As if the 
aposde was not content to say, “You believe through the power 
of God,” nor “through the greatness of that power,” but 
“through the exceeding greatness of His power.” And not 
satisfied with declaring that the salvation of man is the fruit of 
God’s might, he puts it, His mighty power — no, as if that were 
not enough, he writes the energy, the efficacious activity of the 
power of that might. No amount of straining at the passage can 
ever get rid of the grand doctrine which it contains, namely, 
that the bringing of a soul to simple faith in Jesus and the 
maintenance of that soul in the life of faith displays an exercise 
of omnipotence such as God alone could put forth. 

Nor need we, dear friends, be at all surprised at this, when 
we recollect what the work of salvation really is. Be it never 
forgotten by us that the salvation of a soul is a creation. Now, no 
man has ever been able to create a fly, nor even a single 
molecule of matter. Man knows how to fashion created 
substance into many forms; but to create the minutest atom is 
utterly beyond his might. Jehovah alone creates. “All things 


943 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


were created by Him and for Him.” No human or angelic 
power can intrude upon this glorious province of divine power. 
Creation is God’s own domain! Now, in every Christian there 
is an absolute creation — “Created anew in Christ Jesus.” “The 
new man, after God, is created in righteousness.” “regeneration 
is not the reforming of principles which were there before, but 
the implantation of a something which had no existence; it is 
the putting into a man a new thing called the spirit, the new 
man — the creation not of a soul, but of a principle still 
higher — as much higher than the soul as the soul is higher than 
the body. Since the life and principle created are the most 
glorious of all God’s works, being in fact a part of the divine 
nature itself, I may say most boldly that in the bringing of any 
man to believe in Christ, there is as true and proper a 
manifestation of creating power, as when God made the 
heavens and the earth! 

Further than this, there is more than creation — there is 
destruction. No man can destroy anything. Since the world began, 
not a single particle of matter has ever been annihilated. You 
may cast matter into the depths of the sea, but there it is; it still 
exists. Cast it into the fire and the fire consumes it — but either 
in the ash or in the smoke, every atom survives. Fire does not 
destroy a single particle. There is as much matter in the world 
now as when God first spoke it out of nothing. It is as great an 
exercise of divinity to destroy as it is to create — 

“Know that the Lord is God alone — 

He can create and He can destroy.” 

In the regeneration of every soul there is destruction as well 
as creation. The old man has to be destroyed — the stony heart 
has to be taken away out of our flesh; and though this is not 
done in all of us — no, nor in any of us completely — yet the 


944 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


day shall come when sin shall be utterly destroyed — both root 
and branch, and all evil principles shall be torn up by the roots 
and, like our sins, they shall cease to be — so that if they were 
searched for, they could not be found. When the morning stars 
sang together because a world was made, creation was their one 
theme. God made the world out of nothing. That was an easy 
task compared with making a new heart and a right spirit, for 
“nothing” at least could not oppose God — “nothing” could 
not stand out against Him; but here, in salvation, God had to 
deal with an opposing something which He has to fight with 
and to destroy; and when that has been reduced and overcome, 
then comes in the creating power by which we are made new 
creatures in Christ Jesus. So that it is a double t/iiracle, something 
more than creation — it is creation and destruction combined! 

The work of salvation is most truly a transformation. “Be you 
transformed by the renewing of your mind.” You who have 
been made anew in Christ Jesus know in your own hearts how 
great that transformation is. The wolf, with all its bloodthirsty 
tendencies, feeds quietly with all the amiable gentleness of the 
lamb; the lion eats straw like the ox; the desert becomes a 
garden, and the dry land springs water. What is more wonderful 
still, stones of the brook become children unto Abraham. The 
Lord takes the man who is like the leopard — covered with 
spots — and cleanses him till he is whiter than snow; He takes 
the Ethiopian, black as night, and does but touch him with the 
matchless blood of Jesus, and he becomes all together fair and 
lovely. None of the fanciful transformations of which Ovid 
sang of old, could ever rival the matchless work of God when 
He displays His power upon the human mind! Oh, what a 
difference between a sinner and a saint, between “dead in 
trespasses and sins,” and quickened by divine grace! If God 
should speak to Niagara and bid its floods in their tremendous 
leap suddenly stand still — that were a trifling demonstration of 


945 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


power compared with the staying of a desperate human will! If 
He should suddenly speak to the broad Atlantic and bid it be 
wrapped in flames, we should not even, then, see such a 
manifestation of His greatness as when He commands the 
human heart, and makes it submissive to His love! 

Remember, too, as if this were not enough, that the 
conversion of a soul is constantly compared to quickening — the 
quickening of the dead. How great the miracle when the dry 
bones in Ezekiel’s vision suddenly became a great army! 
Greater still is the transcendent work of night when dead souls 
are quickened and made to serve the living God! Indeed it is 
not only the first act of conversion which displays divine 
power — but the whole of the Christian’s life, until he comes to 
perfection — is a clear display of the same. The spiritual life may 
be likened unto the burning bush which Moses saw in Horeb; it 
burnt, but it was not consumed. Such is the Christian — like a 
bush, he is most fitting fuel for the flame; yet the flame does 
not hurt him. It kindles about him, but he is not destroyed. Or 
the Christian life may be likened to walking upon water. As Peter 
trod the waves and did not sink as long as his faith looked to 
Jesus, so the believer, every day, in every footstep that he takes 
is a living miracle. Faith, too, in its life may be compared to 
flying — “They shall mount up on wings as eagles.” “I bear you 
as upon eagles’ wings.” The believer every day takes 
venturesome flights into the atmosphere of heaven, rises above 
the world, leaves its cares and its needs beneath his feet, and 
that, too, with no other wings but those of faith and love! 
Herein is a continued and splendid miracle of the divine power. 

But, to come to our text — laying it down, then, as being 
most certain that the work of the conversion and sanctification 
of a believer is an amazing display of divine might — we have in 
the text given to us a most singular analogy. The apostle 
declares to us by the Holy Spirit that the very same power 


946 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


which raised Jesus Christ from the dead, and exalted Him to 
the highest heaven is seen in the conversion and preservation 
of every individual believer! Now, we shall first notice the analog; 
secondly, we shall consider the reason of it; and thirdly, we shall 
observe the inferences which come from it. 

I. First of all, we shall consider THE ANALOGY WHICH 
THE APOSTLE HERE POINTS OUT. 

Imagine that you hold a great pair of golden compasses. 
You are to put one foot of the compass here upon the grave of 
Christ. You are to open those compasses till you reach Christ 
ascending up into heaven. Widen them again and again and 
again, till you put down the other foot of the compass where 
Christ is head over all things to the Church, which is His 
fullness. Now, can you imagine such a stretch as that? You have 
to conceive of the power by which the dead body of Christ is 
brought to all that pre-eminence of honor — and then to 
remember that just such power is seen in you if you are a 
believer! 

In examining the wonderful picture before us, we begin 
with Christ in the grave, by noticing that it was in Christ’s case 
a real death. Those loving hands have taken Him down from the 
Cross; those weeping eyes have let fall hallowed drops upon 
His face. Tenderly have the women wrapped Him about with 
spices and fine linen, and now He is about to be put into the 
tomb. He is assuredly dead. The pericardium of the heart has 
been pierced; blood and water have both freely flowed. Lift up 
the pierced hand and it falls at once to His side. The lids of 
yonder eyes, so red with weeping, do but cover eyes glazed with 
death. The foot has no power of motion. Take up the corpse, 
you loving bearers, carry it, and put it into the tomb — this is no 
trance, but a most certain death. So is it with us; by nature we 
are really dead. We were dead in trespasses and sins. Try to stir 
the natural man to spiritual action, and you cannot do it. Lift 


947 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


up his hand to good works; he has no power to perform them. 
Try to make his feet run in the ways of righteousness; they will 
not move an inch. The fact is that the heart is dead. The living 
pulse of spiritual life which was in our parent Adam has long 
ago ceased! Neither can the eyes perceive any beauty in 
Immanuel, nor can the nose discover the fragrance of the 
Lord’s sweet spices, nor can the ear hear the voice of the 
beloved. The man is absolutely and entirely dead as to anything 
like spiritual life! There he lies in the grave of his corruption, 
and must lay there, and rot, too, unless divine grace shall 
interpose. 

In Christ’s case, He was not only dead, but as the text tells 
us, He was among the dead. “He has raised up Jesus Christ from 
the dead. ” Notice that. He lay for some time sleeping among 
those who dwelt in the tomb — among the dead. Three days and 
nights He is a denizen of the lonely shades; He was numbered 
among the victims of death’s dart. “He made His grave with 
the wicked and with the rich in His death.” Such were some of 
us — we were among the dead — and “were by nature the 
children of wrath,” even as others. In the case of some of us, 
our outward life was just that of other ungodly men. Were they 
drunkards? So were we. Were they immoral? So were we. Did 
they take delight in the flesh? So did we. Did they follow the 
desires of the mind? So did we. Were they hard-hearted, and 
impenitent, and unbelieving? So were we. Whatever may be 
said of any ungodly man, may be said of at least some of those 
whom God has quickened by His divine power! We, like Jesus, 
were reckoned among the dead. If you had seen His corpse, 
you would have discovered no difference between it and the 
body of another, save only that He saw no corruption. Dear 
brothers and sisters, in this our case is lower than that of our 
Lord, for we did see corruption; the old man is “corrupt 
according to the deceitful lusts.” Yes, more, we were “children 


948 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


who are corrupters,” and in nothing did we differ from others, 
save that the Lord had predestinated that no bands of death 
should hold us forever, for He was determined to save and to 
bring us to His right hand! 

Come with me again to the new tomb in the garden. Will 
that sleeper ever rise? Will that hallowed tomb ever be burst? 
No, never while time and eternity shall last, unless God shall 
interfere! Here comes a heavenly messenger; his face is like 
lightning, and his raiment white as snow — and for fear of him 
the keepers do quake, and become as dead men! So, when the 
time comes, in God’s great power, He sends His messenger — 
it is no angelic spirit whose face is like lightning but it is some 
humble minister of Christ, who, nevertheless, is clothed with 
power; he has in his mouth a sharp two-edged sword, and when 
he speaks of Christ, for fear of Him sins tremble, and the 
prejudices and enmities of men’s hearts become as dead men! 
The divine power is seen all the more in the fact that the 
messenger in the second case is an earthen vessel, a poor 
creature of flesh and blood. There is a divine mandate for our 
resurrection, as much as for that of Jesus Christ! 

There came with that messenger a mysterious life. You 
cannot see it, but inside that tomb a Spirit has fallen upon those 
once bleeding limbs, and entered that lifeless corpse; the eyes 
shall soon see the light, for the hands are already unwinding the 
napkin from the brow; the grave cloths are unbound, one by 
one; the feet are free, and the whole frame is clear of every 
encumbrance! No one saw the life come back. If anyone had 
watched that corpse, they could not have seen the vital spark 
of heavenly flame return to its proper altar. No, it was a 
mysterious thing. Ah, there was a time with us when the 
messenger of God came, but he could not quicken us; he could 
only make the keepers shake and tremble! But a mysterious life 
from God the Holy Spirit fell into our souls, and we were as 


949 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


we never were before! We trembled with a new fear, rejoiced 
with a new joy, believed with a fresh confidence, and hoped 
with a divine hope. We lived! And oh, can we ever forget the 
moment when first we began to live unto God? Divine Spirit, 
You did it. Let all the glory be unto Your name. 

Then came an earthquake, by which the stone was rolled 
away, showing that the power put forth was enough to shake 
the earth, and to make all the elements obedient. Surely when 
God shakes but common dust and clay, and rock and stone, we 
wonder, and men stand in awe; but when he rends the harder 
marble of our hearts, and moves the grosser cast and heavier 
earth of our spirits, there is reason to praise and bless His name! 

The stone being removed, the Savior came forth. He was free; 
raised up no more to die; He stood erect, beheld by His followers, 
who, alas, did not know Him! And even so we, when the divine 
life has come, and the divine energy has burst our tomb, come 
forth to a new life — no more to die! Then men of the world 
know us not, because they knew Him not; they misunderstand 
our motives, they misrepresent our actions, they contort our 
words — because now we have a life of which they are not the 
subjects, and have come into a resurrection-state to which they 
are utter strangers! 

You see the parallel holds. We, too, in the same manner as 
Christ was raised from the dead, have been made to live in 
newness of life, even as the Master Himself said, “As the Father 
raises up the dead, and quickens them; even so the Son 
quickens whom He wills.” 

Please note here, dearly beloved friends that in the 
resurrection of Christ, as in our salvation, there was put forth 
nothing short of a divine power. It was not angelic or arch- angelic, 
much less was it human. What shall we say of those who think 
that conversion is worked by the free will of man? Who ascribe 
man’s salvation to his own goodness of disposition, or to his 


950 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


willingness to accept that which God presents to him? Beloved, 
when we shall see the dead in the graves rise by their own 
power, then expect to see ungodly sinners turn to Christ! It is 
not the ministry, it is not the Word preached, nor the Word 
heard in itself; all the power proceeds from the Holy Spirit! 

Observe again, that this power was irresistible. All the 
soldiers and the high priests could not keep the body of Christ 
in the tomb! Death could not hold Christ in his bonds. When 
the life-pangs first began to move in Jesus, He could no longer 
be held by death; then was death swallowed up in victory! The 
Father brought forth His begotten Son, and said, “Let all the 
angels of God worship Him.” He was the first begotten from 
the dead! Irresistible is the power put forth, too, in the Christian. 
No sin, no corruption, no temptation, no devils in hell, nor 
sinners upon earth can ever stop the hand of God’s grace when 
it intends to convert a man! If God says, “You shall,” man shall 
not say, “I will not,” or, if he does, as the trees of the forests 
before the hurricane are torn up by the roots, so shall the 
human will give place to the irresistible power of divine grace! 

Observe, too, that the power which raised Christ from the 
dead was glorious. It reflected great honor upon God and 
brought great dismay upon the hosts of evil. So there is great 
glory to God in the conversion of every sinner! 

Lasdy, it was everlasting power. “Christ being raised from the 
dead dies no more; death has no more dominion over Him.” 
So we, being raised from the dead, go not back to our dead 
works nor to our old corruptions, but we live unto God. 
Because He lives, we live also, for we are dead and our life is 
hid with Christ in God. The parallel will hold in every point, 
however minute; “Like as Christ was raised up from the dead 
by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in 
newness of life.” 


95i 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


You see I have not stretched the compasses half-way yet. 
We have only proceeded as far as to see Christ raised from the 
dead; but the power exhibited in the Christian goes farther than 
this — it goes onward to the ASCENSION. If you will carefully 
read the story of the ascension, you will notice first that Christ’s 
ascension was contrary to nature. How could the body of a man 
without any means be borne upward into the air? “While He 
blessed them He was taken out of their sight.” So the 
Christian’s rising above the world, his breathing another 
atmosphere, is contrary to nature. How would you marvel if 
you saw a man suddenly rise up into the sky? Wonder more 
when you see a Christian rise above temptation, worldliness, 
and sin; when you discover him forsaking those things which 
once were his delight, and mounting towards heaven! 

You will observe again, that the disciples could not long see the 
rising Savior. “A cloud received Him out of their sight.” So in 
our case, too, if we rise as we should rise, if the Spirit of God 
works in us all the good pleasure of His Will, men will soon 
lose sight of us. They will not understand us; they will be certain 
to run here and there, wondering at this, and marveling at that; 
they will call us mad, fanatical, wild, enthusiastic, and I know 
not what else! And we, on our part, must not wonder at it, for 
now we look down and wonder at them as much as they 
wonder at us! They think it strange that we should be looking 
for unseen things, and hoping for that which we see not; we, 
on the other hand, look down upon them, and wonder how it 
is that they can heap together things of clay, and find a living 
joy in dying things, and fix eternal hopes on shadows that are 
soon — so soon — to melt away forever! 

Jesus Christ continued to ascend by that same divine power, 
until He had reached the seat of heaven above; He was gone, 
really gone from earth altogether. Such is the Christian’s life. 
He continues to ascend — the Lord makes him dead to the 


952 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


world, and the carnal multitudes know him no more. Where his 
treasure is, his heart is also. He is risen with Christ, and his 
affection is set on things above, not on things on the earth. 

See, beloved, we have stretched our compass somewhat 
wide now, when we say that there is as much divine power seen 
in raising the Christian above the world, as in raising Christ 
from the grave into heaven. But that is not all. When the Master 
had come to heaven, we are told in the text that He was made 
to sit down at the right hand of God. Sitting at the right hand implies 
honor, pleasure, and power. Conceive the change! “He was 
despised and rejected of men; a man of Sorrows, and 
acquainted with grief.” They spat in His face, and bowed the 
knee, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews.” He has sat down at the 
right hand of the Majesty on High! He was full of misery — “My 
soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even unto death,” He said. The 
plowers made deep furrows upon His back, and His visage was 
more marred than that of any man. But now His joy is full; He 
is at the right hand of God, where there are pleasures 
forevermore! He was a worm and no man — the despised of the 
people. “All they who see Me laugh Me to scorn.” They shake 
their heads; they thrust out their lips, saying, “He trusted in 
God that He would deliver Him; let Him deliver Him, seeing 
He delights in Him.” But see Him now! He has sat down 
forever at the right hand of God, even the Father! Note the 
change from depths of reproach to heights of glory; from 
fearful deeps of sorrow to glorious summits of bliss; from 
weakness, shame, and suffering, to strength, and majesty, and 
dominion, and glory! Such is the change in the Christian — just 
such a change. You, too, what were you? Were you worthy to 
have been cast upon a dunghill? No, scarcely fit for that; you 
were like salt which had lost its savor, neither fit for the land 
nor yet for the dunghill, and God and man might have cast you 
out; you were utterly worthless and fit for nothing! As for 


953 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


suffering, ah, how were your bones broken by convictions of 
sin! The sorrows of death compassed you, and the pains of hell 
get hold upon you, for the arrows of God stuck fast in your 
loins, and the sword of God pierced to the dividing asunder of 
your soul and spirit. As for power, what power had you? You 
could not lift a finger! You could not pray! You could not 
believe! And yet, where are you now? Why, if you know where 
you are, you are this day as a believer sitting down at the right 
hand of God — God’s beloved one, ministered unto of 
angels — God’s son, endowed with power, and made to sit and 
reign together with the Lord Jesus Christ! All that sitting at the 
right hand of God can mean in respect to the man Christ Jesus, 
it means in respect to every believer! For the aposfie Paul, in 
Hebrews, writes concerning man in Christ Jesus, “What is man, 
that You are mindful of him? Or the son of man, that You visit 
him? You made him a little lower than the angels; You crowned 
him with glory and honor, and did set him over the works of 
Your hands; You have put all things in subjection under his 
feet. For in that He put all in subjection under him, He left 
nothing that is not put under him. But now we see not yet all 
things put under him. But we see Jesus, who was made a litde 
lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with 
glory and honor.” At the right hand of God is the believer’s 
place at this very day! May an act of faith give you a sweet 
enjoyment of it! 

But note next, that Christ was not only put at God’s right 
hand, but He had a complete triumph given — far above all 
principalities and powers, that neither good angels have eminence 
compared with Him, nor evil angels any power in contrast with 
Him. It is not only said that He was above them, but far above 
them. And so is the believer. As for evil angels, the Lord shall 
tread Satan under your feet shortly; as for holy angels, “Are 
they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them 


954 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


who shall be heirs of salvation?” So that we, in the person of 
our Lord, are far above all principalities and powers! 

You will not fail to observe that man has also universal 
dominion, Follow the passage — “And has put all things under His 
feet. ’’And so has the Lord put all things under His people’s feet. 
Their sins and corruptions, their sorrows and afflictions, this 
world and the world to come, are all made subject unto us, 
when He makes us kings and priests, that we may reign forever! 
No, as if this were not enough, Christ is then honored with a 
gracious headship. He is made to be head over all things to His 
Church, and He is made the fullness of that Church, for, “He 
fills all-in-all.” But, as if the believer must be made like his Lord 
even here, observe that if Christ fills all-in-all, the Church is His 
fullness. In Christ, the Church is the head of the universe under 
God. For You have made him a little lower than the angels, and 
have crowned him with glory and honor. You made him to 
have dominion over the works of Your hands; You have put 
all things under his feet: all sheep and oxen, yes, and the beasts 
of the field; the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and 
whatever passes through the paths of the sea. 

I do not know whether I have brought forth the parallel 
completely. If you view our Lord as descending in His agony 
ever so deep, and then behold Him in His glory ever so high; if 
by combining judgment and imagination, hope and fear, you 
can get some glimmering of a thought of how low the Savior 
went, and how loftily He climbed, then you may transfer that 
to your own state — the same power is at work today, has been 
at work, and will be at work in you — to lift you up from equal 
depths to equal heights, that in all things you may be like unto 
Christ; and having been like He is, numbered with the 
transgressors, you may like He obtain the lot and the heritage 
to reign forever and ever at the right hand of the Majesty in the 
heavens! 


955 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


I cannot speak on such a topic as this — it overpowers me; 
it is by far too grand for my limited gifts of utterance, but I trust 
not too great for human delight. We can delight in it, and suck 
honey, marrow, and fatness from it. 

II. Now we must note, in the second place, THE REASON 
OF THIS. 

Why does God put forth as much power towards every 
Christian as He did in His beloved Son? Well, my brothers and 
sisters, I believe the reason is not only that the same power was 
required, and that by this means He gets great glory, but the 
reason is this — union. It lays in the word — union. There must 
be the same divine power in the member that there is in the 
head, or else where is the union? If we are one with Christ, 
members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones, there 
must be a likeness. Note, first, that there cannot be a body at all — 
I mean not a true living body — unless the members are of the 
same nature as the head. If you could conceive a human head 
joined to bestial limbs, you would at once understand that you 
were not looking upon a natural body. If here were a dog’s foot, 
and there a lion’s mane, and yet a man’s eyes, and a human 
brow, you could never conceive of it as a body of God’s 
creation. You would look upon it as a strange monstrosity, a 
thing to be put out of sight, or to be shown for fools to gaze at 
as a nine-day wonder; but certainly not as a thing to display 
divine wisdom and power! Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, you 
remember, had an image of which the “head was of fine gold, 
his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, 
his legs of iron, his feet part of iron, and part of clay.” Do you 
think that the person of Christ is to be so odd a medley? Our 
head, we know, is like much fine gold. Thanks be unto God, 
we are well persuaded that a body of God’s making will be of 
the same material all the way through! He will not have, I say, 
a perfecdy glorious head allied to members in which the divine 


956 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


energy has never been seen. The same power which sparkles 
about the head must shine in the members, or else it cannot be 
a body constituted according to the analogy of nature, or 
according to the usual methods of the divine Worker. 

This is not the most forcible mode of putting it. Let us 
notice that if all the members were not like the head, and did 
not display the same power, it would not be glorious to God. Some 
of the old tapestries were made at different times and in 
different pieces, and occasionally the remark is heard, “That 
part of the batde-scene must have been worked by a different 
needle from the other. You can see here abundance, and there 
a deficiency of skill; that corner of the picture has been 
executed by a far inferior hand.” Now, suppose in this great 
tapestry which God is working — the great needlework of His 
love and power — the mystical person of Christ — that we 
should say, “The head has been worked, we can see, by a divine 
hand; that glorious brow, those fire-darting eyes, those honey- 
dropping lips are of God, but that hand is by another and an 
inferior artist, and that foot is far from perfect in workmanship.” 
Why, it would not be glorious to our great artist; but when the 
whole picture is by Him, we see that He did not begin what He 
could not finish, and that He had not inserted a single thread 
of inferior value! 

Note again, that it would not be glorious to our head. I saw the 
other day a cathedral window in the process of being filled with 
the richest stained glass. I think the great person of Christ may 
be compared to that great cathedral window. The artists had 
put in the head of the chief figure in the most beautiful glass 
that ever human skill could make, or human gold could 
purchase; I have not seen it since, but imagine for an instant 
that the workers afterward found that their money failed them, 
and they were obliged to fill in the panes with common glass. 
There is the window, there is nothing but a head in noble colors, 


957 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and the rest is, perhaps, white glass, or some poor ordinary blue 
and yellow. It is never finished. What an unhappy thing, for 
who will care to see the head? It has lost its fullness. There is 
the head, but it is strangely circumstanced. If you complete it 
with anything inferior, you mar and spoil it; it is the head of an 
imperfect piece of workmanship. But, dear friends, when all the 
rest of the picture shall have been worked out with just the 
same cosdy material as the first part, then the head itself shall 
be placed in a worthy position, and shall derive glory as well as 
confer glory upon the body! You can read this parable without 
an interpreter. 

I must add that if anything, the power manifested in the 
member should be greater than that manifested in the head — 
if anything, it should be greater. A marble palace is to be built. Well, 
now, if they build (and oh, how many people do this kind of 
thing in their houses) the front with cosdy stone, and then erect 
the back with common stock bricks; if the pinnacles are made 
to soar with rich Carrara to the skies, and then down in the 
walls common stone is seen, everybody says, “This was done 
to save money.” But if the whole structure throughout, from 
top to bottom, is of the same kind, then it reflects much honor 
upon the great builder, and declares the wealth which he was 
able to expend upon the structure. But suppose that some of 
the blocks of marble used in the foundation have lain in a very 
dark quarry, and have been subject to damaging influences, so 
that they have lost their gloss and polish — then surely they will 
need more polishing — more workmanship to make them look 
like that bright cornerstone, that noble pinnacle which is 
brought out with shouts. Christ Jesus was in His nature fit, 
without any preparing, to be a part of the great temple of God. 
We in our nature were unfit, and so, if anything, the power 
should be greater; but we are compelled to rejoice that we find 
in Scripture that it is just the same power which lifted the man 


958 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


Christ Jesus to the throne of God, which now shall lift each 
one of us to live and reign with Him! 

Moreover, to conclude this point, the loving promise of 
our Lord never be fulfilled (and He will never be contented 
unless it is), unless His people do have the same power spent 
upon them as He has. What is His prayer? “I will that they also, 
whom You have given Me, be with Me where I am; that they 
may behold My glory.” And then He adds, “The glory which 
You gave Me I have given them.” You know how the union 
stands — “1 in them, and You in Me.” We must be like our head! 
Is He crowned — we must be crowned, too. He is a good 
Husband; He will enjoy nothing without His Spouse. When she 
was poor, He became poor for her sake; when she was despised, 
He was spit upon, too; and now that He is in heaven, He must 
have her there! If He sits on a throne, she must have a throne, 
too; if He has fullness of joy, and honor, and glory forever — 
then so must she! He will not be in heaven, and leave her 
behind; and He will not enjoy a single privilege of heaven 
without her being a sharer with Him! For all these reasons, then, 
you see it is clear why there should be the same power in the 
believer as there was in Christ. 

III. Well, WHAT ARE THE INFERENCES FROM ALL THIS? 
Two or three — they will only be hinted at, so do not grow 
weary. 

The first inference is this — what a marvelous thing a Christian 
is! I am a marvelous person if I am a believer in Christ. I am by 
doubting and fearing led to look down upon myself as 
despicable — but when I reflect that the Eternal has put His 
engraving tool upon me — no, that He has exerted the whole of 
His omnipotence in me, and will continue to exert it till He 
brings me to Himself — Lord, what is man? How strangely 
honored! How near have You brought him to Yourself, so that 
now there is no creature between God and man! God first — 


959 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


man as a creature far distant, but yet second — as an adopted 
and regenerated being, brought as near to God as a son is 
brought to a father! And who shall tell how near this may be? 
Lord, what a mighty thing can Your grace make out of that 
poor crawling worm called man! How have You exalted him, 
and made him to be higher even than principalities and powers! 
Let us love and bless God who has done this much for us! 

Then, secondly, why should I doubt God’s power for others? If 
God has put forth so much power to save me, cannot He save 
anyone? The might which brought Christ from the dead, and 
took Him to heaven is such a tremendous power that it surely 
can bring the drunkard, the harlot, the blasphemer to Christ! 
Let me pray, then, for the chief of sinners; let me encourage the 
vilest of the vile to believe in Jesus, for there is ability in Christ 
to save just such! 

Again, why should I ever have any doubts about my ultimate security? 
Is this irresistible power engaged to save me? Then I must be 
saved! Does the devil vow that he will destroy me? Do my 
corruptions threaten to overwhelm me? Who can stay 
Omnipotence? Who shall come into the struggle with the Most 
High, or match himself with the Eternal? Aha! Aha! You 
enemies of my soul, I laugh you to scorn! If God is with us, 
who can be against us? 

And lasdy, how doleful the state of those who are not converted. See 
where you lie — so dead, so helpless, so ruined, so undone — 
needing nothing less than this eternal power to save you from 
the wrath to come! Ah, indeed I know this to be the case with 
many present here. Our preaching does you very litde good. 
You come here in the morning, and I know what you do in the 
afternoon. You would not be absent from listening to the 
morning’s sermon, nor would you be absent from the evening’s 
pleasure! And when the Bible and the hymnbook have been put 
up, the newspaper will take their place. There are some who sit 


960 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


534 The Mighty Power Which Creates 
and Sustains Faith - Eph. 1:19-23 


under our earnest appeals (and thank God they are earnest, and 
often prevalent), and yet they are as unmoved as slabs of marble 
when oil runs down them! You are in a state of death and ruin! 
I see no human power that can help you — in vain the minister, 
in vain the preaching; your damnation is sure, you will go down 
to hell and perish, and that without mercy. Yet gladly would I 
hope that God would have pity upon you! Still Christ is lifted 
up and, “whoever believes in Him shall not perish, but have 
everlasting life.” If you can now believe in Christ, the mighty 
power of God is working in you! Trust Him now, and you give 
the best evidence that Jesus’ irresistible power has been 
displayed upon you, as it was upon the person of the King of 
kings! The Lord bless you with His mercy, for Christ’s sake. 
Amen. 


961 



535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - 1 Kings 20 : 31-34 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Evening, October 11th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“And his servants said unto him, Behold now, we have 
heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings: 
let us, I pray you, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon 
our heads, and go out to the king of Israel: perhaps he will save 
your life. So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes 
on their heads, and came to the king of Israel and said, your 
servant Ben-hadad says, I pray you, let me live. And he said, is 
he yet alive? He is my brother. Now the men did diligendy 
observe whether anything would come from him, and did 
hastily catch it: and they said, your brother Ben-hadad. Then 
he said, go you, bring him. Then Ben-hadad came forth to him; 
and he caused him to come up into the chariot. And Ben-hadad 
said unto him, the cities, which my father took from your father, 

I will restore; and you shall make streets for you in Damascus, 
as my father made in Samaria. Then said Ahab, I will send you 
away with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him, and 
sent him away.” - I Kings 20:31-34 

ALTHOUGH the manners and customs of warfare were 
exceedingly rough and cruel in those primitive ages, yet, it 
appears that the kings of Israel gained a name for being 
merciful. I do not find recorded in Scripture any particularly 
merciful acts of theirs, and I should conclude that the kings of 
other countries must have been very ferocious, if the kings of 
Israel were at all merciful. Ancient records and memorial slabs 
record tortures so horrible that you could not listen — if I were 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


to describe them — although they were the common barbarities 
with which Assyrian and Babylonian victors concluded their 
wars. It seems that the kings of the house of Israel did not go 
to the lengths of savage cruelty usual among their neighbors. 
Upon which we are led to remark that, where the true worship 
of God does not make men what they should be, yet, it betters 
them in some respects. The kings of Israel were all idolaters, 
but yet, the presence of a little salt, a few of the godly in the 
land, had an effect upon the State; and the situation of the litde 
kingdom of Judah, close at their elbow, with its temple and its 
prophets, influenced the manners and customs of the people, 
so that, “The kings of the house of Israel were merciful kings,” 
and this, not because they feared God themselves, but because 
there were others who did, and whose influence and example, 
perhaps, unconsciously, softened public sentiment, and 
mitigated the ruthless ferocity of war. Is this nothing? Is it not 
a high honor to the 7,000 who bowed not the knee to Baal, that 
in this respect they made Baal’s worshippers bow to them? 
Litde do we know how much of the apparent morality of this 
country is due to the real religion which we have in our land. 
There are thousands of men in London who would open their 
shops tonight if it were not for the influence of those who fear 
the Lord; their shops are closed, not because they take any 
interest in the Christian’s day of rest, but out of respect to 
custom. Sins, which now hide their heads under the veil of 
night, would stalk through our streets with barefaced 
impudence if once Christianity were withdrawn. Bad as the 
customs of trade are, without the purifying power of the godly, 
they would be infinitely worse! The whole fabric of our 
commerce, politics and war, is manifestly affected for the better 
by our religion. Let those, then, who do not feel its power, yet, 
at least think well of it for this fact — that it is a blessing to our 
country; and while other nations have been torn with civil war, 


963 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


while revolution has followed revolution, and class has been set 
against class, the religion of Jesus Christ has made our land a 
happy land, and a land, after all, in which there is more 
generous benevolence towards the needy, and more mutual 
sympathy than in any other kingdom or even in any republic 
beneath the sky! Thank God for true religion! Even if it does 
not convert a man, yet, its presence in his neighborhood tends 
to sober him, and to keep him from running into so great an 
excess of riot. This, however, is but by-the-by; I plunge now at 
once into the subject before me. 

My soul tonight yearns, as it did last Thursday night, to 
induce some timid, seeking soul to make a venture of it, and to 
come boldly to Christ. Last Thursday night, you remember, we 
spoke of Esther and how she said, “I will go in unto the king, 
which is not according to the law, and if I perish, I perish.” We 
tried to urge those of you who were then present to do the 
same. We reminded you that though it was contrary to law, yet, 
it was not contrary to gospel, and we, therefore, bade you come, 
just as you were, into the presence of the Great King — 
promising, on His behalf, that He would stretch out the golden 
scepter to you. Tonight, our line of things is precisely the same. 
Our objective is the same, and we pray that we may have a 
greater blessing than we did then. 

There are three things in the text — first, mery’s report; 
secondly, misery’s resolve; and thirdly, misery’s reception. 

I. First, then, MERCY’S REPORT. 

Down there is a dark cellar; in an inner chamber, shut out 
from the light of day, with, perhaps, only a fire or a candle to 
light him — we see the fugitive King. He, who came up from 
Syria with a 150,000 men at his feet, now returns with but a 
handful of men left. He had sworn in his audacity that he would 
take away Samaria by handfuls that he would bring so many 
men that each one should require to take but a handful, and the 


964 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


whole city of Samaria would be cast to the winds. The king of 
Israel had simply replied, “Let not him who girds on his harness 
boast himself as he who takes it off.” There sits Ben-hadad. He 
reminds me of Napoleon after the flight from Waterloo, sitting 
down by the fire in a peasant’s cottage, his boots and his gray 
coat covered with mire, and his face full of dark anxiety and 
gloomy fears — a man of iron, but a man of iron rusted and 
worn by adversities. There sits Ben-hadad; but he is not like 
Napoleon, for his soul is cowed and broken, and humbled, and 
subdued. He who bragged so loudly is now a pitiful spectacle 
of meanness and dismay. His servants whisper around the 
fallen king and their most assuring word is a humbling one, 
“The kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings.” This is a 
sweet note to poor Ben-hadad’s ear. The boastful king, who 
never dreamed of mercy to others, is now glad to have half a 
chance of mercy for himself! 

But, I come to you, tonight, not to whisper mercy. I come 
to you, who have defied God and have been His enemies, but 
who are now broken beneath His power and my voice is no 
timid whisper made up of mingled hope and fear. As 
ambassador from the God of Israel, I proclaim the fullness of 
His mercy! 

Thus, runs mercy’s report. First, there is mercy! It is God’s 
essential attribute, and He can never cease to be merciful. As 
long as He is God, mercy will be one trait in His divine 
character! An unmerciful god could not be the God of 
revelation. There is mery yet! He has already opened bags of 
mercy and scattered the golden treasure lavishly among the 
forlorn beggars at His footstool; but there are bags yet untied, 
still sealed up with the red seal of the covenant — bags of mercy, 
I say, yet unused! You have not exhausted the loving kindness 
of Jehovah; you have required much, you have pressed the 


965 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


bank of God’s mercy to a great extent, but its coffers are deep 
as the sea, no — deep as the gates of hell — 

“Deep as your helpless miseries, 

Boundless as your sins!” 

Mercy is not dead; it lives still — yes, lives in its ancient 
strength, and riches of glory! Mercy is not drained; it flows 
evermore towards the sons of men. There is mercy! There is 
mercy! 

My proclamation certifies to you, O trembling heart, that 
this tnercy is tender mercy. Your bones are broken tonight, your 
heart is wounded, your spirits are dried up, and you are ready 
to despair; but I tell you that God has tender mercy for such as 
you are. As I sat in the hospital yesterday and saw the many 
cases of maimed limbs, and gushing wounds, I could but think 
how tender the nurses ought to be, and how downy should be 
the surgeon’s finger as he set the broken bones or bound up 
the sores. Doubtless, there are some persons who have iron 
hands and hard hearts, and so, while they are bone-setting or 
binding up wounds, they do it roughly, and cause the patient 
much pain. But, O sinner, here is the tender mercy of our God 
set forth, which, like a day spring from on high, has visited us! 
“A bruised reed will He not break, nor quench the smoking 
flax.” He crowns us with loving-kindnesses, and with tender 
mercies; He binds up the broken in heart, and heals all their 
wounds. Like as a mother comforts her children, even so does 
the Lord comfort His people, and like as a father pities His 
children, so the Lord pities them who fear Him. My Lord is as 
gracious in the manner of His mercy as in the matter of it. 
Glory be to His name! O sinner, come to the gende Jesus and 
live! 


966 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


There is great mercy. There is nothing little in my God; His 
mercy is like Himself — it is Infinite. You cannot measure it; 
you may mount in the balloon of your imagination, but you 
cannot reach to the firmament of His mercy. “As high as the 
heavens are above the earth, so high are His thoughts above 
your thoughts, and His ways above your ways.” Your sin is of 
great measure, but there is no measure to His grace; His mercy 
is so great that it forgives great sins to great sinners, after great 
lengths of time — and then, gives great favors and great 
privileges, and raises us up to great enjoyments in the great 
heaven of the great God. As John Bunyan well said — “It must 
be great mercy or no mercy, for little mercy will never serve my 
turn.” Do you feel that, burdened conscience, do you feel that? 
In God, there is great mercy for the harlot, for the drunkard, 
for the thief, for the whoremonger, for the adulterer, and such 
like. Here is great mercy, which, like a great flood bursting 
upwards, shall cover the highest mountains of your sins! The 
bath of blood is opened for crimson stains; the great physician 
died to heal the foulest disease, and He lives as intercessor, to 
save to the uttermost them who come unto God by Him. 

Hear me again, O troubled conscience, the mercy of my 
Lord is rich mercy! Some things are great, but have little efficacy 
in them, like wine mingled with water — they cannot revive the 
fainting; but every drop of the mercy of my God is worth a 
heaven! Let but a drop of this mercy fall upon a soul, and it 
shall be enough to save it. It is rich, unutterably rich mercy. 
When you get this mercy, it will be a cordial to your drooping 
spirits; it shall be a golden ointment to your bleeding wounds; 
it shall be a heavenly bandage to your broken bones; it shall be 
a royal chariot for your weary feet; it shall be a bosom of love 
for your trembling heart. It is rich mercy. I cannot tell you what 
the mercy of God could not do; nor can I tell you all that it could 
do. 1 cannot tell you what it could not do, for I know of no 


967 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


good thing which it would refuse. I cannot tell you all it could 
do for the catalog is too long, and Watts did not exaggerate, 
when he said — 

“But O! Eternity’s too short 
To utter half its praise.” 

Mercy, rich mercy! The Lord does not give away halfpence 
in the streets; He does not open His door, and throw out bones 
half-picked, and broken crusts, and dry, stale meat; but He 
opens the door, and bids His heralds cry, “My oxen and My 
fadings are killed, come to the supper!” He does not distribute 
pebbles, but diamonds and gems of priceless cost — bought, 
not with corruptible things as with silver and gold — but with 
the precious blood of Jesus. No, so rich is this mercy, that 
heaven had only one Koh-inoor, one “mountain of light,” and 
God gave that; that diamond, that glittering diamond — His 
Only- Begotten Son — sparkles with light upon the bosom of 
forgiven sinners! O the depths of the mercy and goodness of 
the Lord! 

But our proclamation is not concluded yet; in fact, we have 
but begun. There is in God, according to the express word of 
Scripture, manifold mercy. What a fine word that is! Do you 
understand it? Manyfold mercy! Here, I open one fold of it, and 
I find remission for transgressions past; I open another, and I 
find pardon for sins to come; I open the next, and I find 
constraining mercy to lead me into the paths of righteousness. 
No, I find that the folds are more than I can count! I cannot 
possibly reckon up the innumerable mercies which are wrapped 
up one within another! As John Bunyan said, all the flowers in 
God’s garden are double; there is no single mercy — no, they 
are not only double flowers — they are manifold flowers! There 
are many flowers upon one stalk, and many flowers in one 


968 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


flower; you shall think you have but one mercy, but you shall 
find it to be a whole flock of mercies! Our beloved is unto us a 
bundle of myrrh, a cluster of camphor. When you lay hold 
upon one golden link of the chain of divine grace, you pull, pull, 
pull, but lo, as long as your hand can pull, there are fresh 
“linked sweets” of love still to come! Manifold mercies! Like 
the drops of a luster, which reflect a rainbow of colors when 
the sun is glittering upon them, and each one, when turned in 
different ways, from its prismatic form shows all the varieties 
of color, so the mercy of God is one, and yet many, the same, 
yet always changing, a combination of all the beauties of love 
blended harmoniously together! You have only to look at 
mercy in that light, and that light, and that light, to see how rich, 
how manifold it is. Poor sinner, does not this talk suit you? 
Why, if there are many folds, there is a fold lor you! And if your 
case seems to be an extraordinary one, and you have manifold 
sins, and manifold sorrows , here are manifold mercies to suit you! 
Perhaps your mercy is in the last fold, and the devil wants to 
prevent its being opened, but God never had a mercy yet which 
He did not, sooner or later, give to the one for whom He had 
predestinated it; and He will yet give mercy to you! 

Notice further, that as it is manifold mercy, so it is abounding 
mercy. The farther we go down the stream of mercy, the deeper 
it becomes, and the broader it grows. God’s mercy, instead of 
being exhausted by all He has given away, is still as fresh as ever! 
I say, soul, God has given away enough mercy to save millions 
of spirits who are now in heaven, and yet, He has as much 
mercy now as when He began! His giving does by no means 
impoverish Him. I suppose that the shining of the sun, though 
the fact cannot be seen by us, does diminish the store of light 
in that great luminary, but it is not so with the shining of God’s 
mercy! I suppose that when I breathe the air, though none can 
tell it, there is so much less of good oxygen for others to 


969 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


breathe; but when I breathe God’s mercy, there is just as much 
left as there was before. If you take a cupful of water out of the 
ocean, you cannot see the difference, but there certainly is that 
cupful less in the sea; but when you take what mercy you will 
out of this divine sea, this shoreless ocean of mercy — there is 
just as much left as when you first came! You see then, O sinner 
that the Lord has super-abounding mercy, and therefore, if 
your sin has gone on multiplying, His mercy has done the same! 
The mathematician will tell you that numbers, in the process of 
multiplication, will mount to figures so vast that only the 
calculating machine can give what the number will be, and even 
then, when the figures stand in a long row, man may look at 
them, but he will have no idea of what the figures mean. But if 
you had a calculating machine, and all the calculating machines 
that ever were, put together, you could not calculate the extent 
of the super-abounding mercy of God in Christ Jesus — 
enough for every seeking soul forever! 

Poor, trembling soul, let the silver trumpet ring this good 
news in your ears that this is mercy which will never leave you! 
“Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my 
life.” If you get mercy tonight, you have obtained mercy forever. 
If mercy is your friend this evening, mercy will be with you in 
temptation to keep you from yielding — with you in your 
troubles to prevent you from sinking under them; mercy will 
be with you living, to be the light and life of your countenance; 
and mercy will be with you dying, to be the joy of your soul in 
your last moments. “He who trusts in the Lord, mercy shall 
compass him about.” You shall have ranks and files of mercies, 
before and behind, and on every side of you; you shall have the 
mercy which endures forever. I cannot think what Arminians 
make of that Psalm — “His mercy endures forever.” They think 
that we can exhaust God’s mercy, that a child of God once 
saved can yet lose the mercy of God by his sin. Beloved, let us 


970 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


never indulge such a thought; for the God who began to be 
merciful to us will be merciful to us even unto the end, and that 
end shall be without end! 

Sinner, have you heard this proclamation? It is not yet 
finished. Let me tell you that the mery of God flows freely. It needs 
no money and no price from you, no fitness of frames and 
feelings, no preparation of good works or penitence. Free as 
the brook which leaps from the mountainside, at which every 
weary traveler may drink, so free is the mercy of God! Free as 
the sun that shines and gilds the mountain’s brow, and makes 
glad the valleys without fee or reward — so free is the mercy of 
God to every needy sinner! Free as the air which belts the earth 
and penetrates the peasant’s cottage as well as the royal palace 
without purchase or premium — so free is the mercy of God in 
Christ! It tarries not for you; it comes to you as you are; it 
waylays you in love; it meets you in tenderness. Ask not how 
you shall get it; you need not climb to heaven, nor descend to 
hell for it; the Word is near you — on your lips and in your 
heart — if you believe on the Lord Jesus with your heart, and 
with your mouth make confession of Him, you shall be saved! 
If, as guilty, you will accept the great atonement, and be washed 
therein, rejoice O heaven, and sing O earth, for the sinner is 
saved; saved through the abounding mercy of God! It is mercy 
fresh and strong tonight! Mercy ready for you while that clock is 
ticking! Mercy which has followed you to this, your 11th hour, 
and waits for you on the borders of the grave! It is mercy which 
will not easily take a denial from you, but pleads with you now, 
tonight! Sinner, may the Spirit of God come forth with that 
energy which raised Jesus from the dead, and make you say, 
“Lord, I would be saved by Your mercy! God be merciful to 
me a sinner.” 

This is mercy’s report. O that my lips could tell it better! 
May God open your ears to hear it and to believe it. Pause a 


971 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


moment that those in whom the Holy Spirit is working may 
breathe a silent prayer — and then, let us advance to the second 
head. 

II. Misery’s resolve. 

You will come with me into that inner chamber, and look 
at Ben-hadad for a moment. Where are you now, Ben-hadad? 
Where are your legions now? Where now the flaunting 
banners — the proud glory of Syria? You are broken in pieces — 
broken as a ship when the rough north wind has cast aside her 
mast, and shattered all her sails. Where are you now? “Mock 
not at my misery,” the king replies, “I have heard that the kings 
of Israel are merciful — if I sit here I shall be slain by some fierce 
trooper — I will bestir myself; something must be done; I will 
get me unto the king of Israel.” Note then, first, that Benhadad 
saw the necessity of direct and immediate action. Misery, where are you? 
In yonder sinner have you taken up your lodging? I would 
gladly do you service, and therefore, will I speak. Sinner, if you 
sit still, you must die! You are like the prodigal; your money is 
spent; you have wasted your substance in riotous living; you 
have fed the swine, and you have tried to feed on their husks, 
but you cannot fill your belly with them. If you stay among 
those swine troughs, you will die — you will perish of hunger! 
Even now, your gaunt limbs stare at you, and your bare bones 
rebuke you. Man, it is time for you to say, “I will arise; I will 
arise.” O my hearers, I fear that a deadly sleep has fallen upon 
some of you! You are in sin, and you know it, but you take no 
action about it! The trembling of the jailer when he said, “What 
must I do to be saved?” has not seized hold on you. You are in 
the Enchanted Ground and, like Heedless and Too-Bold, you 
are asleep upon the seats of the arbor, and when shaken in your 
slumber, you dreamily mutter, “A little more sleep, a litde more 
slumber, a litde more folding of the hands.” Oh, if you knew 
how near you are to the gates of death! I feel with trembling 


972 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


that my speech is prophetic to someone here. If you knew, O 
immortal soul, how soon the curtain shall be drawn; how in a 
moment you shall see the now invisible God face to face, you 
would shake like an aspen leaf in your seat tonight! As the Lord 
my God lives, there is but a step between you and death! “Set 
your house in order, for you must die, and not live.” May the 
Holy Spirit bestir you to take direct action! Immediate action!! 
There is no time to waste; the sun has gone down, and it may 
never rise on you again; the harvest is past, and the summer is 
ended, and you are not saved! For you there will be no beaming 
spring, no blooming summer of next year; but the cold sod 
shall cover you, and the daisy shall bloom above your grave. 
“Prepare to meet your God, O Israel.” Thus says the Lord unto 
you — “Because I will do this, consider your ways.” — 

“Haste, traveler, haste! The night comes on, 

And many a shining hour is gone; 

The storm is gathering in the west, 

And you far off from home and rest. 

Haste, traveler, haste! 

Then linger not in all the plain, 

Flee for your life, the mountain gain; 

Look not behind, make no delay, 

O speed you — speed you on your way. 

Haste, traveler, haste! 

Poor, lost unenlightened soul, are you 
Willing to find salvation now? 

There yet is hope, hear mercy’s call, 

Truth, life, light, way, in Christ is all — 

Haste to Him, haste!” 

If you are what I take you to be tonight — one sent here 
that God may save you — you will, tonight, begin to cry unto 


973 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


God and will, tonight, seek Him who loosens the seven stars, 
and turns the shadow of death into the morning! Soul, tonight, 
lay hold upon the hem of Jesus’ garment, and make a covenant 
with Him that you may be saved! 

Come again with me down into that dreary vault and we 
will see Ben-hadad again. He is in his dressing room. Let us not 
intrude upon the king in his dressing room. Surely he is putting 
on his imperial purple, and placing his crown upon his head, is 
he not? Ah, a strange dressing room this, and a singular room. 
He has a rope, such a rope as men hang dogs with, and he puts 
it upon his neck; and as for his loins, the dainty garments of 
Egyptian fine linen are all laid aside, and he wraps himself about 
with a piece of an old sack, and then, he scatters ashes upon 
himself! Fit dressing room for a vanquished supplicant! Ah, 
sinner, sinner, there is wisdom here! If you would come before 
God in Christ, go to your dressing room; not to trim yourself, 
not to make yourself dainty and fair; not to perfume yourself 
with choice essences of self-righteousness — not to gird 
yourself with sumptuous apparel. No, no! In your case the 
words of Isaiah 3 have a spiritual meaning — “In that day the 
Lord will take away the finery: the tinkling anklets, the scarves, 
and the crescents; the pendants, the bracelets, and the veils; the 
headdresses, the leg ornaments, and the headbands; the 
perfume boxes, the charms, and the rings; the nose jewels, the 
festal apparel, and the mantles; the outer garments, the purses, 
and the mirrors; the fine linen, the turbans, and the robes. And 
so it shall be: instead of a sweet smell there will be a stench; 
instead of a sash, a rope; instead of well-set hair, baldness; 
instead of a rich robe, a girding of sackcloth, and branding 
instead of beauty.” The finery is all gone — not a rag left — not 
an ornament spared. Sinner, it is so with you! Your proper array 
is the sackcloth of repentance, and the rope of 
acknowledgment that you deserve to die! Man, I say, and let 


974 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


this be the first act you do — confess that you are vile. Come! 
Off with that fine garment; I know you have been to church 
twice every Sunday for the last few years, but away with that, 
away with that — trust not to that! I know that you were 
sprinkled in your infancy, and have been confirmed since; but 
trust not in these observances, for all such confidence shall be 
but as a phantom and a dream of the night! I know that you 
have attended this Tabernacle ever since it was built, and 
listened to our ministry for years; but boast not of that! Away 
with that as a ground of trust — pull off that garment! You have 
never failed in business; you have brought up your children well; 
you never swear; you were never a drunk — midnight orgies 
never saw you mixed up in them! This is well, but I pray you, 
put not on this as your proper dress — the proper dress for a 
sinner to go to Christ in is sackcloth and the rope! “Well,” says 
one, “I never will acknowledge that I deserve to be damned!” 
Then you never will be saved. “Well,” says another, “I never 
will take the language of a great sinner upon my lips.” Then you 
shall never be saved, for unless you are willing to confess that 
God may jusdy damn you, God will never save you. But, by 
God’s grace, if you feel in your heart tonight that if He sends 
your soul to hell, His righteous law approves it well; if you 
wonder how it is that you are not in the pit of hell, and marvel 
why such mercy should have been shown to you — come, 
brother, sister, come — come as you are, for you wear the true 
court-dress of a sinner! When a beggar goes out to beg at the 
door, should he put on a new black coat and a clean white shirt, 
and kid gloves? No, verily, let him clothe himself in tatters — 
the more tears he has the better — for tatters are the clothes of 
a beggar, and rags are the courtdress of a beggar! So, come in 
your sins! Come in your doubts! Come in your hardness of 
heart! Come in your impenitence! Come in your deadness! 
Come in your lethargy! Come as you are — foul, vile, filthy, 


975 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


waiting for no amendment, but with a rope upon your neck, 
and a garment of sackcloth about your loins! Come now, come 
now! God help you to come — 

“Come, needy and guilty! 

Come, loathsome and bare! 

Though leprous and filthy, 

Come just as you are!” 

We will follow Ben-hadad and hear the king at his prayers. He 
has come before the king of Israel, and he has a petition to 
offer. What will it be? Bring the big book — turn to the collect 
for Quinquagesima Sunday — will not that suit him? Will not 
our beautiful liturgy serve his turn? No, no! Living souls must 
have living words, and their own words, too, for I cannot adopt 
another man’s petition, they must be my own children, sprung 
from my own loin! The dead soul may parrot out a printed 
prayer, but the living soul pants to be rid of such tag-rags — 
such bondage. The living spirit can no more be content with a 
mere form of prayer, than the bla 2 ing, flaming comet could be 
chained, belted, and held fast in prison. It must have words of 
its own. Well, but it will be a very fine extemporary prayer, will 
it not — 25 minutes long — an orthodox, Nonconformist 
supplication? Oh, dear no! These long, dry, prosy prayers suit 
dead souls, but living souls need something more burning, 
fuller of fire! When they come before the Lord, they cannot 
pray in that fashion, but this is the way — “Your servant Ben- 
hadad says, I pray You, let me live. ” Ah, that is the sinner’s 
prayer — “Your servant says, I pray You, let me live. ” Why, there 
is not one awakened person here who cannot pray such a prayer 
as that! That suits the clown in his roughness, and it may suit, 
and must suit the peer in his politeness. However dull the 
intellect, this prayer can be understood; and however high the 


976 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


perceptions, this prayer can reach our desires to the full 
extent — “Your servant says, I pray You, let me live.” John, 
John, pray in this form — “Your servant John says, I pray You, 
let me live.” Jane, put it so — “Your servant Jane says, I pray 
You, let me live.” Ah, that is the sort of prayer — “God be 
merciful to me a sinner.” If a man should meet you in the street 
as you walked along and should say, “If you please, sir, wait a 
minute,” and should then draw out of his pocket a long roll, 
and proceed to read to you a fine, well-written oration — well, 
however beautifully it might be put together, he might have a 
quotation from the “Rambler,” or sentences like those of the 
flowing Addison, but you would say, “Yes, yes, but I have not 
time to listen to that, sir.” But suppose that as you were going 
along, a man came to you and said, “Sir, I am starving. I pray 
you, for God’s sake, help me”? Then, you know what the 
problem is, and if your hand does not go into your purse very 
soon, it is only because you may suspect him of being an 
impostor — but you know that this is the kind of language 
which moves the human heart! How does your child come to 
you when he needs anything? Does he open a big book and 
begin reading, “My dear, esteemed and venerated parent; in the 
generosity of your parental goodness”? Nothing of the kind! 
He says, “Father, my clothes are worn out, please buy me a new 
coat.” Or else he says, “I am hungry, let me have something to 
eat.” That is the way to pray, and there is no prayer which God 
accepts but that kind of prayer — right straight from the heart, 
and right straight to God’s heart. We miss the mark when we 
go about to gather gaudy words. What? Gaudy words on the 
lips of a poor sinner; fine phrases from a rebel? There is more 
true eloquence in, “God be merciful to me a sinner,” than in all 
the books of devotion which bishops and archbishops and 
divines ever compiled! 


977 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“Your servant Ben-hadad says, I pray you, let me live.” I feel 
inclined to stop and ask you to bow your heads in your pews, 
and pray that prayer — “O God, Your servant says, I pray You, 
let me live; O cut me not down as a cumberer of the ground, 
but let me live; I am dead in trespasses and sins, quicken me, O 
Lord, and let me live; and when You come to slay the wicked 
on the earth, I pray You, let me live! And when You shall 
destroy the ungodly, and sweep them with the broom of 
destruction into the pit that is bottomless, I pray You, let me 
live!” You see there is not a word of merit; there is nothing 
about what man has done; Ben-hadad only calls himself a 
servant. “Make me as one of your hired servants. Your servant 
says, I pray you, let me live.” He does not ask for honor, or 
wealth, or station — 

“Wealth and honor I disdain, 

Earthly comforts, Lord, are vain. 

These can never satisfy, 

Give me Christ, or else I die.” 

Christ, Christ, Christ! Give me Christ! “Your servant says, 
I pray You, let me live.” 

Well now, we have gone as far as we ought to do, I suppose, 
in intruding on the king’s privacy, but I wish he would let me 
look in his right hand. I wonder what that is which he carries 
there? He has doubtless there some warrant for his prayer, 
some ground for expecting that he will find grace in the sight 
of his enemy. Let us open his hand. What is it? Why, I can 
hardly see it, it is so little; let us bring it to the light and look at 
it. Yes, I see it, it is only a little “perhaps. ” It says — “Perhaps he 
may save your life.” That is all — a little “perhaps,” and yet, with 
nothing but this to carry in his hands, he ventured to go, with 
the rope upon his neck, to the king of Israel! Sinner, 1 will give 


978 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 
20:31-34 


you something more than that to go with! I would not like to 
go into the Bank of England with only a perhaps in my hand, 
with a note saying that perhaps the cashier would give me 10 
pounds. I am afraid, I am afraid that my perhaps would not be 
good for much; but I would not mind going there with a 
promissory note signed with a good name. Sinner, here is a 
promise for you! Here is one. “Come now, let us reason 
together, says the Lord” — there is the signature — “Though your 
sins are as scarlet, they shall be as wool, though they are red like 
crimson, they shall be whiter than snow.” That is better than 
“ perhaps ,” is it not? Here is another — “The blood of Jesus 
Christ, God’s dear Son, cleanses us from all sin.” Is not that 
better than “perhaps”? Here is another — “ All manner of sin 
and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men.” Surely that is 
better than “perhaps.” Here is another — “The Spirit and the 
bride say, Come; and let him who hears say, Come. And let him 
who is thirsty, come. And whoever will, let him take the Water 
of Life freely.” Is not that better than “perhaps”? Go then, soul, 
go to the King, and you shall meet with a gracious reception! 

III. The third head is MISERY’S RECEPTION. 

We have been with Ben-hadad in the vault, and now, we 
will go with him to the palace. He marches along, doleful and 
sorrowful all the way, till he gets into the presence of the king. 
His servants, who are round about him, are all straining their 
ears to catch a word from the king, and the first word they get 
is a kind inquiry — “Is he yet alive?” Ah, there was something in 
that. And so, if you are coming to the King, my Lord begins to 
say — “What? Sinner, are you yet alive? Why, that is the wretch 
who thought he would blow his brains out, is he yet alive? Why, 
that is the sinner who ran his body into such an excess of sin 
that he well-near killed himself — is he yet alive? What? That 
sinner who for years never had a good thought, is there a tear 
in his eye tonight? Does he begin to live? Is he yet alive? That 


979 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


man who has heard sermon after sermon, and never felt under 
one, does he begin to feel tonight? Is he yet alive? What? That 
man who despised a mother’s prayers, and rejected a father’s 
intercessions? The man who has been at sea and shipwreck has 
not softened him — who has had the yellow fever in the West 
Indies, and that has not brought him down — what? Does he 
begin to feel tonight? Is there some motion of the Spirit in him? 
Are there some yearnings after God? Is he yet alive?” See how 
kind is the inquiry. My Master seems to look out of my eyes 
tonight, and as He weeps over you, He cries — “How can I give 
you up, Ephraim? How can I deliver you, Israel? How shall I 
set you as Admah? How shall I make you as Zeboim? My heart 
is moved. My repentings are kindled together. I will not destroy 
him, for I am God, and not man.” 

The next word of the king of Israel is suggestive, “He is my 
brother. ”1 think I see the gleam of pleasure which went over the 
poor courtiers faces as they heard it. If the king had said some 
hard word, they might have heard it with grief, but when he 
said — “He is my brother,” they whispered to one another — 
“ My brother? My brother Ben-hadad? Why, that vile Ben- 
hadad had threatened this king with all sorts of mischief. He 
deserved nothing but death in return.” When the Israelite king 
was in great need, Ben-hadad sent to demand of him his wife 
and his children, and all that he had, and when the king 
volunteered to acknowledge that Ben-hadad was his sovereign 
lord, and that they were his, Ben-hadad ordered him to send 
immediately the best of his wives, and the best of his children, 
and when the king would not do that, Ben-hadad said — “The 
gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall 
suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me.” Hear the 
boaster! How dare he use such insulting language to the king 
of Israel? And yet, here is this king of Israel now saying — ‘He 
is my brother ’ 7 What, brother to such a scoundrel, such a braggart, 


980 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 535 Ben-Hadad’s Escape - I Kings 

20:31-34 

such a tyrant, such a thief, such a rapacious robber who would 
rake the whole world, and spoil a man’s house, and rob his 
bed — brother to him? Yes, says Ahab, “He is my brother.” Well, 
I do not admire that in the king of Israel, but I do admire it in 
my Lord Jesus, that He should turn to a filthy sinner and say, 
“He is my brother; I am his elder brother; he is a child of God, 
accepted in the Beloved; he is heir of God, and joint heir with 
Me, of all things.” Well, trembling, quickened sinner, what do 
you think of this, that Jesus Christ is your brother? Have you 
no love towards Him? Why surely if you are a convicted and 
awakened sinner, the thought of your adoption into the Lord’s 
family, of your being the brother of Christ, will make the tears 
roll down your cheeks, and you will say, “How could I have 
offended against such a Lord? Lord, let me live for my brother’s 
sake.” 

The next thing the king of Israel did was to take Ben-hadad 
up into his chariot. Ahab lets his bragging adversary ride with him 
in his carriage! And Jesus will take you up into His Church, no, 
into His heart, into the chariot of His grace, and you shall ride 
with Him even through the streets of heaven, amidst universal 
acclamations! 

He did one thing more; he ?nade a covenant with him. God 
makes a covenant with sinners in the person of Christ. He gave 
Him to be a covenant for His people, the Leader and 
Commander to His people, and those hearts who are led by 
grace to accept the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, know that 
this is the result of a covenant made before the world began by 
God with elect sinners in the person of Christ Jesus! O sinner, 
such is the Infinite mercy of God, that the very thought of it 
should make you weep! I have known the time when I thought 
God would never have mercy on me, and yet, the thought of 
His love to other people would bring the tears to my eyes. I 
could not help saying once; I remember that I would love God 


981 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


even if He damned me, because He was so gracious to others! 
Something of that emotion ought to be in your soul, and if 
there is, then I think it must be a work of divine grace. If you 
begin to be in love with the mercy of God, it is because the 
mercy of God is in love with you! O poor soul, God’s mercy is 
to be had for the asking! It is to be had on no terms, and no 
conditions except these — “He who believes and is baptized, 
shall be saved.” Trust Jesus! Trust Jesus just as you are for 
everything, and you are saved, and we will meet again in that land 
where they wear no sackcloth on their loins, nor ropes upon 
their necks — but where their heads are crowned with immortal 
honor, and their bodies are robed in immortality! Christ is the 
way, the truth and the life. Look to Him, all you ends of the 
earth, look to Him and live! The Lord enable you to do so, for 
Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


982 



536 Jehovah- Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, October 25 th, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Whereas the Lord was there.” - Ezekiel 35:10 

HEREIN LAY the special security of the chosen land. The 
Edomites saw the whole country of Israel and Judah left 
desolate; Babylonians and Chaldeans had carried away the 
people, and ravaged the land, therefore the proud inhabitants 
of the city in the rock said — “These two nations, and these two 
countries shall be mine, and we will possess it.” The dukes of 
Edom counted upon an easy conquest and such, indeed, the 
Holy Land would have proved, had there not been one great 
difficulty — quite unknown to them — ‘The Lord was there.” 
Jehovah Himself was still in possession, even though His 
rebellious people had been carried into captivity. HE would 
never allow that the Idumea should hold Jehovah’s land in 
possession, and with despiteful hearts, cast it out for a prey. 
From this one incident we gather that whatever may be the 
machinations and devices of the enemies of God’s people, 
though there is nothing else to thwart them, there is this as an 
effectual barrier — the saints are God’s heritage, and the Lord was 
there, to guard and hold His own! The book of Ezekiel, if you 
will notice, concludes with these blessed words, as the name of 
the great city of the latter days. When all conflicts shall be ended, 
when the scattered shall be gathered, when the tabernacle of 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the Lord shall be among them; then this which is Zion’s 
bulwark today, shall be her everlasting glory. JEHOVAH- 
SHAMMAH — ‘The Lord is there. ” 

As Palestine was preserved from the enmity of Mount Seir 
by the presence of the great Jehovah, so the Church and each 
separate member of it is constandy kept by the power of a 
present God, despite the rage of adversaries. In enlarging upon 
this cheering truth of God, I shall invite you to notice the Church 
as a despised people, constantly triumphant; next, we will observe the 
Christian, in his opposed life, perpetually victorious; thirdly, a desolate 
soul graciously delivered from Satan; and lastly, a ruined and depraved 
earth, resplendent with pefect beauty — and all because “The Lord 
was there.” 

I. Consider, then, A DESPISED PEOPLE CONSTANTLY 
TRIUMPHANT, BECAUSE “THE LORD WAS THERE.” 

“Jacob have I loved and Esau have 1 hated.” Here election 
divides two races forever. Since that hour the rejected have 
always displayed a deadly hatred towards the elected. The seed 
of the profane Esau, who sold his birthright, have in all 
generations, maintained perpetual strife against the children of 
the accepted Jacob, upon whom the Lord has looked with the 
eyes of discriminating grace. The prophet Obadiah denounces 
a curse upon Edom for their violence to their brother Jacob — 
“In the day that you stood on the other side, in the day that the 
strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered 
into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even you were as 
one of them. But you should not have looked on the day of 
your brother in the day that he became a stranger; neither 
should you have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day 
of their destruction; neither should you have spoken proudly in 
the day of distress. Neither should you have stood in the 
crossway, to cut off those of his who did escape; neither should 
you have delivered up those of his who did remain in the day 


984 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


of distress.” An eternal enmity is put between the serpent and 
the woman — between his seed and her seed. This was 
evidenced at the beginning of human history, in the case of 
Cain and Abel — and the story of the great batde of 
Armageddon, when Gog and Magog shall be utterly 
overthrown, will stand upon the last page of the world’s story 
as a sure proof that the old enmity is as hot as ever! 

The people of God have always been, in every age, a hated 
and despised people. This may be seen if you will notice a few 
facts. 

1. The adversaries of God’s Israel have often thought in their hearts 
that they would utterly destroy them. When Israel dwelt in Egypt, and 
the single household began to be a great nation, Pharaoh said 
unto His people, “Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest 
they multiply.” Hard bondage, in mortar and in brick, and in all 
manner of service in the field was tried until their lives were 
made bitter; but the tyrant’s purpose was not accomplished, for 
the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and 
grew! Then spoke the king unto the midwives — “If it is a son, 
then you shall kill him; but if it is a daughter, then she shall live.” 
O deep-laid scheme of a cruel and wily despot! Now he thinks 
that the work is surely done; the Nile will be covered with the 
dead bodies of Israel’s sons, and Egypt will know no fear from 
her bond slaves. Little did he dream that the midwives would 
violate his orders, and far less that from the river which he 
worshipped would spring the man who would make the fields 
of Zoan mourn, and avenge upon the first-born of Egypt the 
slaughter of Israel’s sons. As it was fabled of Hercules that 
while a babe in his cradle, he strangled with his infant hands 
the serpents which came to destroy him, so was it with the 
chosen nation, while yet feeble as a child in Egypt, it was more 
than a match for the craft and malice of the dragon, for “The 
Lord was there.” 


985 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


In later years a Pharaoh of like spirit grievously oppressed 
the people until J ehovah brought them forth with a high hand, 
and with an outstretched arm. They had scarcely been free 
more than a few hours — they had gone but a few furlongs from 
Egypt, when the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he said, 
“I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust 
shall be satisfied upon them.” Behold the hosts of Israel — they 
are entangled in the land — the wilderness has shut them in, the 
Red Sea rolls before them. Now Pharaoh, now may you destroy 
them with one blow! How is the prey snatched from the hand 
of the mighty! How gloriously is captivity led captive! The sea 
divides, the waters stand upright like a heap, and the chosen 
people of God are led through the deep as through a wilderness, 
for “The Lord is there!” After-years present us with numberless 
occasions in which the people who bore the oracles of God 
were in imminent peril and were miraculously preserved by her 
great King! Well did the Psalmist sing, “God is in the midst of 
her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right 
early. The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved — He 
uttered His voice, the earth melted. The Lord of hosts is with 
us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.” To single out one case 
among many, let us remember the boasting and the shame of 
Sennacherib. The great king has taken the defended cities of 
Judah, and sent his foul-mouthed servant, Rabshakeh, to 
demand the surrender of Jerusalem, that he may carry away all 
the people of the land. Hezekiah comforts the minds of the 
people, saying, “The Lord will deliver us.” Rabshakeh writes a 
blasphemous letter, and cries to the people on the wall, 
“Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, the Lord will 
deliver us. Has any of the gods of the nations delivered his land 
out of the hands of the king of Assyria? Where are the gods of 
Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? And 
have they delivered Samaria out of my hands? Who are they 


986 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


among all the gods of these lands that have delivered their land 
out of my hands, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of 
my hands?” Thus he boasts against the living God and counts 
upon the ready possession of the Holy City. And what happens? 
He had calculated that his ferocious troops would cut to pieces 
the insignificant armies of Hezekiah; he looked upon Jerusalem 
as a cauldron, and all the inhabitants thereof as the pieces of 
flesh that are boiled therein — but he forgot that the Lord is there ! 
He knew not Jehovah- Shammah! He little dreamed of the 
secret reason why the virgin daughter of Zion despised him and 
laughed him to scorn. But when the hook was in his nose, when 
the thousands of his troops had fallen like leaves in autumn, 
and when he himself was smitten by his own sons in the house 
of Nisroch, his god, then all the nations knew that God was 
great, and greatly to be feared in the mountain of His holiness! 
Had not the Lord been on Judah’s side, she would have been 
as stubble to the fire; but the Lord was there, and her foe could 
not prevail. Fly on still in your vision of the Lord’s marvelous 
works, till you come to the Church of God properly called. 
How easy it seemed to Herod to destroy once and for all, the 
followers of Jesus! They are but a handful; he will take James 
to begin with, and Peter shall follow. The apostles shall be the 
first fruits of the bloody harvest which he means to reap! Aha! 
Aha! Foolish Herod, a greater Herod than you are, sought to 
destroy Him who was King of the Jews! In his blind fury he 
killed all the young children of Bethlehem, but the newborn 
prince escaped the murderous sword, and so shall this young 
child, the new-formed Church, escape out of your wolfish 
fangs! She shall fly to the uttermost ends of the earth and shall 
be free; her word shall go forth throughout every land and 
people! 

Need I say that you have but to change name and 
circumstances, and this story may be repeated thousands of 


987 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


times? During the first centuries, the dragon incessantly 
persecuted the woman — “The serpent cast out of his mouth 
water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be 
carried away by the flood.” One of the Roman emperors set up 
a monument, “In the memory of a destroyed superstition called 
Christianity.” But was our holy religion destroyed? Could the 
dragon prevail against the remnant which kept the 
commandment of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ? 
Behold the multitudes who this day bow the knees at the name 
of Jesus of Nazareth! Diocletian dyed the earth red with the 
blood of saints, and if it had not been that the Lord is there, 
certainly the Roman sword would have cut off forever the 
woman’s seed. But why do I linger here? All ages and all lands 
witness to the same struggle! Our own country, at the 
Reformation, is a clear instance. Mary hunted out the saints of 
God; as the bloodhound tracks the fugitive slave, so she 
tracked the faithful wherever they were hidden; but the stakes 
of Smithfield and the dungeons of the Lollards’ Tower were 
not sufficient to destroy the people of God! And Elizabeth, 
equally bloody against those who fully followed the Lord, 
having set up a semipapal hierarchy, sought to parry Puritans 
out of the land. Her successors followed in her steps, but 
neither the hangman’s rope, nor loathsome dungeons, nor the 
dragoons of Claverhouse, nor fines, nor banishment, nor death 
could destroy the separated Church of God — for her God was 
her refuge and high tower! How came it, let us ask, that all the 
regal and priestly power was foiled, and could not stand against 
the people scattered and peeled? How did this anvil break so 
many hammers? How could this earthwork stand against the 
fire of such well-manned batteries? Was there any human force 
in the Church capable of resisting these bloody persecutions? 
Brothers and sisters, there was none but this — Jehovah-Shammah, 
“The Lord is there.” The Lord being there, immortality, no, 


988 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


eternity was in the Church! God is eternal, He is in the Church, 
and His Church is immortal, too. Who shall quench 
immortality? Where is the sword that can snap the links of 
eternity? When God the immortal shall bow His head to 
weakness; when age shall palsy His arm, and death shall send 
his terrible shaft into His heart, then may the Church of God 
be destroyed; but not till then, because “The Lord is there.” 

2. The enemies of the Church have frequently shown their 
scorn of her by the ridicule which they have cast upon her attacks. 
When the Church defies the world, the proud servants of Satan 
are filled with derision. Even as Midian rested in unguarded 
security, fearless of Gideon and his 300 men, comparing him 
to a poor barley-cake which they could eat at once if it were not 
unworthy of their notice, so the ungodly despise the zeal of the 
godly! But as the cake of barley-bread fell upon the tent of 
Midian, and smote it that it lay along, even so the Church is 
more than conqueror! How loudly did Goliath mock at David! 
How he cursed him by his gods — “Come to me, and I will give 
your flesh unto the fowls of heaven, and to the beasts of the 
field.” But Goliath falls like a tottering tower headlong upon 
the ground; his own sword slays him, and the despised David 
bears the monster’s head triumphantly in his hand! So, 
doubtless, in apostolic times, the world ridiculed the armies of 
the Lord. “These poor men!” said kings and princes — and they 
smiled in royal scorn of the vagrant band, “What kingdom can 
they set up?” “Unlearned and ignorant men!” muttered the 
philosophers, as they cast their mandes about them, and 
mocked at the strange doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. 
“This handful of weaklings,” said the commander of the 
legions of Rome. “This handful! A miserable eleven, what can 
they do against innumerable priests and worshippers supported 
by the eagles of a universal empire?” “Aha! Aha!” said the 
world “was anything ever so despicable, so fanatical, and so 


989 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


foolish! Eleven fishermen! Get back to your nets and to your 
boats! Go back to the lake of Gennesaret! Transform the fishes 
into men, and then come back and think to turn us from the 
ancient gods of our fathers into worshippers of the crucified 
man of Nazareth!” Yet for all their wisdom, their laughter was 
ill- spent, for the Lord was there, and therefore the attacks of the 
brave 11 were followed by speedy victory! Wherever they 
marched, they cast down the idols’ temples, no, they hurled the 
gods themselves to the moles and to the bats, and the few, the 
ignorant, the poor, the weak — in the course of a few score years 
had cast the pomps of priesthood, the pride of philosophy, and 
even the might of kings, from the abodes of their glory, and 
trod them like mire in the streets, because Jehovah-Shammah, 
“The Lord is there.” 

How constantly has the world ridiculed the Church in 
every effort she has put forth for her own enlargement. “What 
of these feeble Jews,” said Sanballat and Tobiah — “will they 
fortify themselves; will they revive the stones out of the heaps 
of rubbish? Even that which they build, if a fox goes up, he 
shall break down their stone wall.” But they built the wall, and 
the timbers were fixed in their places. How vexed must Tobiah 
and Sanballat have been when they saw the city rising upon its 
heap! The same has been the case in all time. To quote a 
modern instance of what has always been the case — Sydney 
Smith said when Carey talked of evangelizing India that a 
consecrated cobbler was going out to preach the gospel to 
educated and enlightened Hindus. But the consecrated cobbler 
took his post and dug in India a well of which thousands shall 
yet drink! That man of God has placed the battering ram of the 
gospel in such a position, that before long the hoary bastions 
of idolatry will tremble, and the world shall see that the 
weakness of God is stronger than man! It is really an absurd 
thing for us to talk about overcoming the world, and converting 


990 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


the heathen, and comforting God’s people, and enlarging the 
borders of the Church. It is, I say, an absurd thing if we talk so 
in our own strength, but it is not absurd when this little word 
comes in — “Whereas the Lord is there.” Then we have 
Omnipotence in our midst! If God is there, the Church has 
God’s omnipotence; and little do our enemies know our might. 
Omnipotence walks forth in the youthful David to fight 
Goliath. Omnipotence goes forth in the consecrated cobbler to 
fight with Juggernaut and the gods of the heathen; and feeble 
though the Church may be to this day, unlearned, and to a great 
extent still made up of the poor of this world, yet the day shall 
come when the earth shall know that the Church is mightier 
than the mightiest of her foes, because Jehovah-Shammah, 
“The Lord is there.” 

3. Let me again remind you that the world’s estimation of 
the Church has frequently been seen in the way in which it will 
tnock all her teachings. The wise men of this world have always 
something far superior to anything that the Bible can reveal; 
even bishops make great discoveries, and find out that Perfect 
Wisdom has made many blunders in the book of Exodus! New 
theologians are every now and then starting most remarkable 
schemes of doctrine — their own wood, hay and stubble, being, 
in their own opinion, infinitely superior to the gold and the 
silver, and precious stones of God’s inspiration! Well, they may 
go on and tell us that the gospel is a vulgar thing and only fit 
for the poor; they may assure us that it will suit very well the 
uneducated masses, but the intellectual and enlightened few 
need something better! Ah, we can well endure their boasting, 
for the doctrines of grace are the loftiest of all philosophy, and 
the most intellectual of all teachings — because Jehovah- 
Shammah, the Lord is in them! And where God is, there is 
perfect wisdom — where God is, there is incomprehensible 
knowledge. The sum total of all human knowledge is but as a 


991 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


drop in the bucket compared with the wisdom of God; and the 
wisdom of God, and the power of God, and therefore in 
answer to the world’s railing against our folly, we reply, “Yes, 
but the foolishness of God is wiser than man,” and, in Scripture, 
“Jehovah- Shammah,” the Lord is there. 

4 . Do they not, also, very frequendy cast in our teeth our trials ? 
They will say of the Christian, “Where is He now?” When 
Israel’s hills were desolate, then Edom said, “Where is their 
God?” The sons of Esau boasted and said, “Let us go up and 
take possession.” It is always the part of the ungodly, when they 
find a Christian in distress, to say, “Where is your God? God 
has forsaken him; let us persecute and take him.” Yes, and we 
would have been swallowed up quickly by our fierce foes, only 
that, in the worst moments of the Church, God is there! If she 
is in prison, God is there! At the stakes where her martyrs burn, 
God is there! The silenced ministers may have to conceal 
themselves in the caves and dens of the earth, but God is there! 
Tried though the Christian is, God is with him in the furnace! 
Nebuchadnezzar can cast in but three; he cannot, however, cast 
out the fourth! Where the Church shall be, Christ shall walk the 
coals with His people, and they shall come out of their trials 
triumphant — for God is there! Where God is, there is 
everlasting love. Where God abides, there is immutable 
affection, and therefore, let this be our comfort, God is with 
you, Israel, passing through the fire! 

Beloved, the world shows its disrespect of us by the way in 
which it often treats Christians. It sees him poor and naked, and 
miserable, and therefore pushes him about as though he were 
a beggar, and not one of the blood royal. Litde do they know 
that however poor the Christian may be, the Cord is there ! The 
image of Jesus Christ is in every Christian’s face, but especially 
in the face of a poor believer; the Holy Spirit dwells in that 
body, however clothed with rags, however emaciated by hunger 


992 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


and disease. You remember the other day that certain young 
men treated rudely a pale-faced person whom they saw sitting 
in a railway carriage — they pushed him about, struck him and 
so forth, and went to their homes, no doubt, boasting of the 
way in which they treated a poor fool who had not the spirit, 
as they would say, to defend himself. To their consternation it 
turned out to be a peer of the realm whom they had thus ill- 
treated, and then how small they seemed, what abject apologies 
they offered. Ah, it was quite a different thing then, they would 
not have pushed his grace, his lordship, and the duke! Oh if they 
had only known it — they thought him only some common man. 
And so nowadays the world elbows the Christian, pushes him, 
strikes him; but when it finds out what a Christian is, then how 
small their mirth will seem — they would not have done it if they 
had known who it was; they knew not the Lord of glory, and if 
they knew not Him, how shall they know His people? Let it 
always be remembered that wherever there is a true Christian, 
there is glory, because God is there, and God is never apart 
from His own glory! The very honor and dignity, and majesty 
of Deity itself guards every follower of the Savior, however 
much he may be despised among men. 

O for a celestial tongue to set forth the honor and safety 
of the chosen people, an honor which streams from the 
presence of God as light pours from the sun! You will see how 
it is. There was a little flock — a multitude of ravening wolves 
all hungry and thirsty for blood came howling on; they rushed 
to the very edge of the fold. They were about to leap in and 
suck the blood of the sheep, but suddenly they started back like 
whipped curs. See how they turn tail and take to flight, for lo, 
a mysterious one lifts His hand over the fold. A voice cries, 
“Get you gone!” and back they go — they little dreamed that the 
Lord is there! Had they known it, they would scarcely have 
attempted a task as impossible as the destruction of a people 


993 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


who had God in the midst of them, and therefore could not be 
moved! 

II. But, I must leave this for lack of time and introduce 
THE MAN OPPOSED AND YET A CONQUEROR. Moses saw at 
the back of the desert a bush burning. It was nothing but a bush, 
the fire was real, the tire was quite capable of consuming the 
bush in but the twinkling of an eye, and yet though the bush 
burned with fire, it was not consumed. It is such a sight as this 
that I bid you now look upon for a few moments, my beloved 
in the Lord Jesus Christ — a Christian is constandy opposed and 
yet perpetually preserved because the Lord is there. The very 
moment that a Christian is born-again, Satan seeks to destroy 
him. The early convictions of a newborn soul are always the 
subject of Satanic attack. Frequendy the devil will employ our 
old companions to laugh us out of our fears — “Come along, 
old fellow,” they will say, “do not give way to this melancholy 
misery. There is a first-class play tonight — come and see it. We 
shall meet at the tavern — we will have merriment and a rare 
time of it.” Satan hopes that with the laughs, the jeers, the jests, 
and merriment, he will utterly destroy all convictions of sin. 
Litde does he dream that the Lord is there, and where God sends 
the arrow home, no devil can ever draw it out! When the Lord 
convicts of sin, it is not possible that those convictions should 
be staunched! If we should attempt to blow out a candle, since 
the candle was lit by human power, human power may put it 
out; but he would be the greatest of fools who should try to 
blow out the sun; for He alone who kindled its matchless rays 
can ever quench them! If, then, the convictions of sin are 
natural, and come from man, man may destroy them; but if the 
sunlight of God has risen in a human heart, no power — human 
or Satanic — shall ever be able to destroy the glorious day which 
the daystar foretold! If I attempt to stop in its course a stone 
which has been slung from human hand, I may, perhaps, 


994 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


accomplish my purpose, but who is he who could interpose to 
stop a meteor as it flashes across the sky? Who shall cast a 
bridle about the neck of the planet as it flies in its tremendous 
pathway? Who shall bind it fast in its place, or thrust a bit into 
its jaws? If God is in the thing, it must traverse its destined 
pathway in spite of all opposition. So, beloved, where the Lord 
begins a true heart-breaking and real conviction of sin, it cannot 
be destroyed. Why? Because Jehovah-Shammah, the Lord is 
there! 

Then, as Satan has tried to destroy conviction, he will next 
shoot his arrows against our faith. Poor, feeble follower of Jesus, 
he will worry you. “Oh,” he says, “he is but a little one, I will 
encounter him in full fury, I will strike him to the ground, and 
spill his soul.” But the faith which God gives to us overcomes 
the world — yes, and overcomes the old dragon, too! It is a faith 
which lives under pressure and load; mountains may be piled 
upon it, but it still breathes under the terrific weight. It lives in 
the midst of death, swallowing up death in victory. It defies the 
power of hell’s fiery darts; they are not only turned aside, but 
they are quenched upon the shield of faith. Satan may throw all 
sorts of accusations in our pathway, but faith flies to the 
Advocate. The devil may strike us many a cowardly blow with 
fierce temptations such as suited our former state and the 
corruptions of our flesh, but if God is in our faith, and He is in 
it if it is real and genuine, “more is He who is for us than all 
they who are against us.” There shall be this always for our 
preservation — “The Lord is there.” 

Beloved, have not you always found that not only your 
faith, but all your good works are the subjects of Satan’s attacks? I 
never yet had a virtue or possessed a divine grace but what it 
was sure to be the target for hellish bullets, whether it was hope, 
bright and sparkling, or love, warm and fervent, or patience, all 
enduring, or zeal, flaming like coals of fire; the old enemy of 


995 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


everything that is good has tried, if he could, to destroy or mar 
it! And why is it that anything virtuous or lovely survives in you? 
There can be no reason given except this, “God is there.” God 
dwells in His people! Every good thing which springs up in the 
human heart is an emanation from the indwelling Deity, and 
being such, the destroyer may vent his malice upon it, but as 
the waves are broken against the rocks, so shall his cruel spite 
be broken against the power of the most high God — God is in 
it! 

Note, beloved, how constant Satan aims against the 
perseverance of God’s people; “They will never hold on their way,” 
he says. You and I have thought we never could. Sometimes we 
have sat down and become weary in well-doing — the troubles 
of the way, our non-successes, our frequent sorrows, perhaps 
the backsliding of our heart from God — all these have made us 
say, “I shall never reach my journey’s end, and see my God with 
acceptance.” And yet you have not fallen away from grace yet, 
not yet have you disgraced your character, not yet gone back to 
your old lusts. Old Adam has given you many a grip in the side, 
as though he would tear the heart out of you, but you have held 
on your way despite all that he could do. How is this? Why, 
God was in you, and if He had not been there, then, indeed, 
had you been a prey unto your adversaries! I went last week 
into the lighthouse at Holyhead and marked the lights that warn 
the mariner crossing the sea, or guide him in time of storm into 
the haven. I noticed in the second story of the lighthouse many 
large vats filled with oil laid up in store that the lamps might be 
constandy trimmed for months to come. I compared that in 
my own mind to that gracious provision of divine grace which 
the Lord lays up in store for His people. The lamps would go 
out, but Jehovah- Shammah, the Lord is there — we have the 
all-sufficiency of God laying up a store of oil so that our lights 
may be always trimmed! A Christian is something like an express 


996 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


train. On some of our railroads you know there are express 
trains which do not stop to take water, the water lies in a trench 
in the middle between the rails, and as the train runs, it sucks 
up its own supply of cold water, and so continues its course 
without a pause. Our God in divine grace has prepared in 
advance our needs; He prepares supplies for His own people 
so that without their stopping to seek the streams of creature- 
confidence — sometimes without the use of means — He is 
pleased to speed them on their pathway towards heaven, fed by 
a divine arrangement of grace! O it is blessed to think that if 
God is there, everything a Christian can need for his final 
persevering, for his eternal life, is ready at hand! 

I have no doubt, beloved; we shall find that when we come 
to die, our dying confidence will be the object of the enmity of all 
the powers of hell. Perhaps Jordan will overflow her banks, and 
Satan will issue his command, “Come here, principalities and 
powers, here is the man who we could not overturn in life, let 
us at last overthrow him in death.” Perhaps like John Knox, 
you may have your blackest day at the last, but oh, thanks be 
unto God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus 
Christ! We have no fear for our dying confidence, for “God is 
there,” even there where the billows are the most tempestuous, 
and the water is most cold; we shall feel the bottom and know 
that it is good, our feet shall stand upon the rock of ages even 
in our dying moments! Beloved, from the first of a Christian’s 
life to the last, the only reason why he does not perish is 
because “ the Lord is there.” How often has the devil reckoned 
without his host? He has thought, “Surely I shall destroy and 
devour that lamb.” So, indeed, he would have, if it had 
belonged to anybody else — but seeing it belonged to the 
Lord — the Lord is there to protect it, to pluck it out of the jaws 
of the lion, and out of the paws of the bear, and to preserve it 
even to the end. I think, my soul, you have learned never to 


997 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


love anything of which you cannot say, “The Lord is there.” If 
you have a grace, a virtue, a good work, a prayer — and the Lord 
is not in it — away with it! Away with it! But if you have the 
feeblest prayer that ever was prayed, and the faintest hope that 
ever gladdened a man, if God is in it, never give it up — for 
where there is God, there is something firmer than granite, and 
the axes of your adversaries shall have their edges broken 
against it. 

III. Now, with still greater brevity, I come to dwell upon 
the third point, which is this — A DESOLATE SOUL, NOT 
DESTROYED, BECAUSE GOD IS THERE. 

I wish I could convey, by my words, some little inkling of 
my own joy of heart while I was thinking over the third part of 
my subject. I thought of the dead sinner; but an elect sinner, and 
the devil, like the sons of Edom, said, “I shall have that dead 
sinner, I shall have him.” “My purpose is,” says Satan, “that he 
shall dwell forever with me, in extreme misery. 1 have laid hold 
upon him,” says he, “and he has made a league with hell. He is 
mine, he is mine forever.” But stop, stop, the Lord was there 
before the devil! Does the devil have a purpose? Yes, but God’s 
purpose is older than the devil’s purpose. Did the sinner make a 
covenant? Yes, but then, God’s covenant was made before that 
sinner was born! And what is the devil’s purpose compared 
with God’s purpose? You see, God is there before him — 
“Whereas the Lord was there.” “I have purposed says the Lord, 
to make that sinner My child, a new heart also will I give him, 
and a right spirit will I put within him. I will sprinkle clean water 
upon him, and he shall be clean; from all his filthiness will I 
cleanse him.” Satan, you are deceived, the purpose of God is 
before you! “Ah, but,” says Satan, “he is mine, I will have him, 
I will go and take possession, he is mine.” And so he is about 
to enter the vineyard and take possession of the vines of sour 
grapes, when lo, someone meets him on the threshold, and says, 


998 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


“What are you doing here?” “I am come to take possession,” 
he says. “Take possession,” says Christ, “I have a claim upon 
this vineyard, I bought it and paid for it with drops of blood. 
What are you doing here? You say, ‘I will possess this land,’ 
whereas the Lord was there.” And He shows the fiend the 
prints of the nails, and points him to His wounded side, and 
says, “Whatever your claim may be, Mine is a higher claim. I 
bought, I paid for, I have the acceptance from the divine hand, 
and this vessel of mercy was Mine, Mine long before you could 
have any claim upon it.” “Yes, yes,” says the devil, “but I have 
been providing for this soul that it shall lie in hell forever. I 
have determined to put such-and-such temptations in its 
pathway that it may go on step by step till it makes its bed in 
hell.” “Ah,” says the Lord, “I have been before you; if you have 
a providence so have I, and My providence is older than yours. 1 
have watched this man from the cradle even until now, and 
even when you have been leading him astray further and 
further from Me, I have overruled it all to bring him nearer and 
nearer to the predestined spot, and to the appointed moment 
when the eternal council shall be fulfilled, and that man shall 
be turned from darkness to light.” Satan, no doubt, thinks he 
lays his plans very prettily; there is only this to deceive his 
calculations and baffle his designs — “Whereas the Lord is 
there.” 

Perhaps the evil one led you here this morning to ridicule 
the gospel, but the Lord may be in it, and you may be brought 
to His feet. I have known the devil lead men into sin, and yet 
the very sin has been blessed of God to their conviction and 
conversion! I remember one, whose life had been eminently 
moral before, who was self-righteous, but the devil led him into 
a trap, and his fall opened his eyes to see the depravity of his 
heart, and so the devil’s head was cut off with his own sword — 
he was taken in his own net! Beloved, whatever Satan may do 


999 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


in providence, God is the master of providence, and He is 
waiting to be gracious, still. But the devil will say, “Yes, but I 
have him — I have got him now. I have put into his thoughts 
and into his mind all manner of lies, and he is mine.” “No,” 
says Christ, “but the Lord is there. He knows the gospel — today 
is the gospel preached in his ears — ‘Believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ and you shall be saved.’” “Yes,” says the devil, “he may 
know it, but I have the power over him; I have my hand upon 
the bit and the bridle — I will manage and control him.” But I 
trust the Lord will say to elect souls who are here this 
morning — “No, but I have the power over you. The Spirit of 
God shall go with the word, to turn them from darkness to 
light, and from the power of sin and Satan unto God.” And 
then shall it be said once more, “The dead soul had almost gone 
to hell, but it could not go, for the Lord is there in the road to 
stop him in his ruinous way.” 

Do I address a backslider — one who used to be a member 
of a Christian Church, but who has gone back to the world? 
Ah, poor soul, if you ever were a child of God, you will come 
back, yet; you will never live at ease — you cannot live happily, 
I know. But by God’s grace you will not live to your life’s end 
what you now are — for if the Lord is in you, the devil may get 
you to give up the means of divine grace; he may lead you to 
attend the public house; he may tempt you to forget the 
Sabbath, and to become as vile as other men, but if God is there, 
Satan will yet be cheated of his prey! At the last moment, if 
never before, I pray that you may hear the voice that says, 
“Return, return.” O that you would hear it this morning! Come, 
backslider, God has not cast you away! Having loved you with 
an everlasting love, He has not forgotten you! Come to His feet; 
confess your wanderings and offenses, and now, again, enter 
into His family and rejoice with unspeakable joy, and fullness 
of glory! You cannot be ruined, for “The Lord is there.” You 


1000 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


536 Jehovah-Shammah - Ezek. 35:10 


shall be saved, for “The Lord is there,” and will not leave you 
nor forsake you! 

IV. And now lasdy — and this is but a hint. The same, dear 
friends, is true with regard to THE ENTIRE WORLD. The world 
cannot be destroyed, because “Jehovah is there.” This world 
once shone, like its sister stars, bright and fair, but a sad shadow 
of eclipse was thrown upon it — it became swathed in the mists 
of sin, and though the glory of the Lord has risen upon it, yet 
still much of the gloom and the thick darkness continues. Shall 
that darkness cover all the nations? Shall the light become dim 
forever? No, no! “The whole creation groans and travails in 
pain together until now.” Shall its groans and travails end in 
nothing? No, no! The day comes when, “The glory of the Lord 
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for the 
mouth of the Lord has spoken it.” There are signs which we 
sometimes think portend the speedy coming of the Son of man, 
“when He shall stand in the latter day” upon Mount Olivet, and 
reign gloriously with all His ancients; then shall it be seen that 
since God in all ages was in the world with patriarchs and 
prophets, with Christ and His apostles, and with His Church 
throughout all time, there always was a reason why the world 
should yet be saved — why there should be a new heaven, and 
a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Despair not for the 
world, beloved; work on, hope on, pray on, and expect every 
blessing, for God is in the earth still, and therefore it can never 
be the devil’s globe — it can never be wholly given up to the 
enemy of Jehovah-Shammah, “The Lord is there.” 

Now, I do not know whether the Great Master is about to 
conduct some of you. You are, perhaps, about to journey 
across the sea. You may have, some of you, to go to a bed of 
sickness, but remember I give you this for your cordial — “The 
Lord is there.” It may be, brothers and sisters, some of you are 
appointed unto death, you have come to the borders of the 


1001 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


dark valley; or else bereavement will befall you, and you will 
have to visit and re-visit the graves of children and friends, and 
relatives. Remember the Lord is there. Through floods and flames, 
if Jesus leads, I’ll follow where He goes. Anywhere with Jesus! 
Anywhere with Jesus! Nowhere would I be without Him. If He 
says, “I am with you,” then will I neither fear the floods nor the 
fires, nor death, nor life, nor things present, or things to come! 
This shall be my joyous trust and boast — “The Lord is there.” 
God bless you. And in the school, the college, and our beloved 
classes, may it be said, “The Lord is there.” Amen. 


1002 



537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 1:38 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, October 18th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At Cornwall Road Chapel, Bayswater 


“Encourage him.” - Deuteronomy 1:38 

MOSES could not conduct the people into the promised 
land. Nor can the law bring any man to heaven. The law may 
lead a man out of the Egypt of his sin, and it may bring him 
into the wilderness of conviction; there it may provide him with 
food, and nourish him with some litde comfort, but the law can 
never give rest to the spirit. Into Canaan, Moses can never 
conduct the Israel of God. This was left for Joshua, whose 
name, you know, is but another form of the name Jesus. As 
Joshua, alone, could drive the Canaanites out of the land, and 
give a portion to all the seed of Israel, so Jesus, alone, can give 
rest unto the heirs of heaven. Moses cannot do it. He may see 
the promised land, but he can never enter it. Legal convictions 
may be accompanied with some desires towards divine things, 
yes, and some apprehensions of their sweetness, too; but the 
ultimate enjoyment, the rest which remains for the people of 
God, can only come to the believer through Jesus Christ. See 
here the weakness of the law. It is not able to bring us to our 
rest. “By the works of the law shall no flesh living be justified.” 
Fly then, to Jesus; for He is the Captain of our salvation, by 
whom our foes shall be subdued, and our everlasting 
inheritance secured! 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


It is not, however, my purpose to explore the mystic truth 
which is couched beneath; I confine myself this morning to the 
moral on the surface. Joshua was a young man in comparison 
with Moses. He was about to undertake the burdensome task 
of commanding a great people. He had, moreover, the difficult 
enterprise of leading them into the promised land, and chasing 
out the nations which possessed it! The Lord commanded 
Moses, therefore, to encourage Joshua, that in the prospect of 
great labor he might not be dismayed. This teaches us, I think, 
that GOD, EVEN OUR GOD, IS GRACIOUSLY 
CONSIDERATE OF HIS SERVANTS, and would have them 
well fitted for high enterprise with good courage. He does not 
send them as a tyrant would send a soldier upon an errand for 
which he is not capable; nor does He afterward withhold His 
succor, forgetful of the straits to which they may be reduced; 
but He is very careful of His servants, and will not let one of 
them perish. He counts them as the apple of His eye, keeps 
them at all hours, and defends them from all dangers. Why is 
this? The Lord our God has strong reasons for being thus 
considerate of His servants. Are they not His children? Is He not 
their Father? Does He not love them? If all human loves could 
be put together, they would scarcely make a drop in a bucket 
compared with the oceans of love which God the Father has 
towards His children! All mothers’ loves, all the loves of friends, 
of brothers and of sisters, of husbands and of wives — if all 
piled together, would be a molehill, and compared with the 
towering mountain of the divine love which God the Father 
has towards His chosen. We are — and there is no other figure 
which sets forth the whole length and breadth of that love — 
we are as dear to God as His only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ! — 

“So dear, so very dear, 

to God I cannot dearer be; 


1004 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


The love wherewith He loves His Son, 
such is His love for me!” 

“As the Father has loved Me, even so have I loved you,” 
said Christ. Now, none of us would send a child of ours upon 
a difficult enterprise without being anxious for his welfare. We 
would not put him upon a trial beyond his strength, without, at 
the same time, guaranteeing to stand at his side, and make his 
strength equal to his day. Moreover, the Father Himself is 
concerned as to His honor in all that they do. If any servant of God 
shall fall, then God’s name is despised. The daughters of 
Philistia would rejoice, and the inhabitants of Ekron triumph. 
“Aha! Aha,” they would say, “so we would have it! God’s 
servants are put to the rout; Jehovah was not able to give them 
victory. They trusted in Him, and they were confounded. They 
rested upon Him, and they fell to the ground.” Think not that 
the heavenly Father will ever permit this to be said. Will He 
ever send forth His servants to let them fall by the hand of the 
adversary? He is too jealous of His great name! His honor is 
too much concerned ever to permit this! You feeble ones, to 
whom God has given to do or to suffer for His name’s Sake, 
rest assured that He has His eyes upon you now. He cannot 
leave you, unless He can cease to be “God over all, blessed 
forever.” He cannot forget you, for His heart of love can never 
change, and the relationship which He has towards you can 
never be dissolved. Beloved, God the Father cares for His 
children because they are His children, and because His honor 
is concerned in them. How sweet the thought — if I fail, God 
fails — if I succeed, being God’s sent servant, God has all the 
honor! Could I lean on Him and fail, then to that degree God’s 
purpose is not fulfilled, God’s promise is not kept, and God’s 
nature is not glorified! Oh, when you can fall back on the name, 
the renown, the very character of God; when you can say, as 


1005 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Moses said upon the Mount, “What will You do for Your great 
name?” When you can plead as Luther did, “Lord, this is no 
quarrel of mine, it is Yours! You know You did put me to speak 
against Your foes, and now if You leave me, where is Your 
truth?” When you can plead with God in this way, surely He 
will rescue you. You cannot fail when your cause is God’s cause! 

Nor is the Divine Father alone concerned. Is not the Son of 
God concerned in the welfare of His brothers and sisters? He 
has bought them with His blood! That which a man dearly 
purchases he will highly prize. If he did not, it would be as 
much as to confess that he had paid too costly a sum for what 
he bought. You are bought with a price. A price tremendous 
enough; the King of Glory gave His heart’s blood to redeem 
poor worms like ourselves, but He will never confess that He 
gave too much for us! In love He will esteem the purchase equal 
to the price He paid. The love and the price are both infinite. 
As He looks upon any one of His people, He says, “There is 
My purchase,” and He values you not so much for what you 
are intrinsically worth, as because He sees the drops of His own 
blood upon you. “There,” He says, “is the travail of My soul; 
there is the divine satisfaction My Father gives Me for the 
sufferings I endured.” Do you think that when He thus values 
His servants He will leave them without His help? It cannot be! 
Moreover our blessed Lord has passed through precisely those very 
troubles to which He calls His people. “We have not a high priest 
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities.” 
“He was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.” 
The thorn in your foot pierced His heel before it touched you. 
The sorrow which sends the tears gushing from your eyes have 
first of all swollen His heart — 

“In every pang that rends the heart, 

The Man of Sorrows had a part.” 


1006 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


“In all their affliction He was afflicted, and the angel of His 
presence saved them.” If you have been widowed, you feel a 
compassion for those who are brought into the like state, to 
which others who have never passed through it are strangers. 
Were you ever a fatherless child? I know you will love orphans. 
Now our Lord and Master was forsaken of His Father. “My 
God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?” He says. He has 
gone all the length of human grief, and therefore, it is not 
possible that He should be inconsiderate concerning any one 
of His beloved! 

Do you not know, to crown this point, that every believer 
is actually a part of Christ? We are members of His body, of His 
flesh, and of His bones. Were the poor servants of God at 
Damascus persecuted? Christ suffered. “Saul, Saul, why do you 
persecute Me?” To this very day our Head is in sympathy with 
us — 


“He feels at His heart all our sighs and our groans, 

For we are most near Him, His flesh and His bones.” 

Do you think the Head will not care for the members? Shall 
I let my finger fester uncared for, until it needs to be cut away? 
Not while my brain can think, or my tongue can speak! And 
Jesus, as long as He can see His people, and His tongue can 
make any intercession, will not let even the lowest member of 
His mystical body suffer for lack of supplies. Even as God 
cared for Joshua, so does Christ care for you this morning, 
beloved member of the body of Christ! 

Is not this sufficient argument — the Father’s interest and 
the Son’s? If not, remember the most blessed Spirit. He dwells in all 
the people of God. How can He dwell in them and not be mindful 
of them? We forget the sick and the poor because they live in 


1007 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a back street, and we do not pass there; but you could not have 
poverty pining in your own house, I think, without readiness to 
relieve it! You would not have sickness lying in your own 
chamber without showing sympathy. Now, our body is the 
house of the Holy Spirit. He dwells in the body as in a temple, 
and do you think that He will see His people languish for lack 
of divine grace while He is present with them? Can it be that 
He will walk in them and see them famish, perceive their lack 
and destitution, and not supply their needs? Dream not so 
harshly of the tender and blessed Spirit, whose name is “the 
Comforter.” Be it never forgotten that it is His office to supply the 
needs of God’s people. It is the Holy Spirit’s business to see after 
the saints. “If I go away,” said Jesus, “I will send the Comforter 
to you.” So long as they had the personal presence of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, the disciples could want for nothing. As long as 
He had a crust of bread, they had half. If He had a place where 
to lay His head at any time given Him by charity, they could 
rest with Him. “Where I am there shall also My servant be,” 
was Christ’s loving rule. When He went away, then, they were 
left like orphans until the Spirit of God came as another 
Comforter, “Who would abide with them forever.” Do you 
think that the Holy Spirit will neglect His office? O you weak 
and trembling believer, do you imagine that God the Holy 
Spirit will be negligent of His sacred trust? Can you suppose 
that He has undertaken what He cannot, or will not, perform? 
Now, if it is His business to work in you, to strengthen you, to 
illuminate you, to comfort you, do you suppose He has 
forgotten you? Why say you, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel, “My 
way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over by 
my God? Have you not known, have you not heard, that the 
everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth, faints not, 
neither is weary.” You are near to Him; now His eyes are upon 
you. Like as a father pities his children, even so the Lord pities 


1008 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


you; and like as a mother tenderly comforts her suckling, even 
so the Lord loves you; the heart of His love is yearning over 
you, pitying your sufferings, ready to help you in your distresses. 
Trust in Him, and He will surely encourage you, and with your 
fears exchanged for faith, you shall triumph over every foe, and 
realize every promise! 

Observe well how far the tender consideration of God for 
His servants extends! He not only considers their outward state, 
and the absolute interests of their condition, but He remembers 
their spirits, and loves to see them of good courage. Some 
people think it a small thing for a believer to be full of doubts 
and fears, but I do not think so. I perceive from this text that 
my Master would not have you entangled with fears. He would 
have you without fear, without doubt, without sorrow; He says, 
“Encourage him” — as much as if He had told Moses that it was 
an important thing for His servant Joshua to have his courage 
duly sustained. My Master does not think as lightly of your 
unbelief as you do. You are desponding this morning; well, this 
is a grievous matter. My Lord loves not to see your 
countenance sad. It was a law, you remember, of Ahasuerus, 
that no one should come into the king’s court dressed in 
mourning; but it is not the law of my Master, for you may come 
mourning as you are; but still He would have you put off those 
rags, and that sackcloth, for surely there is much reason to 
rejoice. Rejoice in the Lord always! Be of good courage! Wait 
on the Lord, for He will renew your strength! 

The Christian must have his spirits sustained, in order that 
he may glorify the Lord. If his spirits are kept up, he will be 
able to endure trial upon trial. He comes to the fire, but it will 
never kindle upon him when his faith is firm. He walks through 
the rivers, but the floods never overflow him while he can look 
to his God. The sweetest songs believers ever have are those 
they sing at night. God’s people are like the nightingale — their 


1009 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


music is best heard when the sun is gone down. Oh, how much 
depends on your spirit being supported! Let the spirit sink, and 
a little trouble lays like a dead weight upon the soul. On the 
other hand, if faith is firm, tons of troubles become light as a 
feather. LTnless the spirits of God’s people are sustained, they 
will dishonor their God; they will think harsh things of Him, and 
perhaps they will speak harsh things against Him, and so the 
holy name of God will not be had in good repute. What a bad 
exa?nple it is! This disease of doubt and discouragement is an 
epidemic that soon spreads among the Lord’s flock. One 
downcast believer makes dozens sad; this phobia is a contagious 
species of madness as soon are men are bitten with it; if there 
is one doubt of the promise of God; straightway a whole 
congregation will begin to foam with like doubts! When Paul 
was in the ship and took bread and ate it in the midst of the 
storm, then all the crew were encouraged; but if Paul had been 
downcast, then, from the captain to the smallest cabin boy, 
there would have been great distress. Oh, be of good courage 
for the sake of your brothers and sisters in Christ! When you 
would say a hard or bitter thing, keep it back as David did, lest 
you should offend the generation of God’s people. “When I 
thought to know this, it was too painful for me.” Unless your 
courage is kept up, Satan will be too much for you! My experience 
teaches me that the cowardly old tempter always comes upon 
us when we are in our worst state. If he would but meet me 
sometimes , I could drive him as chaff before the wind; but he will 
always meet me when an attack of bile, or some domestic 
trouble, or ill tidings in the camp, hinder my cheerfulness. Then, 
sure enough, in some dark, narrow lane, stands the arch-enemy, 
with his sword drawn, and he swears he will spill the blood of 
my soul! But just let the heart be right, let the spirit be joyful in 
God my Savior, and the joy of the Lord shall be your strength, 
and no fiend of hell shall make headway against you! 


1010 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


Besides, labor is light to a man of cheerful spirit! You can 
work all day and almost all night when the spirit is right — but 
once let the heart sink and your soul lack encouragement — and 
then, you grow weary and cry, “Would God it were evening, 
and the shadows were drawn out, that we might rest from our 
toil.” Success waits upon cheerfulness! The man who toils 
rejoicing in his God, believing with all his heart, has success 
guaranteed! He who sows in hope shall reap in joy. He who 
trusts in the Lord and laughs at impossibilities, shall soon find 
that there are no impossibilities to laugh at! To the man who is 
confident in Jehovah, all things are possible. It is thus of 
paramount importance that the spirits of the Christian should 
be constandy kept up. God so considers it. Thus says the Lord, 
“Encourage him.” — “Make the good man’s heart glad; make 
the believer sing with joy; encourage him!” 

II. Secondly, we remark that GOD USES HIS OWN 
PEOPLE TO ENCOURAGE ONE ANOTHER. He did not say to 
the angel, “Gabriel, there is My servant Joshua, about to take 
the people into Canaan — fly down and encourage him.” God 
never works needless miracles; if His purposes can be 
accomplished by ordinary means, He will certainly accomplish 
them without using miraculous energy! Gabriel would have not 
been half so well fitted for the work as Moses. A brother’s 
sympathy is more precious than an angel’s embassy. The angel, 
swift of wing, had better known the Master’s bidding than the 
people’s temper. An angel had never experienced the hardness 
of the road, nor seen the fiery serpents, nor had he led the stiff- 
necked multitude in the wilderness. Moses felt it all. For my 
part, I am glad to think that God does His work by man. It 
gives us such a bond of brotherhood. We must be dependent 
on one another. We need condolence in our grief; and we invite 
companionship in our joys. So, being mutually dependent on 
one another’s countenance and counsel, we are fused more 


1011 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


completely into one mass, and made more thoroughly one 
family. 

To whom, then, should this work of encouraging the 
people be committed? Surely the elders should do it; those of 
riper years than their fellows. I know some aged persons, who 
whenever they see a young Christian, make it a point to inform 
him of all the difficulties and perils of the road. Like Mistrust 
and Timorous, they have always a doleful story to tell about the 
way to heaven. This was the old style of Christians in many of 
our Churches. For my part, I think that the aged Christian is 
better employed in looking after the lambs of the flock, and 
trying to carry them in their bosoms. Talk cheerily to the young 
and anxious inquirer; lovingly try to remove stumbling blocks 
out of his way. When you find a spark of divine grace in the 
heart, kneel down and blow it into a flame. Leave the young 
believer to discover the roughness of the road by degrees. Tell 
him of the strength which dwells in God, of the sureness of the 
promise, of the delightfulness of fellowship with Jesus, of the 
charms of communion with Christ. Entice the young Christian 
on, as good mothers teach their children to walk by holding out 
here a sweet, and there some tempting thing, that they may put 
their trembling feet one after the other, and at last know how 
to walk. I would that every Church had many of these aged 
brothers and sisters, fathers and mothers in Israel, who take 
this for their motto whenever they see a young Christian, — 
“Encourage him.” I know of nothing more inspiriting than to 
hear the experience of a gray-headed saint. I have found much 
spiritual comfort in sitting at the feet of my venerable 
grandfather, more than 80 years of age. The last time I saw him, 
I said to him, “I suppose you have had many trials, 
Grandfather?” He said, “I have not had too many, and the most 
of what I have had, I have made myself.” “And do you think 
that God will ever leave His people?” I asked. “No,” he said, 


1012 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


“for if He would leave one of them, He would have left me, 
but He is a faithful God, and I have proved Him, for I have 
known His love more than 70 years, and yet He has been 
faithful to me. Not one good thing has failed of all that the 
Lord God has promised.” Why, it comes home to the hearts of 
us young people, and makes us feel that we have found 
something which it is safe to depend upon when those who 
have gone through the valley can bear such a word of testimony 
as this! Do not let a word of peevishness come out of your 
mouth, my aged brothers and sisters; let no syllable of 
complaining ever escape you. Let your mouth be filled with 
your Lord’s praises and with His honor all the day, and so you 
will encourage others. 

Not the aged only, but the wise in the family should be 
comforters. All believers are not equal in knowledge. Some are 
quick of apprehension in the ways of the Lord; they rapidly 
acquire doctrinal knowledge; and experiential knowledge 
comes to them with a brighter light than it does to duller 
intellects. There are in all our Churches those who never will 
be doctors of divinity, though they know right well that they 
are sinners, and that Christ saves them, and so their acceptance 
is secured. If you talk to them about the mysteries of the gospel, 
they will soon get into depths where they lose their footing, for 
they have not learned to swim. Perhaps they will never be able 
to understand, or at least to appreciate, the doctrine of election. 
Now, wiser men should not keep their knowledge to 
themselves; above all they should not use it to criticize. I could 
tell of men who carry knowledge like a sword. They listen to 
the sermon, and when they meet some friend who gained a little 
good from it, they will quibble. They say, “Oh, the first or the 
third point I did not think quite sound.” They will be sure to 
have something to say that will knock the bread from the 
mouths of those who are willing to feed! They are more 


1013 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


knowing than wise. Moses was wise in doctrinal knowledge. 
With what consummate wisdom he addressed Joshua. “Be 
strong and of a good courage — for you must go with this 
people unto the land which the Lord has sworn unto their 
fathers to give them; and you shall cause them to inherit it. And 
the Lord, He it is who does go before you; He will be with you, 
He will not fail you, neither forsake you — fear not, neither be 
dismayed.” Oh, you, who have searched the Scriptures through, 
and know its promises — you who have been among these beds 
of spices, and whose garments smell of frankincense, be sure 
to quote the promises of God to trembling hearts, and 
especially to those engaged in arduous labor for the Master. 
Comfort them! Repeat the doctrine of God’s faithfulness; say 
to them, “He will be with you; He will not fail you, neither 
forsake you — fear not, neither be dismayed!” Oh, that the wise- 
hearted in the Lord’s family would be thus employed at all 
times! 

Nor can I doubt that the happier sort of Christians ought 
always to be engaged in comforting the mournful and 
sorrowing. You know whom I mean; their eyes always sparkle; 
wherever they go, they carry lamps bright with animation, 
sunshine gleams in their faces; they live in the light of God’s 
countenance. We have some of a more somber countenance, 
good people, too; they always see the black side of affairs. Now, 
you who are happy, try to encourage those who are downcast. 
Oh, dear friends, I am afraid we neglect this duty, many of us. 
You will say, “How can I perform it?” Always speak a kind 
word; find out those who are weary, and give them a word of 
consolation! Even a smile from your face may do them good. 
Do not avoid them because they are melancholy, but rather 
pursue them. Hunt them out, do not let them be quiet in their 
nest of thorns, but if the Lord has given it to you to soar aloft 
into the clear blue ether, try to carry your friend with you, and 


1014 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


lift him above the clouds! Suppose your house is on a hill and 
he lives down in the marsh, ask him to climb the hill and stay 
with you. Perhaps you have the keys of the promise; use the 
key and open the door for him. It is just possible that you may 
live in the upper story where you can see further and behold 
more of the blessed land. Ask him to come up from his cellar 
and walk on the roof of your palace, and scan the prospect 
through your telescope, “Encourage him. ” 

Let the brother of low degree be likewise encouraged by 
these who are rich among you. You may frequendy breathe 
comfort into a desponding spirit by seasonable help. The 
destitute will think himself rich upon your leavings. Perhaps 
your poor brother thinks you look down upon him because you 
are better off than he is — try to prevent his thinking so. If God 
has blessed you with a good position in Providence, be ready 
to encourage those who are poor and needy. Oh, if all these 
things I have been counseling should be put in practice, what a 
vast amount of happiness, by God’s grace, would be created! Our 
Churches would be more like families. I do not like people to 
come into a place of worship like so many icebergs floating out 
to sea, and wishing to avoid each other, but I like to see all 
distinctions broken down, except the distinctions of superior 
grace, and those only observed because one brother has cast in 
more to the common treasury of the Church of spiritual riches 
than another can do! I like those who fear the Lord to speak 
often to one another. We are getting into a bad state when they 
who fear the Lord speak often against one another. I believe 
that this one practice of encouraging each other might restore 
to the Churches that holy fraternity and blessed love which once 
distinguished them. I am sure this would enrich you all. It is by 
commerce that countries grow rich. France sends her exports 
to England, and England repays her with abundance. The labor 
of the humble, and the skill and enterprise of the lofty 


1015 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


contribute to the great commonwealth. An exchange of 
thought tends to help. A stream of holy wealth would flow 
through our Churches if each one would seek the other out 
with this aim of holy encouragement. How many a good thing 
is strangled in birth! How many a good enterprise is dashed to 
pieces on the shoals before it gets out to sea! Encourage that 
loving-hearted sister who thinks that she might at least take an 
infant-class in the Sunday school; encourage that aged woman 
who has but litde talent, but who yet might go from house to 
house to attend the sick. Encourage that poor struggling 
tradesman who would do something for the Master if he could 
by any means be delivered from the constant cares which 
harass him. Encourage every soul that has a spark of divine 
grace in it! Labor to help others and you shall find a most 
gracious return in your own soul. God encourages you, Christ 
encourages you as He points to the heaven He has won for you. 
The Spirit encourages you as He works in you to will and to do 
of His own will and pleasure. Then act the divine part and go 
forth to encourage others, according to the motto, “Encourage 
him.” 

III. I advance to THE OBJECTIVE that is uppermost in my 
mind. It struck me, some six weeks ago, that I might say a few 
things to my brother’s congregation which he might not like to 
say himself, [Brother Spurgeon was preaching at Cornwall 
Road Chapel, Bayswater] and that as his was a new enterprise — 
and I am sure all our hearts anxiously desire it the very richest 
success — I might possibly take the liberty of saying a few things 
to you, the congregation clustering around this pulpit, which 
may be useful in the future of the Church. I shall speak of him 
as a stranger, as I would speak of any other young man anxious 
to build up a Church, and glorify his Master. I believe there is 
a special occasion for the exercise of this duty of encouraging 
one another in the case of the minister and Church in this place. 


1016 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


It is a fresh enterprise surrounded with peculiar difficulties, and 
demanding special labor. “Why,” you say, “should a minister 
need encouraging? We have plenty of troubles all the week long 
with our losses here, and crosses there, we need 
encouragements, but surely ministers do not!” Ah, if you want 
to have a refutation of that idea, you had better come into this 
pulpit and occupy it a litde time! If you would like to exchange, 
I would truly say that, as far as the pleasure of my voice is 
concerned, apart from the spiritual joy my Lord gives me, I 
would change places with a crossing-sweeper, or a man who 
breaks stones on the road! Let a man carry out the office of a 
Christian minister aright, and he will never have any rest. “God 
help,” says Richard Baxter, “the man who thinks the minister 
has an easy life.” Why, he works not only all day, but in his 
sleep you will find him weeping for his congregation — starting 
in his sleep with his eyes filled with tears, as if he had the weight 
of his congregation’s sins resting on his heart, and could not 
bear the load. I would not be that man in the ministry who does 
not feel himself so fearfully responsible that if he could escape 
from the ministry by going with Jonah into the depths of the 
sea, he would cheerfully do it; for if a minister is what he should 
be, there is such a weight of solemn concern, such a sound of 
trembling in his ears, that he would choose any profession or 
any work, however arduous, sooner than the preacher’s post! 
“If the watchman warns them not, they shall perish, but their 
blood will I require at the watchman’s hands.” To sit down and 
ponder over the question — “Am I free of his blood?” is terrible! 
1 have sometimes thought I must have a day or two of rest, but 
I frankly confess that rest is very litde rest to me, for I think I 
hear the cries of perishing souls, the wailings of spirits going 
down to hell, who chide me thus — “Preacher, can you rest? 
Minister, can you be silent? Ambassador of Jesus, can you cast 
aside the robes of your office? Up and to your work again!” 


1017 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


As Mr. Whitefield said, when he thought of the ministry, 
and what was concerned in it, he wanted to stand on the top of 
every hackney coach in London and preach the gospel as he 
rode along. It is a work so solemn that if you do not encourage 
your minister, your minister will probably sink down in despair! 
Remember that the man, himself, needs encouragement, 
because he is weak. Who is sufficient for these things? To serve 
in any part of the spiritual army is dangerous, but to be a captain 
is to be doubly exposed. The most of the shots are aimed at the 
officers. If Satan can find a flaw in our character, then it will be, 
“Publish it, publish it, publish it!” If he can lead us to keep back 
a doctrine, or go amiss in practice, or wander in experience, he 
is glad enough! How delighted is the devil to break the vessels 
of mercy. Pray for the poor man, whom you expose to perish, 
if you do not preserve him by supplication! If there were a ship 
at sea stranded and broken on the rocks, and someone 
volunteered to carry a rope to the sinking crew, you, standing 
on the shore, could do no more — I think you could not do 
less — than cry, “O God, help him to bear the rope to that 
wrecked ship.” Pray for the minister, and encourage him, for 
there are plenty to discourage him! There are always carping 
spirits abroad who will remind him of any fault; he will be 
afflicted by those cowards who will not dare to sign their names 
to a letter, but send it to him anonymously! And then, there is 
the devil, who, the moment the man has got out of the pulpit, 
will say, “There is a poor sermon! You will never dare to preach 
it again.” After he has been preaching for weeks, there will 
come a suggestion, “You are not in your proper sphere of 
labor.” There are all sorts of discouragements to be met with. 
Professing Christians will backslide. Those who do remain will 
often be inconsistent, and he will be sighing and crying in his 
closet, while you, perhaps, are thanking God that your souls 
have been fed under him. Encourage your minister, I pray you, 


1018 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


wherever you attend — encourage him for your own sakes! A 
discouraged minister is a serious burden upon the congregation. 
When the fountain gets out of order, you cannot expect to find 
water at any of the taps; and if the minister is not right, it is 
something like a steam engine in a great factory — everybody’s 
loom is idle when the power is out of order. See that he is 
resting upon God and receiving His divine power and you will 
all know, each Sunday, the benefit of it. This is the least thing 
you can do. There are many other things which may cause you 
expense, effort, time — but to encourage your minister is so easy, 
so simple a matter, that I may well press upon you to do it! 

Perhaps you will say, “Well, if it is so simple and easy, tell 
us, who are expecting to setde down in this place, how we can 
encourage the minister here.” Well, you can do it in several 
ways. You can encourage him by very constant attendance. By the 
way, looking round here, I think I know some of the persons 
present who belong to neighboring chapels. What business 
have you here? Why did you leave your own minister? If I see 
one come into my place from the congregation of another 
brother in the ministry, I would like to give him a flea in his ear 
such as he may never forget! What business have you to leave 
your minister? If everyone were to do so, how discouraged the 
poor man would be! Just because somebody happens to come 
into this neighborhood, you will be leaving your seats? A 
compliment to me, you say. I thank you for it; but now, in 
return, let me give you this advice — these who are going from 
place to place are of no use to anybody; but those are the truly 
useful men who, when the servants of God are in their places, 
keep to theirs, and let everybody see that whoever discourages 
the minister, they will not, for they appreciate his ministry! 

Again, let me say, by often being present at the prayer meetings 
you can encourage the minister. You can always tell how a 
Church is getting on by the prayer meetings. I will almost 


1019 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


prophecy the kind of sermon on the Sunday from the sort of 
prayer meeting on the Monday! If many come up to the house 
of God and they are earnest, the pastor will get a blessing from 
on High; it cannot but be, for God opens the windows of 
heaven to believing prayer! Never fail to plead for your pastor 
in your closet. Oh, dear friends, when you mention a father’s 
name, and a child’s name, let the minister’s name come forth, 
too; give him a large share in your heart, and both in private 
and public prayer, encourage him! Encourage him, again, by 
letting him know if you have received any good. Oh, if there should 
come into this house of prayer, a sinner needing a Savior, and 
not knowing the way, and my brother’s words shall point him 
to the Savior’s cross; if he should be the means of showing you 
what faith means, and of leading you to believe in Him, who 
has reconciled us unto God by His death, do not conceal the 
good news — come and tell it! The best way to do it will be by 
proposing to be united with the Church in fellowship. Our 
Church meeting nights, when we receive fresh candidates into 
fellowship, are the harvest nights in the Christian ministry! 
Then, we see how God’s cause prospers in our hand; but if 
many in the Church who have been converted fail to let the 
minister know it, and hold back, how is the poor man to be 
comforted? I know I address some here — God’s people — who 
have never made a profession. Suppose all God’s people did as 
you do — and they have as much right to do it as you have — 
how, I ask you, would the ministry itself be maintained? How 
could ministers’ hearts be kept from breaking, if they never 
knew of any conversions? Make haste! Do not put it off! Delay 
not to keep God’s commandments, but come forward at once 
and be baptized, and acknowledge what God has done for your 
soul! 

Again, you can all encourage the minister by the consistemy of 
your lives. I do not know when I ever felt more gratified than on 


1020 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


537 Encourage Your Minister - Deut. 

1:38 


one occasion, when sitting at a Church meeting, having to 
report the death of a young brother who was in the service of 
an eminent employer, a little note came from him to say, “My 

employee, Edward , is dead. I send you word at once, 

that you may send me another young man; for if your members 
are such as he was, I never wish to have better employees 
around me.” I read the letter at the Church meeting, and 
another was soon found! It is a cheering thing for the Christian 
minister to know that his converts are held in repute. Of 
another member of my Church an ungodly employer said, “I 
do not think anything of him; he is of no use to anybody; he 
cannot tell a lie!” Oh, that is the honor which a Christian minister 
longs and pants after, to have consistent followers, to have 
those listening to him who will adorn the doctrine of God our 
Savior! 

Gather round my brother, all of you, and encourage him, 
by earnestly aiding and abetting him in every good word and 
work. There is a neighborhood here, I am told, requiring 
evangelization. Here we have side-by-side, poverty and riches. 
Shall not yonder wretched potteries be the better for the 
building of this house of prayer? I am sure my friend, Sir 
Morton Peto, would think he had wasted his money if it were 
merely for the gathering of a congregation, and not for 
improving the neighborhood! We build our houses of prayer 
always with a view to the people round about. We believe it is 
like opening a well in the wilderness, or an oasis in the desert, 
or placing a drinking fountain where thirsty souls may drink. It 
is introducing a new physician into the neighborhood to attend 
to the diseases and sickness of souls. Oh, how my heart yearns 
after the success of this house — not only because the minister is 
my blood brother, and also my brother in Christ, but because he is 
a valiant soldier of Christ! To preach the truth of God he has 
not hesitated to make himself a multitude of enemies elsewhere, 


1021 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and will not be ashamed to do the same here, if the same case 
should occur. I honor him because he has honored my Master; 
and I expect that you will get from him the truth of God, the 
whole truth of God and nothing but the truth of God — so far 
as God has taught it to him! I know he is ready to lay down his 
own neck for the conversion of souls. I know his earnestness 
to do anything for the conversion of sinners. And if you do not 
encourage him, you will bring down upon your head every 
curse of those who reject the prophet of God; but encouraging 
him, you will see a Church flocking around him which shall last 
long after our time, which shall be a perennial stream of 
benediction to ages yet unborn, until Christ Himself shall come 
and consummate the kingdom, by reigning Himself in person 
among the sons of men! May the Lord grant His blessing! 

Some of you cannot encourage the minister. You can 
encourage no one, for you are not born-again yourselves. Oh, 
if you have not passed from death unto life, the first thing that 
can encourage him is to begin to think about your own state. 
Where are you? What are you? Out of God, out of Christ, out 
of safety? You will be out of life, and out of heaven — shut in 
the pit of hell forever, except you repent! Oh, you will 
encourage the preacher, if the Lord leads you, to consider your 
ways, and turn from sin and from self-righteousness, too! Look 
to the Almighty Savior, able to save unto the uttermost all 
among you who shall trust Him! May the Lord add a blessing, 
for Christ’s sake. Amen. 


1022 



538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, November 1st, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“But My servant Caleb, because he had another spirit in 
him, and has followed Me fully, him will I bring into the land 
he went, and his seed shall possess it.” - Numbers 14:24 

IT IS A ROUGH NAME that — “Caleb.” Most translators say 
it signifies “a dog. ’’But what matters a man’s name? Possibly the 
man himself was somewhat rough — many of the heartiest of 
men are so. As the unpolished oyster yet bears within itself the 
priceless pearl, so oftentimes ruggedness of exterior covers 
worth. A dog, moreover, is not all badness, though, ‘Without 
are dogs and sorcerers.” It has this virtue that it follows its 
master; and therein this Caleb was well-named; for never dog 
so followed his master as Caleb followed his God! As we have 
seen the faithful dog following his master when he is on 
horseback through mud, and mire, and dirt, for many a weary 
mile, even though the horses heels might wound him, so Caleb 
keeps close to God; and even if stoning threatens him, yet is he 
well content to follow the Lord fully. The name, however, has 
another signification, and we like it rather better — it means “All 
heart. ” Here was a fitting surname for the man, whose whole 
heart followed his God. He says himself that he brought a 
report of the land according to all that was in his heart. He was 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a man of a healthy and mighty spirit; he did nothing heartlessly; 
his spirit was not the Laodicean lukewarmness, which is neither 
hot nor cold, which God spits out of His mouth — it was a spirit 
of holy heat, of noble daring. If I may not call him lion-hearted, 
never lion had a braver heart than he. Many mortals appear to 
have no heart. They are like corporations of which we are often 
told that a corporation has a head — does it not have a new 
mayor every year? And yet who ever saw it blush? It certainly 
has a mouth, for it swallows much — and hands, for it can grasp 
much — and feet, for it takes long strides; but whoever heard of 
a corporation with either heart or conscience? In the same 
manner it may be said of many persons — they have a head to 
understand and think, and feet to move, and hands to act, but 
a heart of compassion and they have not. Doubdess you have 
seen — doubtless you have met persons without hearts. The 
moment you come into their company you perceive what they 
are, as readily as the voyager on the Atlantic knows when there 
is an iceberg in the neighborhood, by the sudden chill which 
comes over him. You shake the man’s hand — it drops into your 
hand as cold as a dead fish; the man’s blood is cold as a 
December frost. You talk with him, but no effort on your part 
can stir the frozen current of his soul. You begin to speak to 
him about religion — which he professes to love so much — his 
words are few, his syllables faint, for his heart is not in the 
matter. Others we have the privilege of knowing — I trust there 
are many such in this community — who cannot talk of Jesus 
without emotion — 

“Their pulse with pleasure bounds, 

The Master’s name to hear.” 

If they sing, they wake up their glory, saying, with David, 
“Awake, psaltery and harp; I myself will awake right early.” If 


1024 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


they pray, it is the wrestling prayer of Jacob at the brook Jabbok; 
and if they serve their God, they carry out the words of the 
aposdes, “Whatever you do, do it heartily, as unto God and not 
unto man.” It is a hearty Caleb, then. We will rather interpret his 
name this way than the other; but if we put both together, he 
shall be a dog for faithfully following his God, but he shall be all 
heart, because he so fully follows his Lord. 

There are three things about Caleb worthy of consideration, 
then — first, his faithful following ; secondly, his favored reward; and 
thirdly, his inner character — that which was the secret source of 
his following God, namely, that “he had another spirit.” 

I. First, then, let this brave veteran stand before us; let us 
look at him, and learn something of HIS FAITHFUL 
FOLLOWING OF HIS GOD. 

Perceive, beloved, he never went before his God. That is 
presumption. The highest point to which the true believer ever 
comes is to walk with God, but never to walk before Him! It is 
true that we walk before the Lord in the land of the living, but 
that is in another sense, meaning under His eyes; we never run 
before God so as to outrun His providence, and become the 
directors of our own steps. They who travel before the cloud 
will soon find other clouds lowering upon them. Those who 
leave the fiery pillar, and will be their own guides, shall soon be 
in the fire, without a guide to bring them out again. We ought 
to follow the Lord. The sheep follow the shepherd. “He puts 
forth his own sheep,” says Christ, “and goes before them, and 
they follow him.” They follow as the soldier follows the captain; 
he points the road, leads the van, and bears the thick of the 
danger; while the faithful warrior keeps close behind. They 
follow as the disciple follows the Master, not teaching, nor 
discussing, nor disputing, but sitting at His feet, believing that 
when He leads in the way of knowledge, it is a true and a right 
way, whereas if we seek to be wise beyond what is written, we 


1025 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


make unto ourselves pits and traps, and fall into a snare. Caleb 
followed the Lord; many others do the same, but then they 
cannot win that adverb, which is Caleb’s golden medal — he 
followed the Lord, “fully, ” says one text, “wholly, ” says another. 
Some of us follow the Lord, but it is a great way off, like Peter, 
or now and then as did Saul the king. We are not constant; we 
have not given our whole heart to God. The essence, then, of 
the man’s faithful following lies in the adverb — “fully. ” And 
here, by your leave, in explaining this word “wholly, ” I shall 
follow the explanation of good Matthew Henry. I cannot think 
of a better or even of one as good, myself. 

1. He followed the Lord wholly, that is, first of all, he 
followed Him universally, without dividing. Whatever his Master 
told him to do, he did — 

“In all the Lord’s appointed ways 
His journey he pursued.” 

He did not say, “I will perform this duty and neglect the 
other; I will be faithful to my conscience and to my God upon 
this point, but that shall be left unto another day.” He took the 
commandments as he found them, and if they were 1 0, he did 
not desire to make them nine; nor did he want to change their 
order, and put that second which God had put first. He did not 
wish to divide the commandments; what God had joined 
together, he did not desire to put asunder. He followed the 
Lord without picking and choosing, being universally obedient 
to his Master’s law. Brothers and sisters, I wish we could say 
the same of all professed Christians! You see Caleb was quite 
as ready to fight the giants as he was to cany the clusters. We 
have a host who are ready for sweet duties, pleasant exercises, 
and spiritual engagements, which bring joy and peace, are 
always very acceptable; but as for the fighting of giants — how 


1026 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


many say, “I pray you have me excused.” To defend Christ’s 
cause against adversaries, to submit themselves to rebuke, to 
go up single-handed and fight against the Lord’s foes — from 
this the many will draw back, and we are afraid there are some 
who draw back unto hell, because they have never had the 
perfect heart given to them which is obedient to God in all His 
will. If you have a maid who will choose which of your 
commands she will obey, she is rather the mistress than the 
maid! If you, dear brother, shall say concerning the Lord’s will, 
“I will do this, and I will not do that,” you do in fact make 
yourself master! The spirit of rebellion is in you, you have already 
erred and strayed from your Lord’s ways, and set up the 
standard of revolt; mind that you do not pierce yourself 
through with many sorrows. 

Some excuse themselves for neglecting duties on the 
ground that they are non-essential — as if all duty was not 
essential to the perfect follower of Christ. “They are 
unimportant,” says the man, “they involve nothing;” whereas 
it often happens that the apparendy unimportant duty is really 
the most important of all! Many a great lord, in the olden times, 
has given up his land on copyhold to his tenant, and perhaps 
the fee which was to be annually paid was to bring a small bird, 
or a peppercorn — in some cases it has been the bringing of a 
turf, or a green leaf. Now, if the tenant should on the annual 
day refuse to do his homage, and say it was too trifling a thing 
to bring a peppercorn to the lord of the manor in fee, would 
he not have forfeited his estate, for he would have been setting 
himself up as superior owner, and asserting a right which his 
feudal lord would at once resist! It is even so — to quote a single 
instance — in the matter of believer’s baptism. When the 
believer says, “Well, surely this is but a small thing, I may safely 
neglect it,” does he not therein deny unto his sovereign Lord 
and Master that act of homage which, though it is simple in 


1027 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


itself, is nevertheless full of meaning, because it is an 
acknowledgment of the superior rights of the great King? Who 
told you it was nonessential? Who bade you neglect it? Surely 
it must be a spirit of darkness that talked with you! The Jew of 
old must not neglect circumcision. His child shall be cut off 
from the congregation of Israel unless the painful rite is 
performed. He must not refuse the paschal supper, for if he 
does, the destroying angel shall smite his household. And in 
that passover everything must be observed. Not a bone must 
be broken; the creature must not be eaten raw, nor sodden at 
all with water; it must be roasted in the fire; it must be eaten 
with bitter herbs. There are minute particulars given, and every 
one of these having the solemn command of God upon them, 
and are to be carefully observed by the children of Israel 
throughout all generations! Surely it must be so with Christian 
ordinances, and with the commands of the king of heaven! We 
cannot violate them with impunity. The spirit which would 
prompt us to neglect one of the least of them is of the devil, 
and leads down to hell — a spirit of partial obedience is a spirit 
of radical disobedience! The old prophet did but eat and drink 
at Bethel and that, too, as he thought, upon prophetic authority, 
and yet the lion slew him because he rebelled against the 
express bidding of God. We are not to imitate the Pharisee who 
tithed the mint, anise, and cummin, and then neglected the 
weightier matters of the law, but we are to remember that Jesus 
said, “These things you ought to have done, and not to have 
left the other undone.” So that mint, and anise, and cummin, 
are still to be tithed; and still in the little as well as in the great 
our obedience to God is to be carried out. Take care, dear 
friends, that, like Caleb, you follow the Lord fully, that is, 
universally, without dividing. 

Now may I put a question of conscience to all around me? 
Is there not something that I know to be my Master’s will 


1028 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


which I have not done? Brothers and sisters, is there not some 
command which as yet you have not obeyed? Some self- 
denying duty which you have shirked, some holy engagement 
for the good of your fellow men, or for your Lord’s glory, 
which you have carelessly avoided? If it is so, do, I pray you see 
to it, for you can never have the blessing of Caleb till you have 
the complete and universal spirit of obedience which Caleb had! 

2. But secondly, Caleb followed the Lord fully, that is, 
sincerely without dissembling. He was no hypocrite; he followed the 
Lord with his whole heart. One of the safest tests of sincerity 
is found in a willingness to suffer for the cause. I suppose that 
the 12 spies met each other in the south part of the land, and 
held a little consultation as to what should be the report they 
would bring up. Like 12 jurymen they were now to bring in 
their verdict, and ten of them were agreed — “It is a land that 
flows with milk and honey, but it eats up its inhabitants; it is 
full of giants with cities walled up to heaven, and it is impossible 
for us to take possession of it.” Caleb and Joshua both dissent 
from that verdict. I cannot tell what were the arguments and 
the reasonings, what the bantering and the jests, and the jeers, 
to which Caleb was exposed from the other 1 0 princes, but we 
do know that when they came to give in their verdict Caleb 
dared to stand forth, alone, and declare that such was not his 
testimony. Joshua appears to have said nothing, probably from 
prudential reasons, because, being the servant of Moses, the 
people would attach less importance to what he said, arguing 
that he was sure to take part with Moses, and would be biased 
by his superior. Therefore Caleb stood out alone, and took the 
brunt of the tumult. How courageous was that man, who had 
only numbered 40 summers, to put himself in opposition to the 
other 10 princes, and declare in flat contradiction to them — 
“Let us go up; we are able to possess the land.” When the 
people took up stones, and Joshua was forced to speak with 


1029 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Caleb, it was with no small peril, and required no litde mental 
courage to stand up amidst the insults and jeers of the crowd, 
and still to bring up a good report of the land. Caleb followed 
the Lord sincerely. O beloved, how many profess to follow 
God who follow Him without their hearts! The semblance of 
religion is often dearer to men than religion itself. As one says, 
many a man has spent 500 pounds upon a picture of a beggar 
by Murillo, or a brigand by Salvator Rosa, who would not give 
a penny to a real beggar, and go out of their wits at the sight of a 
brigand! The picture of religion, the outward name of it, men 
will give much to maintain, but the reality of religion — ah, that 
is quite a different thing! Many of our Churches are 
surmounted with the cross in stone, but how few of the 
worshippers care to daily take up the cross of Christ and follow 
Him! We know religious men who are respected by the ungodly, 
not for their religion, but on account of some accidental 
circumstance. It was not the religion itself they cared for. If you 
should take a bear in a cage into a town, men will pay their 
money to see it, but let it loose among them, and they will pay 
twice as much to get rid of it; so sometimes if a religious man 
has gift or ability, there are many who will regard, and admire 
him, but not for his religion! Let the religion itself come abroad 
in the daily actions of his life, and then straightway they begin 
to abhor him. There is much false love to Jesus — much 
unhallowed profession. Let us remember, however, that the 
day is coming when all false profession will be destroyed! The 
fan in Christ’s hands will leave none of the chaff remaining 
upon the wheat heap, and the great fire will not allow a single 
particle of dross to be unconsumed! Happy shall that man be 
whose faith was a real faith, whose repentance was sincere, 
whose obedience was true, who gave his heart, his whole heart 
to his Master’s cause! 


1030 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


3. The third point is most noteworthy. Caleb followed the 
Lord wholly, that is, cheerfully without disputing. Those who serve 
God with a sad countenance, because they do what is 
unpleasant to them, are not His servants at all. Our God 
requires no slaves to grace His throne; He is the Lord of the 
empire of love. The angels of God serve Him with songs, not 
with groans; and God loves to have the joyful obedience of His 
creatures; in fact I will venture to say that that obedience which 
is not cheerful is disobedience, for the Lord looks at the heart 
of a thing, and if He sees that we serve Him from force, and 
not because we love Him, He will reject our offering! That 
service which is coupled with cheerfulness is hearty service, and 
therefore true. Take away joy from the Christian, and you have 
taken away, I believe, that which is the test of his sincerity. If a 
man is driven to battle, he is no patriot, but he who marches into 
the fray with flashing eyes and a beaming face, singing, “It is 
sweet to die for one’s country,” proves himself to be sincere in 
his patriotism. Cheerfulness, again, makes a man strong in 
service. It is to our service what oil is to the wheels of a railway 
carriage. Without its proportion of oil, the axle soon grows hot 
and accidents occur; and if there is not a holy cheerfulness to 
oil our wheels, we shall not be able to serve God with anything 
like power. The man who is cheerful in his service of God 
proves that obedience is his element. I have seen the sea birds 
in stormy weather flying over the land with their huge heavy 
flapping wings. What a contrast between them and the lark, 
which, as it mounts to heaven makes its wings vibrate many 
times in a moment, while these heavy broad-winged creatures 
fly as if they could not fly; they are out of their element; they 
long till again they shall be swimming upon the sea. 

Some men in the service of God are like these heavy swans; 
their wing goes every now and then with a sort of dying flap — 
there is no sprightliness of life in them; they are out of their 


1031 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


element. Now God will never receive at our hands an 
obedience which is not consistent with our nature. Understand 
me, if it were possible for a man with an unspiritual nature, with 
a fallen nature, to perform the very same work which is 
performed by a saint, his nature would mar his act. God looks 
at the nature from which the act comes, and if He sees that it 
comes from a spiritual, renewed, regenerated nature, then He 
recognizes that obedience is our element, and so accepts our 
service. 

Let me put this question round among you all. Brothers 
and sisters, do you serve the Lord cheerfully? Frequently 
people give to the cause of God because they are asked. A 
guinea is dragged out of them. Do you think God cares for your 
guinea? You might as well have kept it; no blessing can come 
to you. When you give to the cause of God, do it cheerfully. 
He who gives must not give grudgingly, or else he has offered 
an unacceptable offering unto God. When you come out to 
week-night services, do you come because you should come, or 
do you love to come? This is the mark of the genuine child of 
God, the true Caleb — that he can sing — 

“Make me to walk in Your commands 
It is a delightful road.” 

The man has his heart right, he feels at home in the work 
of the Lord! Here is his joy — 

“It is love that makes our cheerful feet 
In swift obedience move.” 

Caleb was one of those who served the Lord cheerfully! 

4. But now there is a fourth point, he followed the Lord 
constantly without declining. Having begun when he first started 


1032 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


upon the search to exercise a truthful judgment, he persevered 
during the 40 days of his spying, and brought back a true report. 
Forty-five years he lived in the camp of Israel, but all that time 
he followed the Lord and never once consorted with 
murmuring rebels; and when his time came to claim his heritage 
at the age of 85, the good old man is following the Lord fully; 
still his speech betrays him; he shows a constant heart. God set 
his seal upon that man’s soul in his youthful days, and he 
remained his God’s when gray hairs adorned his brow. Beloved, 
how many professors fail in this respect? They follow the Lord 
by fits and starts; they go out from us because they are not of 
us; for if they had been of us, doubtless they would have 
continued with us. They leap into religion as the flying fish 
leaps into the air; they fall back again into their sins, as the same 
fish returns to its element. They make a great name for a time 
like the crackling of thorns, but lo, the flame has soon expired, 
for they are not like the miraculous bush which burned; God 
dwells not in them! Caleb was kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation. He could say with Jude, “Now 
unto Him who is able to keep me from falling, unto Him be 
honor and glory forever and ever.” He was not as some are, 
who imitate the lame beggar who limped all day in the streets 
to gather money, and then at night went to the thieves’ kitchen, 
where all the dainty bits were brought out of the bag, the money 
flowed freely, and the wine and the good cheer was bought, 
then the rogue unloosed his lame leg, and danced as merrily as 
the rest. No, Caleb was not of this kind. He did not limp in 
virtue nor leap in vice, his walk was always the same, and the 
way was always straight. God had delivered him from 
dishonesty, and had given him constancy in its place. How 
brighdy he shone when he was left alone, faithful among the 
faithless. Even Joshua for a while is silent. But we may compare 
him, to use the metaphor of good old Gotthold — we may 


1033 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


compare him to a tree. The wind had been blowing — it was a 
dreadful hurricane and Gotthold walked into a forest and saw 
many trees tom up by the roots; he marveled much at one tree 
which stood alone, and yet had been unmoved in the tempest. 
He said, “How is this? The trees that were together have fallen 
and this alone stands fast!” He observed that when the trees 
grow too closely they cannot send their roots into the earth — 
they lean too much upon each other; but this tree, standing 
alone, had space to thrust its roots into the earth and lay hold 
on the rock and stones, and so when the wind came, it fell not. 
It was so with Caleb — he always would lay hold upon his God, 
not upon men; and so when the wind came, he stood. I saw 
this morning a huge tree which stood by the water’s edge but 
yesterday, blown into the large pond upon our common. Well 
might it fall during such a night, but there were other trees 
further from the water that stood fast. You know it is our 
prosperity, our mercy-side — -it is where the water comes to the 
root, where the plenty comes, that the temptation comes, too, 
and we are always weakest where perhaps we dreamt we were 
the strongest! 

Caleb was constant because he was a rooted man, and even 
success did not overturn him. He was not one of those plants 
which spring up quickly because there is no depth of earth. He 
had a firm hold upon his God. You know, my sisters, how you 
wear your rings. I would that every Christian wore his graces 
after the same fashion. You wear not only the wedding ring, 
but the keeper, too. And every Christian should wear the 
keeper of constancy to guard the ring of his faith. Caleb had set 
a seal upon his heart, and a bracelet upon his arm — his love 
was strong as death, and endured even to the grave. He saw the 
Lord, he loved the Lord, he trusted the Lord, and for these 
reasons he followed the Lord wholly. Here I leave him, only 
asking you, dear friends, to see to it that you have his holy 


1034 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


perseverance. Therefore pray, “Hold You me up and I shall be 
safe,” and trust yourself where Caleb trusted himself — in the 
hands of God! 

I will give you those four subdivisions again — universally, 
without dividing; sincerely, without dissembling; cheerfully, 
without disputing; and constantly, without declining. 

II. Now for the second point, which is CALEB’S FAVORED 
PORTION. 

In reward for his faithful following of his Master, his life was 
presewed in the hour of judgment. The 10 fell, smitten with plague, 
but Caleb lived. Blessed is the man who has the God of Jacob 
for his confidence — 

“He who has made his refuge God 
Shall find a most secure abode; 

Shall walk all day beneath His shade, 

And there at night shall rest his head. 

What though a thousand at your side, 

At your right hand ten thousand died, 

Your God His chosen people saves 
Among the dead, amidst the graves.” 

If any man shall experience special deliverances, Caleb is 
he. If he follows God fully, God will fully take care of him. 
When you look to nothing but your Master’s honor, your 
Master will look to your honor. When Queen Elizabeth sent a 
certain merchant over to Holland, he complained to her, “If I 
do your Majesty’s business, my own business will be ruined.” 
‘You do my business,” said the Queen, “and I will see to your 
business.” It is so with our God. “My servant, serve Me, and I 
will serve you.” Caleb is willing to give his life for his Master, 
and therefore his Master gives him his life. There are many who 
seek their life who lose it; and there are some who lose it for 


1035 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Christ’s sake, who find it to life eternal! Caleb was also 
comforted with a long life of vigor. At 85 he was as strong as at 40, 
and still able to face the giants. If there is a Christian who shall 
have in his old age vigor of faith and courage, it is the man who 
follows the Lord fully! I have in my mind’s eye one who gave 
himself, while yet a young man, to his Master’s cause. He has 
zealously served the Church in his day and generation, and it is 
his privilege now to see the good of God’s chosen. His heart is 
so glad at the sight of God’s mercy that he is ready to say with 
Simeon — “Lord, now let Your servant depart in peace, 
according to Your word: for my eyes have seen Your salvation.” 
We gain our old saints from among those faithful young ones. 
If ever we are to see among us noble veterans — champions of 
the age whose heads shall be crowned with gray hairs of 
honor — we must look for those who in the beginning of their 
days were hearty in their Master’s cause, were universal in their 
obedience, thorough in their consecration to God. Experience; 
wisdom; divine grace are all gifts of our Lord Jesus to those 
who walk with zeal and earnestness in His ways! 

Again, Caleb received as his reward great honor among his 
brothers and sisters. He was at least 20 years older than any other 
man in the camp except Joshua. How the mothers would hold 
up their little children in their arms to look at Caleb as he 
walked down the street! “All died,” the mothers would say, “all 
died in Israel’s host, except that man who walks yonder with 
steadfast tread. All died, and their carcasses were buried in the 
wilderness, except that man and Joshua the son of Nun.” At 
their council he would be regarded with as much reverence as 
Nestor in the assemblies of the Greeks; in their camps he would 
stand like another Achilles in the midst of the armies of 
Lacedaemon; as king and sire he dwelt among men. As some 
mighty Alp lifts its head nearer to heaven than all its 
companions — its pure, snowwhite head communing with 


1036 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


celestial things — so this gray-headed old man must have 
seemed a towering summit in the midst of Israel’s worthies, a 
grace-made prime minister of the people of Israel after Joshua 
himself had departed! Well, brothers and sisters, such will God 
make of us if we give our hearts wholly to Him. I say, again, if 
we honor God, He will honor us. “They who honor Me I will 
honor; they who despise Me shall be lightly esteemed.” 
Inconsistent professors — men and women who may be 
Christians, but who never enter thoroughly into the Lord’s 
work — are never honored in the Church. They must necessarily 
keep in the background; they are rather tolerated than admired; 
but warm-hearted spirits, zealous and full of life — these are the 
men and women who stand like Joseph’s sheaf in the midst of 
his brothers sheaves which do obeisance unto it. 

Again — and you will think this is a strange thing to say — 
Caleb had the distinguished reward of being put upon the hardest 
service. That is always the lot of the most faithful servant of God. 
There were three huge warriors in Mount Hebron; no one will 
undertake to kill them except our good old friend Caleb. These 
Anakims, with their six toes on each foot, and their six fingers 
on each hand, are to be upset and driven out. Who is to do it? 
If nobody else will offer himself, here is Caleb! No, he does not 
merely allow himself to be sent upon the service, but he craves 
permission to be allowed to take the place, the reason being 
because it was the worst task of the war, and he panted to have 
the honor of it. Grand old man! Would God you had left many 
of your like behind you. If there is some pleasant thing to do 
for Christ, how we scramble after the service! But if there is a 
front place in the battle, “Oh, let our friend So-and-so do it.” 
Do you not notice the way most men decline the honor of 
special danger? “Our friend So-and-so is much better qualified 
for that; let him take it.” If we were true heroes we should each 
of us contend which should undertake the most hopeless, the 


1037 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


most difficult, and the most dangerous task! Who wins the 
honor? Why the man who leads the forlorn hope! But there are 
not many who will strive to have the privilege of going first. 
They are not quite so fond of being knocked off the ladder, and 
sent headlong from the wall to have their brains knocked out 
on the ground — not quite so desirous of being blown to pieces 
by the batteries. But, truly, if we could rival even earthly soldiers 
in their bravery and self-sacrifice, it would be well. Caleb had 
the distinguished honor of being permitted to lead the van 
against the gigantic Anakim. Follow the Lord fully, and the 
devil himself will be afraid of you; keep close to your Lord, and 
defy all the fiends of hell. Last Tuesday morning, when I left 
London to go to Worcester to preach, the fog was about as 
thick as I have ever seen it, but what did that matter? The 
engine had just to keep on the rails, stick fast to the metals and 
she was safe. There was no particular need of seeing, because 
the road was laid down; and when a Christian knows he is right, 
he may go straight on, fog or no fog! But when a man gets off 
the road, then he may well pause, for he may be in a ditch, and 
no one knows how soon he may come to grief. Get your heart 
right, and you are independent of weather. Get your soul right, 
and you may defy the sharpest arrow of the adversary. The 
Lord is with us, if we are with Him. 

This grand old man in his later years had the honor of enjoying 
what he had once seen. He had only seen the land when he said, 
“We are able to take it.” But others said, “No, no, no.” Well, 
he lived not only to take it, but to enjoy it for himself. We get 
in some of our Churches — I say nothing of mine just now — 
certain reverend old gentlemen who might as well have gone to 
heaven years ago, who if there is any enterprise to be 
undertaken, say, “Oh, no, no! It cannot be done.” They sit 
down and figure away on a piece of paper with their pencil and 
say, “We have not enough money; it cannot be done.” Perhaps 


1038 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


some youthful soldier of Christ in the army says, “It can be 
done; I am sure we can do it.” But the good old man, having 
made up his mind never to walk by faith, stands to his 
watchword, “It is imprudent.” That is the big word with which 
they try to knock out the brains of young Zeal — “imprudent, 
imprudent!” But thank God there are others of another sort, who 
though they grow gray, say, “Well, I do not know; I may be 
thought to be a boy in my old age, but I do believe that God 
will hear prayer, and that if it is God’s work, we can do it.” And 
the old man lays his hand on the young soldier’s shoulder and 
bids him go on, and God be with him. That is the kind of Caleb 
I like! May such men live to see the reward of their confidence! 
Indeed they shall see that God is true to their faith, and that He 
does reward those who dare to do difficult things in confidence 
in His name. I may be speaking to some people from the 
country; you have got a minister down there, but he wants to 
do a litde better than you like him to do. Now mind what you 
think! Stand back! If you cannot help him, leave him alone. But 
I do pray you, on the other hand, endeavor to encourage him, 
cheer him on, for you will never win a Hebron for yourself or 
the Church if you are always talking about the giants, and the 
difficulties, and the dangers! There are no difficulties to the 
man who has faith enough to overcome them. 

To conclude this point, good old Caleb left a blessing to his 
children. He had many sons, but he fought for them, and carved 
out a portion for them all. And he had a daughter, too, whom 
he promised to give to wife, you will remember, to anyone who 
would smite Kirjath-Sepher. He was a man of such a kind that 
he did not like to have a man for a son-in-law who could not 
fight as well as himself. He delighted to see valor in young 
people, and so he offered his daughter as a prize. When he had 
given his daughter, she came to him and asked for a double 
blessing. She had the field and a south country — she would 


1039 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


have the land of springs — and he gave her the blessing of the 
upper and the nether springs. If there is any man who shall be 
able to leave his children the blessing of the upper and nether 
springs, it is the man who follows the Lord fully! If I might 
envy any man, it would be the believer who from his youth up 
has walked through divine grace according to his Lord’s 
commandments, and who is able, when his day comes, to 
scatter benedictions upon his rising sons and daughters, and 
leave them with godliness which has the blessing of this life and 
that which is to come. The blessing of the upper and the nether 
springs, then, was the reward of good old Caleb. There are 
some of us who are young in years, members of this Church, 
men and women, and we have before us, I hope, the 
opportunity, if God gives us divine grace, of becoming like 
Caleb! And if the Lord should spare me as he spared Joshua, 
and spare you as he spared Caleb, we may yet, when our hairs 
are gray, do something, still, for the Lord our God, when those 
who fought the fight before us shall sleep among the clods of 
the valley. O, for the Holy Spirit within us, and the love of Jesus 
upon us, that we may be accepted in the Beloved! 

III. And now, the last point of all — CALEB’S SECRET 
CHARACTER. 

The Lord says of him, “Because he has another spirit in 
him.” He had another spirit — not only a bold, generous, 
courageous, noble and heroic spirit, but the Spirit and influence 
of God which thus raised him above human disturbances and 
earthly fears. Therefore he followed God fully — literally he 
filled after Him. God showed him the way to take, and the line 
of conduct he must pursue — and he filled up this line, and in 
all things followed the will of his Master. Everything acts 
according to the spirit that is in it. Yonder lamp gives no light. 
Why? It has no oil. Here is another. It cheers the darkness of 
the cell. Why? It is full of oil, and oil is the mother of light. 


1040 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


538 Caleb - The Man for the Times - 
Num. 14:24 


There are two huge bags of silk. One of them lies heavily upon 
the ground, the other mounts up towards the stars. The one is 
filled with carbonic-acid gas; it cannot mount, it acts according 
to the spirit that is in it; it has a heavy gas, and there it lies. 
There is another full of hydrogen, and it acts according to the 
spirit that is in it, and up it goes; the light air seeks the lighter 
regions, and up it mounts! Everything according to its own 
order; the real way to make a new life is to receive a new spirit. 
There must be given us, if we would follow the Lord fully, a 
new heart, and that new heart must be found at the foot of the 
cross, where the Holy Spirit works through the bleeding 
wounds of Jesus! Dear friends, I would to God that we had, all 
of us, that which is the distinguishing mark of a right spirit, the 
spirit of faith, that spirit which takes God at His word, reads 
His promise, and knows it to be true. He who has this spirit 
will soon follow the Lord fully. Unbelief is the mother of sin, 
but faith is the nurse of virtue. More faith, Lord, more simple 
childlike faith upon a precious Savior! Then a faithful spirit 
always begets a meek spirit, and a meek spirit always begets a 
brave spirit. It is said of the wood of the elder tree that none is 
softer, but yet it is recorded of old that Venice was built upon 
piles of the elder tree because it will never rot; and so the meek- 
spirited man who is gentle and patient lasts on bravely, holding 
his own against all the attacks of the destroying adversary. The 
true believer has also a loving spirit as the result of Jesus’ grace. 
He loves God, therefore he loves God’s people, and God’s 
creatures, and having this loving spirit he has next a jealous 
spirit, and so he spends and is spent for God, and this begets 
in him a heavenly spirit and so he tries to live in heaven, and to 
make earth a heaven to his fellow men, believing that he shall 
soon have a heaven for himself and for them, too, on the other 
side of the stream. Such a spirit had good Caleb. We cannot 
imitate him till we get his spirit; we are dead until He quickens 


1041 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


us. O that the Holy Spirit would lead us to go to Jesus just as 
we are, and look up to Him and beseech Him to fulfill that great 
Covenant promise — “A new heart also will I give them, a right 
spirit w'M I put within them.” 

You and I have not followed the Lord fully. What shall we 
do, then? First let us humbly repent! Caleb means a dog. Let us 
learn from a dog. When a dog has done amiss, and you take a 
stick, and are about to beat him, he will lie down on the ground 
and howl, and creep to your feet, and look up so piteously at 
you that you throw down your stick. Now let us each do the 
same. Let us each be Calebs — dogs in this. Let us crouch at the 
feet of God’s justice, let us look up into the face of God’s mercy, 
and through Jesus Christ He will forgive us. Having done this, 
may He enable us to exercise a simple faith in Christ. As the 
child lives hanging upon the mother’s breast, and deriving its 
nourishment from the parent, so be it yours and mine to hang 
upon the wounds of our own dear Lord; and tonight when we 
come to His table, let us eat His flesh, and drink His blood, 
keeping close to His person, receiving our life from the secret 
channels of His life, living upon Him. Ah, if we live close to 
Jesus, we must be Calebs! He who is one with Jesus will follow 
God because Jesus is perfect in His following of His Father, 
and we, being parts of Him, shall be perfect too; but the Holy 
Spirit’s work must begin by bringing us to Jesus just as we are. 
God help us to trust Him as we are, and then, by His grace, He 
will make us Calebs and keep us to the end! Amen. 


1042 



539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 5:8 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, November 8th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my 
beloved, that you tell Him that I am lovesick.” - Song of 
Solomon 5:8 

SICK! That is a sad thing. It moves your pity. “Sick of love” 
(KJV) — lovesick! That stirs up other emotions which we shall 
presendy attempt to explain. No doubt certain sicknesses are 
peculiar to the saints — the ungodly are never visited with them. 
Strange to say, these sicknesses, to which the refined 
sensibilities of the children of God render them peculiarly liable, 
are signs of vigorous health. Who but the beloved of the Lord 
ever experience that sin-sickness in which the soul loathes the 
very name of transgression, is unmoved by the enchantments 
of the tempter, finds no sweetness in its besetting sins, and 
turns with detestation and abhorrence from the very thought 
of iniquity? No less is it for these, and these alone, to feel that 
self-sickness whereby the heart revolts from all creature 
confidence and strength, having been made sick of self, self- 
seeking, self-exalting, self-reliance, and self of every sort! The 
Lord afflicts us more and more with such self-sickness till we 
are dead to self, its puny conceits, its lofty aims, and its 
unsanctified desires. Then there is a twofold lovesickness. Of the 
one kind is that lovesickness which comes upon the Christian 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


when he is transported with the full enjoyment of Jesus, even 
as the bride elated by the favor, melted by the tenderness of her 
Lord, says in the 5th verse of the second chapter of the Song, 
“Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples: for I am 
lovesick.” The soul, overjoyed with the divine communications 
of happiness and bliss which came from Christ, the body 
scarcely able to bear the excessive delirium of delight which the 
soul possessed, she was so glad to be in the embraces of her 
Lord, that she needed to be stayed under her overpowering 
weight of joy. Another kind of lovesickness, widely different 
from the first, is that in which the soul is sick, not because it 
has too much of Christ’s love, but because it has not enough 
present consciousness of it; sick, not of the enjoyment, but of 
the longing for it; sick, not because of excess of delight, but 
because of sorrow for an absent lover. It is to this sickness we 
call your attention, this morning. This lovesickness breaks out 
in two ways, and may be viewed in two lights. It is, first of all, 
the soul longing for a view of Jesus Christ in grace; and then again, it 
is the same soul possessing the view of divine grace, and longing for a 
sight of Jesus Christ in glory. In both these senses we, as accurately 
as the spouse, may adopt the languishing words, “If you find 
my beloved, tell Him that I am lovesick.” 

I. First, then, let us consider our text as the language of a 
soul LONGING FOR THE VIEW OF JESUS CHRIST IN GRACE. 

1. Do you ask me concerning the sickness itself — What is it? 
It is the sickness of a soul panting after communion with Christ. 
The man is a believer; he is not longing after salvation as a 
penitent sinner under conviction, for he is saved. Moreover, he 
has love to Christ and knows it; he does not doubt his evidence 
as to the reality of his affection for his Lord, for you see the 
word used is, “My beloved,” which would not be applicable if 
the person speaking had any doubt about her interest; nor did 
she doubt her love, for she calls the spouse, “My beloved. ” It is 


1044 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


the longing of a soul, then, not for salvation, and not even for 
the certainty of salvation, but for the enjoyment of present 
fellowship with Him who is her soul’s life, her soul’s all! The 
heart is panting to be brought once more under the apple tree; 
to feel once again His “left hand under her head, while His right 
hand does embrace her.” She has known, in days past, what it 
is to be brought into His banqueting house, and to see the 
banner of love waved over her, and she, therefore, cries to have 
love visits renewed. It is a panting after communion. Gracious 
hours, my dear friends, are never perfectly at ease except they 
are in a state of nearness to Christ; for mark you, when they are 
not near to Christ, they lose their peace. The nearer to Jesus, the 
nearer to the perfect calm of heaven; and the further fromjesus, 
the nearer to that troubled sea which images the continual 
unrest of the wicked! There is no peace to the man who does 
not dwell constandy under the shadow of the cross; for Jesus 
is our peace, and if He is absent, our peace is absent, too. I 
know that being justified we have peace with God, but it is 
“through our Lord Jesus Christ.” So that the justified man 
himself cannot reap the fruit of justification, except by abiding 
in Christ Jesus, who is the Lord and Giver of peace. The 
Christian without fellowship with Christ loses all his life and 
energy; he is like a dead thing. Though saved, he lies like a 
lumpish log — 

“His soul can neither fly nor go 
To reach eternal joys.” 

He is without liveliness, yes, more, he is without animation 
till Jesus comes; but when the Lord sensibly sheds abroad His 
love in our hearts, then His love kindles ours; then our blood 
leaps in our veins for joy, like the Baptist in the womb of 
Elizabeth! The heart, when near to Jesus, has strong pulsations, 


1045 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


for since Jesus is in that heart, it is full of life, of vigor, and of 
strength! Peace, liveliness, vigor — all depend upon the constant 
enjoyment of communion with Christ Jesus! The soul of a 
Christian never knows what joy means in its true solidity, except 
when she sits, like Mary, at Jesus’ feet. Beloved, all the joys of 
life are nothing to us; we have melted them all down in our 
crucible, and found them to be dross. You and I have tried 
earth’s vanities, and they cannot satisfy us; no, they do not give 
a morsel of meat to satiate our hunger. Being in a state of 
dissatisfaction with all mortal things, we have learned through 
divine grace that none but Jesus, none but Jesus can make our 
souls glad. “Philosophers are happy without music,” said one 
of old. So Christians are happy without the world’s goods. 
Christians, with the world’s goods, are sure to bemoan 
themselves as naked, poor, and miserable, unless their Savior is 
with them. You who have ever tasted communion with Christ 
will soon know why it is that a soul longs after Him. What the 
sun is to the day, what the moon is to the night, what the dew 
is to the flower — such is Jesus Christ to us! 

What bread is to the hungry, clothes to the naked, the 
shadow of a great rock to the traveler in a weary land — such is 
Jesus Christ to us! What the turtle is to her mate, what the 
husband is to his spouse, what the head is to the body — such 
is Jesus Christ to us; and therefore, if we have Him not, no, if 
we are not conscious of having Him; if we are not one with Him, 
no, if we are not consciously one with Him, little marvel if our 
spirit cries in the words of the Song, “I charge you, O you 
daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my beloved, tell Him that I 
am lovesick.” Such is the character of this lovesickness. We 
may say of it, however, before we leave this point, that it is a 
sickness which has a blessing attending it — “Blessed are they who 
hunger and thirst after righteousness.” And therefore, 
supremely blessed are they who thirst after the Righteous 


1046 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


One — after Him who in the highest perfection embodies pure, 
immaculate, spotless righteousness! Blessed is that hunger, for 
it comes from God. It bears a blessing within it; for if I may 
not have the blessedness in full bloom of being filled, the next 
best thing is the same blessedness in sweet bud of being empty 
till I am filled with Christ! If I may not feed on Jesus, it shall be 
next door to heaven to be allowed to hunger and thirst after 
Him! There is a hallowedness about that hunger, since it 
sparkles among the beatitudes of our Lord. Yet, it is a sickness, 
dear friends, which, despite the blessing, causes much pain. The 
man who is sick after Jesus will be dissatisfied with everything 
else; he will find that dainties have lost their sweetness, and 
music its melody, and light its brightness — life itself will be 
darkened with the shadow of death to him, till he finds his Lord 
and can rejoice in Him! Beloved, you shall find that this 
thirsting, this sickness, if it ever gets hold upon you, is attended 
with great vehemence. The desire is vehement as coals of juniper. 
You have heard of hunger that breaks through stone walls — 
but stone walls are no prison to a soul that desires Christ! Stone 
walls, no, the strongest natural barriers, cannot keep a lovesick 
heart from Jesus! I will venture to say that the temptation of 
heaven itself, if it could be offered to the believer without his 
Christ, would be as less than nothing; and the pains of hell, if 
they could be endured, would be gladly ventured upon by a 
lovesick soul, if he might but find Christ! As lovers sometimes 
talk of doing impossibilities for their fair ones, so certainly a 
spirit that is set on Christ will laugh at impossibility, and say, 
“It shall be done.” It will venture upon the hardest task, go 
cheerfully to prison, and joyfully to death, if it may but find its 
beloved and have its lovesickness satisfied with His presence. 
Perhaps this may suffice for a description of the sickness here 
intended. 


1047 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


2. You may inquire concerning the cause of this 
lovesickness. What makes a man’s soul so sick after Christ? 
Understand that it is the absence of Christ which makes this 
sickness in a mind that really understands the preciousness of 
His presence. The spouse had been very willful and wayward; 
she had taken off her garments, had gone to her rest, her 
sluggish slothful rest, when her beloved knocked at the door. 
He said, “Open to Me, My beloved; for My head is filled with 
dew, and My locks with the drops of the night.” She was too 
slothful to wake up to let Him in! She gave excuses — “I have 
put off my coat; how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet; 
how shall I defile them?” The beloved stood waiting, but since 
she opened not, He put in His hand by the hole of the lock and 
then her heart was moved towards Him. She went to the door 
to open it, and to her surprise her hands dripped with myrrh, 
and her fingers with sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of 
the lock! There was the token that He had been there, but He 
was gone. Now, she began to bestir herself, and seek after Him. 
She sought Him through the city, but she found Him not. Her 
soul failed her; she called after Him, but He gave her no answer, 
and the watchmen, who ought to have helped her in the search, 
smote her, and took away her veil from her. Therefore, it is that 
now she is seeking, because she has lost her beloved! She 
should have held Him fast, and not have permitted Him to go. 
He is absent, and she is sick till she finds Him. Mingled with 
the sense of absence is a consciousness of wrong-doing. Something 
in her seemed to say, “How could you drive Him away? That 
heavenly bridegroom who knocked and pleaded hard, how 
could you keep Him longer there amidst the cold dews of night? 
O unkind heart! What if your feet had been made to bleed by 
your rising? What if all your body had seen chilled by the cold 
wind, when you were treading the floor? What had it been, 
compared with His love to you?” And so she is sick to see Him, 


1048 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


that she may weep out her love and tell Him how vexed she is 
with herself that she should have held to Him so loosely, and 
permitted Him so readily to depart. 

So, too, mixed with this, was great wretchedness because He 
was gone. She had been for a little time easy in His absence. 
That downy bed, that warm cover, had given her a peace, a false, 
cruel, and a wicked peace. But she has risen now, the watchmen 
have smitten her, her veil is gone, and, without a friend, the 
princess, deserted in the midst of Jerusalem’s streets, has her 
soul melted for heaviness, and she pours out her heart within 
her as she pines after Her Lord. “No love but my love, no Lord 
but my Lord,” she says, with sobbing tongue, and weeping eyes; 
for none else can gratify her heart or appease her anxiety! 
Beloved, have you ever been in such a state, when your faith 
has begun to droop, and your heart and spirits have fled from 
you? Even then, your soul was sick for Him. You could do 
without Him when Mr. Carnal-Security was in the house and 
feasted you — but when he and his house have both been 
burned with fire, the old lovesickness came back and you 
needed Christ, nor could you be satisfied till you found Him 
once again. There was true love in all this, and this is the very 
essence of all lovesickness. Had not she loved, absence would 
not have made her sick, nor would her repentance have made 
her grieve. Had she not loved, there would have been no pain 
because of absence, and no sinking of spirits, but she did love, 
and thus all this sickness! It is a delightful thing to be able to 
know when we have lost Christ’s company that we do love 
Him — “Yes, Lord, You know all things; You know that I love 
You; I did deny You, yes, in the moment of Your sorrow, I said, 
‘I know not the man.’ I did curse and swear that men might 
think I was no follower of Yours, but still You know all things; 
You know that I love You.” When you can feel this, dear 
friends, the consciousness that you love will soon work in you 


1049 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


a heart-burning, so that your soul will not be satisfied till you can 
tell out that love in the Master’s presence, and He shall say to 
you, as a token of forgiveness, “Feed My sheep.” I do not 
doubt that in this sickness there had been some degree of fear. 
Sorrowful woman! She was half afraid she might never find 
Him again. She had been about the city — where could He be? 
She had sought Him on the walls, and on the ramparts, but He 
was not there. In every ordinance, in every means of divine 
grace, in secret and in public prayer, in the Lord’s Supper, and 
in the reading of the Word, she had looked after Him — but He 
was not there! And now, she was half afraid that though He 
might give His presence to others, yet never to her, and when 
she speaks, you notice there is fear in her voice. She would not 
have asked others to tell Him if she had any assuring hope that 
she would meet Him herself — “If you find Him,” she seems to 
say, “O you true converts, you who are the real daughters of 
Jerusalem; if He reveals Himself to you, though He never may 
to me, do me this kindness, tell Him that I am lovesick.” There 
is half a fear here, and yet, there is some hope. She feels that He 
must still love her, or else why send a message at all? She would 
surely never send this sweet message to a flinty, adamantine 
heart, “Tell Him I am lovesick,” and she remembered when the 
“glances of her eyes had ravished Him; she remembered when 
a motion from her hand had made His heart melt, and when 
one tear of her eyes had opened all His wounds afresh. She 
thinks, “Perhaps He still loves me as He loved me then, and 
my moans will enchain Him; my groans will constrain Him, and 
lead Him to my help.” So she sends the message to Him — “Tell 
Him, tell Him I am lovesick.” 

To gather up the causes of this lovesickness in a few words, 
does not the whole matter spring from relationship ? She is His 
spouse; can the spouse be happy without her beloved Lord? It 
springs from union; she is part of Him. Can the hand be happy 


1050 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


and healthy if the life-floods stream not from the heart and 
from the head? Fondly realizing her dependence, she feels that she 
owes all to Him, and gets her all from Him. If then the fountain 
is cut off, if the streams are dried, if the great source of all is 
taken from her, how can she but be sick? And there is, besides 
this, a life and a nature in her which makes her sick. There is a 
life like the life of Christ, no, her life is in Christ, it is hid with 
Christ in God; her nature is a part of the divine nature; she is a 
partaker of the divine nature! Moreover she is in union with 
Jesus, and this piece divided, as it were, from the body, wriggles 
like a worm cut asunder and pants to get back to where it came 
from. These are the causes of it. You will not understand my 
sermon, this morning, but think me raving, unless you are 
spiritual. “But the spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is 
judged of no man.” 

3. What endeavors such lovesick souls mil put forth. Those who 
are sick for Christ will first send their desires to Him. Men use 
pigeons sometimes to send their messages. Why, what sort of 
carrier pigeons do they use? The pigeon is of no use to send 
anywhere but to the place from which it came, and my desires 
after Christ came from Him, and so they will always go back to 
the place from which they came; they know the way to their 
own dovecot, so I will send Him my sighs and my groans, my 
tears and my moans. Go, go, sweet doves, with swift and 
clipping wings, and tell Him I am lovesick! Then she would 
send her prayers. Ah, I think she would say of her desires, “They 
will never reach Him; they know the way, but their wings are 
broken, and they will fall to the ground and never reach Him.” 
Yet, she will send them whether they reach Him or not! As for 
her prayers, they are like arrows. Sometimes messages have 
been sent into besieged towns bound to an arrow, so she binds 
her desires upon the arrow of her prayers, and then shoots 
them forth from the bow of her faith. She is afraid they will 


1051 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


never reach Him, for her bow is slack, and she knows not how 
to draw it with her feeble hands which hang down. So what 
does she do? She has traversed the streets; she has used the 
means; she has done everything; she has sighed her heart out, 
and emptied her soul out in prayers. She is all wounds till He 
heals her; she is all a hungry mouth till He fills her; she is all an 
empty brook till He replenishes her once again, and so now, 
she goes to her companions and she says, “If you find my beloved, 
tell Him I am lovesick.” This is using the intercession of the saints. 
It is unbelief that makes her use it, and yet, there is a little faith 
mixed in her unbelief. It was unbelief but not a misbelief. There 
is efficacy in the intercession of saints. Not of dead saints — they 
have enough to do to be singing God’s praises in heaven 
without praying for us — but saints on earth can take up our case. 
The king has his favorites; he has his cupbearers; he has some 
who are admitted into great familiarity with him — give me a 
share in a good man’s prayers. 1 attribute, under God, the 
success the Lord has given me to the number of souls in every 
quarter of the earth who pray for me — not you alone, but in 
every land there are some who forget me not when they draw 
near in their supplications. Oh, we are so rich when we have 
the prayers of saints! When it is well with you, speak for me to 
the Captain of the host, and if He should say to you, “What 
was his message?” I have no other message but that of the 
spouse, “Tell Him I am lovesick.” Any of you who have close 
familiarity with Jesus, be the messengers, be the heavenly tale- 
bearers between lovesick souls and their divine Lord! Tell Him, 
tell Him we are lovesick! And you, who cannot thus go to Him, 
seek the help and aid of others. But after all, as I have said, this 
is unbelief though it is not misbelief, for how much better it 
would have been for her to tell Him herself. 

“But,” you say, “She could not find Him!” No, but if she 
had had faith she would have known that her prayers could; for 


1052 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


our prayers know where Christ is when we do not know, or 
rather, Christ knows where our prayers are — and when we 
cannot see Him, they nevertheless reach Him! A man who fires 
a cannon is not expected to see all the way where the shot goes. 
If he has his cannon righdy sighted and fires it, there may come 
on a thick fog, but the shot will reach the place; and if you have 
your hearts sighted by divine grace after Christ, you may 
depend upon it — however thick the fog — the hot shot of your 
prayer will reach the gates of heaven though you cannot tell 
how or where! Be satisfied to go to Christ yourself. If your 
brothers and sisters will go, well and good, but I think their 
proper answer to your question would be in the language of the 
women in the 6th chapter, the first verse, “Where is your 
beloved gone, O you fairest among women? Where is your 
beloved turned aside? So that we may seek Him with you.” 
They will not seek Him for us they say, but they can seek Him 
with us. Sometimes when there are six pair of eyes, they will see 
better than one; and so, if five or six Christians seek the Lord 
in company, in the prayer meeting, or at His table, they are 
more likely to find Him! “We will seek Him with you.” 

4 . Blessed lovesickness! We have seen its character and its 
cause, and the endeavors of the soul under it; let us just notice 
the comforts which belong to such a state as this. Briefly they are 
these — -you shall be filled. It is impossible for Christ to set you 
longing after Him without intending to give Himself to you! It 
is as when a great man prepares a feast. He first puts plates 
upon the table, and then, afterward, there comes the meat. 
Your longings and desires are the empty plates to hold the meat. 
Is it likely that Christ means to mock you? Would He have put 
the dishes there if He did not intend to fill them with His oxen 
and with His fadings? He makes you long — He will certainly 
satisfy your longings! Remember, again, that He will give you 
Himself all the sooner for the bitterness of your longings. The more 


1053 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


pained your heart is at His absence, the shorter will the absence 
be. If you have a grain of contentment without Christ, that will 
keep you longer tarrying; but when your soul is sick till your 
heart is ready to break, till you cry, “Why does He tarry? Why 
are His chariots so long in coming?” When your soul faints 
until your beloved speaks to you, and you are ready to die from 
your youth up, then shordy, He will lift the veil from His dear 
face, and your sun shall rise with healing beneath His wings. 
Let that console you. Then, again, when He does come, as 
come He will, oh, how sweet it will bel I think I have the flavor in 
my mouth now, and the fullness of the feast is yet to come. 
There is such a delight about the very thought that He will 
come, that the thought itself is the prelude, the foretaste of the 
happy greeting! What? Will He once again speak comfortably 
to me? Shall I again walk the bed of spices with Him? Shall I 
ramble with Him among the groves while the flowers give forth 
their sweet perfume — I shall! I shall! And even now, my spirit 
feels His presence by anticipation — “Before I was aware, my 
soul made me like the chariots of Amminadab.” You know 
how sweet it was in the past. Beloved, what times we have had, 
some of us! Oh, whether in the body or out of the body, we 
cannot tell — God knows. What mountings! Talk of eagles’ 
wings? They are earthly pinions, and may not be compared with 
the wings with which He carried us up from earth! Speak of 
mounting beyond clouds and stars? They were left far, far 
behind. We entered into the unseen, beheld the invisible, lived 
in the immortal, drank in the ineffable, and were blessed with 
the fullness of God in Christ Jesus, being made to sit together 
in heavenly places in Him! Well, all this is to come again, “I will 
see you again and your heart shall rejoice.” “A litde while and 
you shall not see Me: and again, a litde while and you shall see 
Me.” “In a litde wrath I hid My face from you for a moment. 
But with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on you, says the 


1054 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


Lord your Redeemer.” Think of this! Why, we have comfort 
even in this lovesickness! Our heart, though sick, is still whole, 
while we are panting and pining after the Lord Jesus — 

“O love divine, how sweet You are, 

When shall I find my willing heart 
All taken up with thee? 

I thirst, I faint, I die to prove 
The fullness of redeeming love — 

The love of Christ to me.” 

II. And now, secondly, with as great brevity as we can, this 
lovesickness maybe seen in A SOUL LONGING FOR A VIEW OF 

Jesus in his glory. 

1. And here, we will consider the complaint itself for a 
moment. This ailment is not merely a longing after communion 
with Christ on earth — that has been enjoyed, and generally this 
sickness follows that — 

“When I have tasted of the grapes, 

I sometimes long to go 

Where my dear Lord the vineyard keeps 

And all the clusters grow.” 

It is the enjoyment of Eshcol’s first fruits which makes us 
desire to sit under our own vine and our own fig tree before 
the throne of God in the blessed land! 

Beloved, this sickness is characterized by certain marked 
symptoms; I will tell you what they are. There is a loving and a 
longing, a loathing and a languishing. Happy soul that 
understands these things by experience! There is a loving in 
which the heart cleaves to Jesus — 


1055 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“Do not I love You from my soul? 

Then let me nothing love — 

Dead be my heart to every joy 
When Jesus cannot move.” 

A sense of His beauty! An admiration of His charms! A 
consciousness of His infinite perfection! Yes! Greatness, 
goodness and loveliness, in one resplendent ray combine to 
enchant the soul till it is so ravished after Him that it cries with 
the spouse, “Yes, He is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, 
and this is my friend, O you daughters of Jerusalem.” Sweet 
loving is this — a love which binds the heart with chains of more 
than silken softness, and yet more firm than granite! 

Then, there is a longing. She loves Him so that she cannot 
endure to be absent from Him; she pants and pines. You know 
it has been so with saints in all ages — whenever they have 
begun to love, they have always begun to long after Christ. John, 
the most loving of spirits, is the author of those words which 
he so frequendy uses — “Come quickly, even so, come quickly.” 
“Come quickly,” is sure to be the fruit of earnest love. See how 
the spouse puts it — “O that You were as my brother, that 
sucked the breasts of my mother! When I should find You 
outside, I would kiss You; yes, I should not be despised.” She 
longs to get hold of Him; she cannot conclude her song 
without saying, “Make haste, my beloved, and be You like a roe 
or a young hart upon the mountains of spices.” There is a 
longing to be with Christ! I would not give much for your 
religion if you do not long to be with the object of your heart’s 
affections! 

Then, comes a loathing •; when a man is sick with the first 
lovesickness, then, he does not loathe — it is, “Stay me with 
flagons, comfort me with apples.” When a man has Christ, he 
can enjoy other things; but when a man is longing after Christ, 


1056 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


and seeking after Christ, he loathes everything else — he cannot 
bear anything besides! Here is my message to Jesus — “Tell 
Him” — what? Do I need crowns and diadems? Crowns and 
diadems are nothing to me! Do I need wealth, and health, and 
strength? They are all very well in their way. No — “Tell Him, 
tell the beloved of my soul that I grieve after Him — His gifts 
are good — I ought to be more grateful for them than I am, but 
let me see His face! Let me hear His voice! I am lovesick, and 
nothing but that can satisfy me, everything else is distasteful to 
me.” 

And then, there is a languishing. Since she cannot get the 
society of Christ — cannot as yet behold Him on His throne, 
nor worship Him face to face — she is sick until she can. For a 
heart so set on Christ will walk about traversing highway and 
by-way, resting nowhere till it finds Him. As the needle once 
magnetized will never be easy until it finds the pole, so the heart 
once Christianized never will be satisfied until it rests on 
Christ — rests on Him, too, in the fullness of the beatific vision 
before the throne of God! This is the character of the 
lovesickness. 

2. As to its object — what is that? “Tell Him that I am 
lovesick.” But what is the sickness for? Brethren, when you and 
I want to go to heaven, I hope it is the true lovesickness. I catch 
myself sometimes wanting to die and be in heaven for the sake 
of rest; but is not that a lazy desire? There is a sluggish wish 
that makes me long for rest. Perhaps we long for the happiness 
of heaven — the harps and crowns — there is a little selfishness 
in that is there? Allowable, I grant you; but is not there a little 
like selfishness? Perhaps, we long to see dear children, beloved 
friends who have gone before; but there is a little of the earthy 
there. The soul may be as sick as it will, without rebuke, when 
it is sick to be with Jesus. You may carry this to its utmost 
extent without either sin or folly. What am I sick with love for? 


1057 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


For the pearly gates? — No; but for the pearls that are in His 
wounds! What am I sick for? For the streets of gold? — No; but 
for His head which is as much fine gold! Am I sick for the 
melody of the harps and angelic songs? — No; but for the 
melodious notes that come from His dear mouth! What am I 
sick for? For the nectar that angels drink? — No; but for the 
kisses of His lips! What am I sick for? For the manna on which 
heavenly souls feed? — No; but for Him, who is the meat and 
drink of His saints. Him! Him! My soul pines to see HIM! Oh, 
what a heaven to gaze upon! What bliss to talk with the man, 
the God, crucified for me; to weep my heart out before Him; 
to tell Him how I love Him, for He loved me and gave Himself 
for me; to read my name written on His hands and on His 
side — yes, and to let Him see that His name is written on my 
heart in indelible lines; to embrace Him, oh, what an embrace 
when the creature shall embrace his God — to be forever so 
close to Him that not a doubt, nor a fear, nor a wandering 
thought can come between my soul and Him forever! — 

“Forever to behold Him shine, 

Forevermore to call Him mine, 

And see Him still before me! 

Forever on His face to gaze, 

And meet His full assembled rays, 

While all the Father He displays 
To all the saints in glory!” 

What else can there be that our spirit longs for? This seems 
an empty thing to worldlings, but to the Christian this is heaven 
summed up in a word — “To be with Christ, which is far better,” 
than all the joys of earth! This is the object, then, of this 
lovesickness. 


1058 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


3. Do you ask what are the excite?nents of this sickness ? What 
is it that makes the Christian long to be at home with Jesus? 
There are many things. There are sometimes some very little 
things that set a Christian longing to be at home. You know the 
old story of Swiss soldiers, who, when they have enlisted into 
foreign service, they never will permit the band to play the 
“Rami des V aches” — The Song of the Cows, because as soon as ever 
the Swiss hear The Song of the Cows, they think of their own dear 
Alps, and the bells upon the cows’ necks, and the strange calls 
of the herd-boys, as they sing to one another from the 
mountain peaks; and they grow sick and ill with homesickness. 
So if you were banished, if you were taken prisoner or a slave, 
why, to hear some note of one of old England’s songs would 
set your spirit pining for home, and I do confess, when I hear 
you sing sometimes — 

“Jerusalem! My happy home! 

Name ever dear to me; 

When shall my labors have an end, 

In joy and peace and thee?” 

It makes me say, “You daughters of Jerusalem, if you find 
my beloved, tell Him that I am lovesick.” It is the song of home 
that brings homesickness. We remember what He used to be 
to us, what sweet visits we have had from Him, then, we get 
sick to be always with Him. But, best of all, when we are in His 
presence, when our soul is overjoyed with His delights — when 
the great deep sea of His love has rolled over the mast-head of 
our highest thoughts, and the ship of our spirit has gone right 
down, foundering at sea in the midst of an ocean of delights — 
ah, then its highest, its deepest thought is, “O that I may always 
be with Him, in Him, where He is, that I might behold His 
glory — the glory which His Father gave Him, and which He 


1059 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


has given me, that I may be one with Him, world without end.” 
I do believe, brothers and sisters, that all the bitters and all the 
sweets make a Christian when he is in a healthy state, sick after 
Christ — the sweets make his mouth water for more sweets, and 
the bitters make him pant for the time when the last dregs of 
bitterness shall be over. Wearying temptations, as well as rapt 
enjoyments, all set the spirit on the wing after Jesus! 

4 . Well now, friends, what is the cure of this lovesickness ? Is it a 
sickness for which there is any specific remedy? There is only 
one cure that I know of, but there is some relief. A man who is 
sick after Christ, longs to be with Him, and pants for the better 
land, singing as we did just now — 

“Father, I long, I faint to see 
The place of Your abode.” 

He must have the desire realized, before the thirst of his 
fever will be relieved. There are some reliefs, and I will 
recommend them to you. Such, for example, is a strong faith 
that realizes the day of the Lord and the presence of Christ, as 
Moses beheld the promised land, and the goodly heritage when 
he stood on the top of Pisgah. If you do not get heaven when 
you want it, you may attain to that which is next door to heaven, 
and this may bear you up for a litde season. If you cannot get 
to behold Christ face to face, it is a blessed make-shift for the 
time to see Him in the Scriptures, and to look at Him through 
the glass of the Word of God. These are reliefs, but I warn you, 
I warn you of them. I do not mean to keep you from them — use 
them as much as ever you can — but I warn you from expecting 
that it will cure that lovesickness! It will give you ease, but it 
will make you more sick still, for he who lives on Christ gets 
more hungry after Christ. As for a man being satisfied and 
needing no more when he gets Christ — why he needs nothing 


1060 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


539 Heavenly Lovesickness - Song. 

5:8 


but Christ it is true, and in that sense, he will never thirst; but 
he needs more, and more, and more, and more of Christ! To 
live on Christ is like drinking seawater — the more you drink the 
thirstier you grow. There is something very satisfying in Christ’s 
flesh — you will never hunger except for that — but the more 
you eat of it the more you may; and he who is the heartiest 
feaster, and has eaten the most, has the best appetite for more. 
Oh, strange is this, but so it is; that which we would think 
would remove the lovesickness, and is the best stay to the soul 
under it, is just that which brings it on more and more! But 
there is a cure, there is a cure, and you shall have it soon — a 
black draught, and in it a pearl — a black draught called Death. 
You shall drink it, but you shall not know it is bitter, for you 
shall swallow it up in victory! There is a pearl, too, in it — melted 
in it. Jesus died as well as you, and as you drink it, that pearl 
shall take away all ill effect from the tremendous draught. You 
shall say, “O death, where is your sting? O grave, where is your 
victory?” When you have once drank that black draught, you 
are secure against that lovesickness forever. For where are you? 
No pilgrimage, no weary flight through cold ether, you are with 
Him in paradise! Do you hear that, soul? You are with Him in 
paradise, never to be separated, not for an instant; never to 
have a wandering thought, not one; never to find your love 
waning or growing cold again; never to doubt His love to you 
anymore; never more to be vexed and tempted by sighing after 
what you cannot view. You shall be with Him, where He is — 

“Far from a world of grief and sin, 

With God eternally shut in.” 

Till then, beloved, let us strive to live near the cross. Those 
two mountains, Calvary and Zion, stand right opposite one 
another. The eye of faith can sometimes almost span the 


1061 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


interval. And the loving heart, by some deep mystery of which 
we can offer you no solution, will often have its sweetest 
rapture of joy in the fellowship of His griefs. So have I found 
a satisfaction in the wounds of a crucified Jesus, which can only 
be excelled by the satisfaction I have yet to find in the sparkling 
eyes of the same Jesus glorified! Yes, the same Jesus! Well 
spoke the angels on Mount Olivet — ‘This same Jesus, which is 
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as 
you have seen Him go into heaven.” This same Jesus! My soul 
dotes on the words! My lips are fond of repeating them. This 
same Jesus! — 

“If in my soul such joy abounds 
While weeping faith explores His wounds, 

How glorious will those scars appear, 

When perfect bliss forbids a tear! 

Think, O my soul, if it is so sweet 
On earth to sit at Jesus’ feet, 

What must it be to wear a crown 
And sit with Him upon His throne?” 

Would to God you all had this lovesickness! I am afraid 
many of you have it not. May He give it to you. But oh, if there 
is a soul here that wants Jesus, he is welcome! If there is one 
heart here that says, “Give me Christ,” you shall have your 
desire! Trust Jesus Christ, and He is yours; rely upon Him, you 
are His! God save you and make you sick o/" vanities, sick after 
truths of God — pining even unto sickness for Jesus Christ, the 
beloved of my soul, the sum of all my hope, the sinner’s only 
refuge, and the praise of all His saints, to whom be everlasting 
glory! Amen. 


1062 



540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, November 15 th, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“He shall gather the lambs with His arm, and carry them in 
His bosom.” - Isaiah 40:11 

THE PEOPLE OF God are most fitly compared to sheep. 
The excellences of their moral and spiritual character furnish 
one side of the picture, for like sheep they are gende in their 
lives, and are well accepted, whether living or dying, as a 
sacrifice unto God; their frailties and weaknesses complete the 
likeness, for they are prone to wander — full of needs, powerless 
in self-defense, and not able to escape from their enemies by 
rapid flight. No creature has less power to take care of itself 
than sheep; even the tiny ant with its foresight can provide for 
the evil day, but this poor creature must be tended by man or 
else perish. Such are the people of God — timid, weak, 
defenseless — unable to provide for themselves, and compelled 
to depend for everything upon Him whose name is, “That great 
Shepherd of the sheep.” 

As the people of God individually are comparable to sheep, 
so the Church as a whole finds a very fit representative in a 
flock. A flock is a multitude. Diversities of character, of state, 
of age, of condition are always to be found in a flock. Yet, while 
a multitude, it is but one. One in association — they journey or lie 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


down together, in the same pasture they rest, beside the same 
still waters they are led. They are one in nature — they are equally 
sheep, and, however much they may differ, their diversity is not 
half as great as their agreement. Two believers may greatly 
differ; but only let me be assured that they are both sheep of 
the Lord’s pasture, and I will find 1 0 points of likeness for one 
of difference! They are one, moreover, in property — they are the 
property of one owner, being bought with one price in one 
great transaction, when their one great Shepherd laid down His 
life for the sheep. The saints are intimately and truly united; 
even now they are secredy one in their absent Head, and they 
shall soon be visibly one in their glorious Lord, when He comes 
in the glory of His Father, and all His holy angels with Him, 
and shall place the sheep at His right hand forever! 

In all docks, unless they are cursed by barrenness, there 
will be lambs, and these will make up a very important part of 
the community. In all healthy churches, those believers, who 
are comparable to lambs, make up the major part; and though 
in our own we have many strong ones who are fit to lead the 
way, and not a few competent to bear the burden well, yet the 
majority, I suppose, are the litde ones of the flock. Mr. Ready- 
to-Halt, on his crutches, is the commander of quite a regiment, 
distinguished as Mr. Fearing, Mr. Litde-faith, Mr. Feeble-Mind, 
Miss Much- Afraid, and the like, who are slender in knowledge, 
shallow in experience, and weak in faith. It is, therefore, with 
great delight we find our gracious Lord executing the office of 
Shepherd in a peculiarly tender manner towards the lambs. 
Special need has here its own appropriate promise; great 
weakness is met by great consolation; the best place is found 
for those in the worst circumstances, and the most loving care 
bestowed on those most exposed to danger! “He shall gather 
the lambs with His arm, and carry them in His bosom.” 


1064 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


First, let us describe the lambs; secondly, let us express our fears 
about them; thirdly, let us rejoice in the tenderness of the great Shepherd 
over them; and, fourthly, let us hear that great Shepherd’s voice. 

I. First LET ME ENDEAVOR TO DESCRIBE THE LAMBS. 

Our first word concerning them is that they are truly sheep. They 
are not sheep in maturity, but they are sheep to a certainty. 
Leave them to their good Shepherd’s care, let them continue to 
lie down in the green pastures, and feed beside the still waters, 
and they will become as fully developed as yonder ewes of the 
flock. It is true that not a bone in them is of full size, or a muscle 
of full strength; still, who shall dare to exclude them from the 
fold? The new-born convert is possessed of the true nature and 
life of faith, even as the life of a babe is the same life as that 
which is found in perfection in the full grown man. Every 
member is there, but it is in miniature; the vital processes are 
the same, although upon a smaller scale; indeed, the whole man 
is in the child, and so the whole life of God is in the feeblest 
believer! If you will mark the signs of a sheep, you shall see 
them more or less distincdy in every one of the lambs. The 
sheep of God are harmless, “Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners.” They can bear, but they cannot revenge. They 
have neither power nor will to hurt others. They would sooner 
be cheated a thousand times than wrong their fellow men. They 
may sometimes be “wise as serpents” — they are commanded 
to be so — but then they blend with this the obedience to the 
precept, “Be you harmless as doves.” If I see any man injuring 
his fellows — tearing, rending, fighting, quarrelling — if 1 see 
him blustering and proud, I discern at once that he is no sheep 
of God; for this is the mark of the Lord’s people, that they 
when reviled, revile not again, but have put on as the elect of 
God, a heart of compassion, kindness, and long-suffering. You 
will find this holy, non-resistance of evil even more in the lambs 
than in some of the sheep, for worldly influences frequently 


1065 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


wear off this beautiful bloom from older professors. The sheep 
goes further than the noninflicting of evil, it bears evil without 
complaint; they are led to the slaughter and they are silent; they 
are thrown down by the shearer, but they are dumb. There is 
nothing revolting in the sight of the slaughter of a lamb even 
by our ordinary butchery, for the gentle creature is so passive 
and silent, that with scarcely a struggle its life oozes forth from 
it. Long before the knife is at their throats, the swine awaken 
all the neighborhood, fidy teaching us how rebellious are the 
wicked under their trials, and how horribly they are afraid of 
death; but in the case of the lamb, there is so little to shock or 
disgust, that the most delicate might have stood in the 
tabernacle of old, and seen the multitudes of lambs slaughtered 
without feeling any other emotion than a hallowed awe at the 
sinfulness of sin, and the value of the atonement by which it is 
put away. The extraordinary patience of the sheep is seen in 
God’s people when they joyously endure a weight of affliction, 
and pass through the valley of death with composure. Whether 
it is to the knife of death or to the shears of his persecutors, the 
faithful is alike patient, and the lambs of the flock partake of 
the same endurance. 

Sheep, again, are clean creatures — clean in their feeding — 
carrion never tempts them — clean in their habits. The sow may 
revel in her wallowing in the mire, but sheep love the green 
pastures, and if it dirties itself, it is not easy till it has cleaned 
itself as best it may. So God’s people are holy. Be especially 
mindful of holiness, my beloved friends, for when men begin 
to despise holiness, they lose one of the most prominent marks 
of a child of God! Now the lambs may not have all the 
excellences of the sheep, but they quite as earnestly pant after 
holiness. Their daily prayer is — 

“Teach me to run in Your commands, 


1066 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


It is a delightful road. 

Nor let my head, nor heart, nor hands, 

Offend against my God.” 

They pant to be perfect in their obedience to God, and sigh 
and cry when they find, by daily experience, that the flesh lusts 
for evil, and that the tendency of the heart is to go astray. 
Furthermore the sheep is guileless. You see the lion creeping 
through the thicket full of cunning; but sheep have none. “Poor, 
simple sheep,” we say; and God’s people are a simple people. 
Like Nathaniel of old, we may say of them, “Behold an Israelite, 
indeed, in whom is no guile.” Those who are crafty and cunning 
betray but very litde of the Spirit of Jesus. Jesus was no dupe 
for knaves, but at the same time, a fool was safe in His hands; 
and so with the Christian, he is not to be so foolish as to be the 
prey of every deceiver, but he is to be so generous that the most 
foolish shall never be wronged, or have advantage taken of 
them by him! The lambs bear this character as well as the 
sheep — they, too, know no guile. Again, sheep are obedient. 
When a man tames a lion so that he may sport with it, he gets 
the name of lion- tamer; nobody is renowned for taming a sheep, 
for it has an obedient disposition, and so all the elect of God, 
when they have been renewed by divine grace, have an 
obedient and yielding spirit. They are willing to follow their 
great protector at His will. “Not my will, but Yours be done,” 
is the constant bleat of every sheep, and every lamb of the flock 
when it is in a right state of heart. The lambs, then, are truly 
sheep in all the essential points. 

Do not forget, dear friends, that the lambs are truly 
CHRIST’S sheep. They are as dearly bought with His blood; they 
are as surely objects of His care; they are as manifesdy 
illustrations of His power; they shall as certainly be proofs of 
His faithfulness, as the strongest of the flock. When you look 


1067 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


upon a child of God who has only known his Lord for die last 
few days, you must not despise him, for he is as dear to the 
Savior’s heart as the most advanced believer. He was as much 
loved in all eternity as you were, and will be as much loved in 
the eternity to come as you can be! 

Well, but if they are truly sheep, and truly Christ’s sheep, 
why are they lambs? And in what way are they distinguished? 
Some of them are lambs for age, though not all; for there are 
some young Christians who are full grown, and there are others 
very aged who remain to be lambs, still. Growth in divine grace 
does not coincide with progress in human stature. Many men 
are 70 years old, and are, nevertheless, little children in grace; 
and, on the other hand, there are a few who at 20 are as solid, 
and profound, and spiritual as veterans of eighty! It is not a 
man’s age alone, yet for the most part, the young in years are 
also children in the divine family. The distinguishing mark lies 
rather in spiritual deficiencies — they are but children in 
knowledge. Many in the church do not as yet understand the 
loftier doctrines of revelation. They know Christ; they know 
themselves, somewhat, but they cannot “comprehend with all 
saints, what are the lengths and breadths.” As yet they have not 
taken a high degree in Christ’s school. They sit at His feet with 
Mary, but they have not come to lean their heads upon His 
bosom with John. Some doctrines greatly puzzle them. They 
are the subjects of many doubts and fears under which they 
would not suffer if they knew more. They are easily put out by 
those who oppose themselves against the Word of God 
because they are not established in what they know. They have 
not yet come to know the arguments which prove a doctrine. 
They believe, but scarcely know why they believe — and in this 
respect they are but lambs of the flock. 

They are immature also in experience. They know that they 
have an evil heart, but they have not felt all its evil yet — they 


1068 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


know not the plague within as they will when God permits the 
fountains of the great deep to be broken up. Their heavy trials 
are yet to come. They have not yet felt the foot of Satan upon 
their necks in the valley of humiliation, nor trod the dark places 
of the valley of death shade. They have not tried and proved 
this wicked world — they are consequendy too trustful of men. 
They have not yet proved the promises of God and their 
veracity; they have not as yet passed through the deep waters 
supported by an Almighty arm; they have not forded the floods 
of flame, protected by Omnipotent love. They are shallow in 
the inner life; their experience is only up to their ankles; they 
have not learned to swim in the stream. Their litde boats keep 
near the shore, they have not passed the great and deep sea; 
they are raw recruits in the army, and have not yet seen the 
garments rolled in blood. 

So are they lambs in tenderness of feeling. They are too 
susceptible, and therefore acutely feel the unkindness of the 
world. If anyone speaks evil of them, they fret over it; if their 
conduct is misconstrued by the wicked, they are gready 
troubled. They have sleepless nights as the results of a slander 
which stronger saints would smile at. They have not as yet 
acquired that hardness to which the Christian soldier attains by 
enduring hardness. Young believers cry out where advanced 
believers would hardly wince. An ounce is more to them than 
a pound to the strong man. They cannot bear the brunt of the 
batde or the storm — they need seasoning for the strife. They 
are lambs for tenderness. 

Then, again, they are timid and trembling and dare not 
courageously proclaim themselves at all times on the Lord’s 
side. To give a reason of the hope that is in them with meekness 
and fear is a great trial to them. Coming before the church was 
a very blessed lesson to them — it braced their nerves and 
exercised their courage. They need a few more such exercises, 


1069 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


for they are still very retiring and love most the rear of the army. 
They can hardly pray in public. If they were asked to say a few 
words even to five or six children in a Sunday school class, they 
would quake for fear. It will be some time before they can be 
compared to lions for boldness; they have need of more divine 
grace lest they fail to avow their Lord in the hour of persecution. 
They are still poor timid lambs! 

Perhaps, too, they are subject to melancholy, to doubts, 
and fears, and distresses of mind. They cannot mount up as on 
the wings of eagles, but their wings are so broken that they lie 
on the ground and flutter. They are the subjects of very great 
questioning; they sing that hymn which just expresses the 
groanings of doubting babes — 

“It is a point 1 long to know, 

Oft it causes anxious thought. 

Do I love the Lord, or no? 

Am I His, or am I not?” 

When any trial assails them, how difficult it is for them! 
When a temptation assaults them, they do not yield to it, but it 
gives them very grievous pain, and costs them many struggles. 
They cannot even think of meeting Apollyon without feeling 
the blood fly from their cheeks for very fright! I might continue 
thus to describe the various weaknesses and infirmities of the 
lambs, but I must stop. Suffice it to say that everything which 
is needed to make them perfect Christians they already have; 
but they have it as yet in an immature and undeveloped state. 
Everything is there; but it is feeble. Their faith is yet a sapling 
and not a tree; their love is a spark, not a fire; their hope is a 
fledgling and not a full grown bird. In all respects they are 
immature — weak eyes, hands hanging down, feeble knees, and 
stammering tongue — all show their need of more divine grace. 


1070 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


I will give you a picture of some of them, to bring them 
more before your mind. There is one dear lamb — a boy of 13 
or fourteen. A pious mother has made that child the object of 
her constant prayers. He comes to a Sunday school class; he 
sits in the Tabernacle — it always gives me great joy to see so 
many lads and children come here — and I frequently notice 
that many of them are as attentive during the preaching of the 
Word as any of the older folks! Well, the Lord blesses the Word 
to that child while but 13 or fourteen. You know we have had 
the happiness of receiving several such into our Church. Now, 
as you look upon that curly-headed young soldier, you cannot 
but think of all the trouble which may befall him, and 
temptations that may assail him. I am sure there are neither 
mothers nor fathers in the whole Tabernacle who do not feel 
the tears welling up into their eyes. We begin to pray, “Lord, 
keep that lamb; preserve it safely.” We think — I am afraid there 
is a little self-conceit about it — that a child is more in danger 
than we are; and our heart is moved to anxious prayer for it. 
What more melting sight than a child baptized into Jesus upon 
profession of its faith? May many such lambs be found among 
us! 

Picture another. There are many such here, and thank God 
there is a dear mother in connection with this Church who 
nurses and nourishes them! I refer to the case of a young 
woman — father and mother are ungodly. She is out in a 
situation; she works and honorably toils. The grace of God has 
entered her heart, and there is something inexpressibly 
beautiful about her young piety — for she has had to forsake 
fond associations for Christ’s sake. In the workroom they point 
at her as a religious girl — they give her a name of scorn; she 
bears it — she bears it cheerfully. But when we think of how she 
has to suffer every day, we may well be anxious. Perhaps there 
is poverty mingled with her other trials; and poverty has its 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


temptations, and some of these are of the severest character. 
When we see these young women, and young men, too, thus 
exposed to perilous persecutions and cruel mockings, we 
number them with the lambs, and our heart is very anxious for 
them. We are glad to see them brought into the fold, but we 
rejoice with trembling. These are our jewels; these are the 
sheaves that we reap in our Master’s fields; but when we 
recollect the temptations to which they are exposed, we look 
with pity upon these poor tempted ones, and thank our loving 
Jesus that there is a promise on purpose for them! 

I might single out too, as another specimen, yonder aged 
woman. She has lived for 70 years without God and without 
Christ, knowing nothing beyond a formal religion; bearing “a 
name to live,” but being truly “dead.” And now, at last, in her 
old age, when the body is tottering, and the faculties feeble, she 
has found Christ, and she has come forward to be baptized. It 
has been our joy to receive some into church fellowship, who 
have passed the threescore years and ten allotted to human life, 
and have gone trembling down into the baptismal pool in 
obedience to their Lord! Seeing their infirmities, and the fact 
that much of the intellect is weakened — the eyes have become 
dim so that they cannot read, and the memory has become frail 
so that sermons do not profit them as they do younger 
persons — we look upon these as lambs, needing as they do so 
much of the gathering arm, and the nourishing bosom of the 
great Bishop and Shepherd of souls. 

Shall I pause to describe one other? You know her well. 
She is a member of the church, but she thinks she ought not to 
be. In her fits of grief, she even writes to the pastor to tell him 
that she wishes he would put her out, for she is not a Christian; 
and yet, in a few days, she retracts the note, and begs him to 
forget it. She very seldom can read her tide clear — in fact, she 
never did but once or twice — and that was on very bright 


1072 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


sunshiny days when her soul was exceedingly glad. She is like 
Mrs. Much- Afraid in the casde; Giant Despair has shut her up 
in one of his dark dungeons, and frequently uses the crab-tree 
stick upon her until she has grown a sorrowful creature, indeed. 
We have a few brothers and sisters of the same spirit; they go 
limping and halting. We number these, too, among the lambs 
of the flock. 

I have given a too lengthy description, but you will not fail, 
from this time on, to very readily recognize the lambs. You will 
see that in all Christian Churches they make up a large 
proportion. 

II. Let us come then, in the second place, to EXPRESS OUR 
FEARS CONCERNING THESE LAMBS OF THE FLOCK. 

We are afraid for them, because of the howling wolves there are 
about. Some of us can bear to be laughed at. We have grown so 
used to it that it has become the atmosphere which we breathe! 
But we do pity these new beginners. We know the cruel 
mockings, which if they break not the bones, yet often break 
the heart — and we are afraid lest these lambs should turn back, 
lest they should say, “I cannot endure this,” and so seek the 
warm side of the hedge, and forsake their Lord and Master. Yet 
more, we are afraid of another order of wolves — the wolves in 
sheep ’s clothing — those hypocrites, who by their bad living cause 
the poor lambs to stumble, and make them think that surely, 
religion must be a deception and a lie; and those other 
wolves — doctrinal wolves — full of all manner of error; we have 
them always prowling around our churches. There is the 
Antinomian, too glad to get hold of any young lamb he can 
seduce with his fawn i ng pretences to love a free-grace gospel, and 
the freewill wolf, which drags some away from the truth of God, 
and wolves of all sorts that are continually trying to deceive, if 
it were possible, the very elect! We are afraid for these young 
ones, knowing how easily they are carried about by every wind 


1073 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of doctrine. We are equally alarmed, too, because of their 
association with the goats. There is another flock in the world — 
the devil’s flock. It is not easy for a Christian to associate with 
the world without feeling the influence of it. We are afraid for 
some of the young ones, when they have to mingle in their 
work, and in their family associations with the baser sort. The 
worst form of ill association is an ungodly marriage! I do not 
know anything that gives me more satisfaction than to see our 
brothers and sisters, who have walked in the faith of God, 
united in marriage — the husband and the wife both fearing and 
loving God. It is a delightful spectacle, and is the best means of 
building up the church with a generation which shall fear the 
Lord. But a very fruitful source of ruin to church members is 
that of a young man or a young woman choosing an ungodly 
partner in life. They never can expect God’s blessing upon it. 
They tell you, sometimes, they hope to be the means of their 
friend’s conversion. They have no right to hope such a thing; it 
so seldom occurs! The much more likely thing is that the 
ungodly one will drag the other down to his level, than that the 
godly one shall pull the other up. We are fearful, I say, for the 
lambs — for we have marked some of them that were as earnest 
as they well could be, and apparendy as loving to their Lord 
and Master, but another love came across their path, and where 
are they now? Perhaps the house of God sees them no longer, 
and the theater or the ball room is now their delight. When we 
think of some cases of this kind that have occurred, we do 
tremble for the lambs, and we lift up our hearts in prayer to 
God for them, that they may be kept, as kept they will be, if 
they are truly the Lord’s! 

Then we are jealous over the lambs, because of the old lion. We 
have some of us had to meet him face to face, and I do assure 
you I had sooner suffer any temptation that the world or the 
flesh can bring than to be tempted of the devil, for when 


1074 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


ApoUyon meets Christian in the valley, it is no child’s play! A 
man needs to be the master of every heavenly weapon to get 
the victory there. Better to go 20 miles around, over hedge and 
ditch, than to have one conflict with Satan! There is nothing 
gained by it. Even should we overcome, we shall be wounded, 
and to our dying day will bear the scars of the terrible conflict. 
I can now remember one or two instances in which I have had 
to stand foot to foot with that archfiend, and though my soul 
has held her own through divine grace, I still look back upon 
those days of trial with sorrow, for there were blasphemous 
thoughts injected which I never can forget; there were fiery 
darts thrown at me, and though the barbed shafts have been 
drawn out, the wounds are still there. Would God it had been 
possible to have gone that road without contending with the 
fiend! We are afraid for you, young lambs, when we think of 
the lion. 

We are even more concerned when we think of the bear. A 
flattering world hugs tighdy. The lion tears, and rends, and 
rages — but the world — when it takes to loving, speaks, oh, so 
gently, and puts the thing so nicely! It loves the Christian — so 
it says. It is fashionable to be religious; it is a creditable thing to 
be a professor, and then the world says, “Come to my arms; I 
love you. Come and be one with me and be a Christian, too! Be 
not so Puritanical as to thrust me away.” We are more afraid of 
the hugs of the bear than of the teeth of the lion! 

When we put all these dangers together, we add to them 
the fact that lambs are subject to the same diseases which are 
incident to all sheep. They, too, get the foot-rot of weariness in 
the Ways of God. They begin to be slothful and sluggish in the 
Cause of God. They, too, suffer from coldness of heart, have a 
tendency to wander, and catch the stiff neck of pride. Dear 
lambs of the flock, those who have to see after you, and are 
God’s under-shepherds, may well offer no apology when they 


1075 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


say they tremble for you, and put up earnest prayers on your 
behalf! 

III. In the third place let us REJOICE IN THE GOOD 
SHEPHERD. “He shall gather the lambs with His arm, and 
carry them in His bosom.” Who is He of whom such gracious 
words are spoken? Who is He who cares so tenderly for lambs? 
Listen! These are the words of Isaiah — “Behold, the Lord God 
will come with strong hands, and His arm shall rule for Him: 
behold, His reward is with Him, and His work before Him. He 
shall feed His flock like a shepherd.” So, then, it is the Lord 
Jehovah who comes forth to bless His people in this fashion! 
What condescension is here! The Lord God, the Eternal and 
Infinite, acts the part of a Shepherd! But let us read on. The 
words which follow the text may well astound you, when you 
see how our great God stoops from His loftiness to carry lambs 
in His bosom. “Who has measured the waters in the hollow of 
His hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and 
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed 
the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? Who has 
directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being His counselor has 

taught Him? Behold, the nations are as a drop in a bucket, 

and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, He 
takes up the isles as a very little thing.” And yet this same God 
who does all these things gathers lambs in His arms, and carries 
them in His bosom! I am sure we are not sufficiendy sensible 
of the infinite love of God in stooping to consider us. Alas, that 
such condescension should be so unregarded! Remember, I 
pray you, that Infinite power engages to protect you, that 
inimitable affection sets itself on you, that wisdom which 
cannot err watches for your good, and that who never can be 
turned aside pledges to bless you! Why, that God should 
provide for such creatures as we are is some condescension; 
that He should think of them with a Father’s heart is marvelous! 


1076 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


“What is man that You are mindful of him, or the son of man 
that You visit him?” That He should carry that man, no, the 
weakest of such men, the lambs among this flock — that He 
should carry them in His arms! What shall I say to this? I will 
be silent on a theme which needs a more eloquent tongue than 
mine. Blessed be the name of such a gracious God. Brothers 
and sisters, rejoice in this tender Shepherd! Be confident, be 
grateful, be joyful, be thankful, be of good cheer always, for He 
it is who carries you is Jesus Christ! 

But why? Why does He carry lambs in His bosom? First, 
because He has a tender heart and any weakness at once melts Him. If 
He sees a lamb, He stops as you would do if you are gende of 
spirit. If He hears your sigh, your groan, or marks your 
ignorance or your feebleness — the very tenderness of His mind, 
even if there were nothing else — would compel Him to look 
upon you. But more, it is His office to consider the weak. For this 
it is that He was made a faithful high priest — that He might 
have compassion on the ignorant. For this it is that He became 
the mediator; He were nothing if He had not this — I mean to 
say that His office would be a mere sinecure, but a nominal 
thing, if there were no weak and feeble ones for Him to care 
for. Remember, too, that He was a lamb Himself once. What a 
mysterious fact! If a man could have been a lamb, and known 
a lamb’s weakness, how would he sympathize with it! Our Jesus 
was and is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world! 
He knows what strong temptations mean for He has felt the 
same. Do you inquire for more reasons why He carries them in 
His bosom? He purchased them with blood! He sees the marks of 
His passion upon each of them, and therefore He prizes them, 
and will not allow them to perish. They are His property. He is 
their proprietor. Another man’s lamb He might not carry so 
carefully; but His own lamb, the gift of His Father, the purchase 


1077 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of His blood, the heritage of His reward — He must and will 
care for that! 

Moreover, remember, He is responsible for that lamb. At 
Jacob’s hand Laban required all the sheep, and at Jesus’ hand 
every elect one will be required at the last. He is the surety of 
the everlasting covenant, and He is bound by covenant 
engagements to bring the many sons and daughters home to 
glory, and not to allow one whom His Father has given Him to 
perish by the way. Nor will He fail in His covenant, my beloved! 
He will be true to His pledge, and say at the last, “Here am I, 
and the flock committed to My care.” 

Moreover, they are all a part of His glory. This flock will be as 
the jewels of His crown. If He lost one of them He would lose 
a part of His fullness, a part of His reward of His soul’s travail, 
therefore will He never turn away His eyes from them, or His 
hands from doing them good, but He will preserve them to the 
end! 

But what does He say He will do? He says, “He will carry 
them.” How does He do that — how does Jesus carry weak 
saints? Sometimes He carries them by not permitting them to endure 
much trouble. “He tempers the wind to the shorn lamb;” He takes 
them up in the arms of providence, and carries them where 
there is no trouble. At other times they are carried in His arms 
by having some tender, loving person to take care of them. He 
carries them instrumentally. As Christiana and the other 
women had Mr. Great-Heart to kill the giants for them, so 
many saints are carried in the bosom of Christ Jesus by the 
loving care of some godly relative, or friend, or pastor. At other 
times, such lambs are carried by having an unusual degree of love 
given them, and consequendy a large amount of joy, so that 
they bear up and stand fast. Though their knowledge may not 
be deep, they have great sweetness in what they do know. They 
may have but litde to feed on, but that litde is great from its 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


nutritive power, and they have strong digestive powers given 
them by which they may even suck honey out of a rock, and oil 
out of a flinty rock. The little becomes much. The barley loaves 
and few small fishes are sufficient for the thousands of their 
necessities. Sometimes He carries them by giving them a very 
simple faith. Their faith may not be very strong, but it is very 
simple, and after all, I do not know whether I would not almost 
as soon have a simple faith as a strong faith, if the two could be 
divided. That simple faith which takes the promise just as it 
stands — may not fully comprehend its meaning — yet it believes 
it, and runs straight to Jesus with every trouble! That is very 
beautiful in a child. The child has no great extent of knowledge, 
and is not strong enough to defend itself, but what does it say 
when mistreated in the street? “I will tell Father.” And so 
simple souls will go and tell their Father. They run to their big 
brother, the great Savior, and so the simplicity of their faith 
gives them an unusual degree of confidence, and they are 
carried in Jesus’ bosom. 

But to close this point, how does He carry them ? He carries 
them in His bosom — not on His back — that is how He carries 
stray sheep — He flings them over His shoulders rejoicing, but 
they do not rejoice, mind you! They will not rejoice, for they 
have wandered; they must be made to feel the weight of the 
crook, and they must pray, “Make the bones which You have 
broken to rejoice.” But, “He carries the lambs in His bosom.” 
Here is put forth, brothers and sisters, boundless affection. Could 
He put them in His bosom if He did not love them much? 
Where does the Father place the Son? He is in the bosom of 
the Father. Where did Abraham carry Lazarus? In his bosom. 
Where did Naomi bear her young grandson Obed? He was in 
her bosom. Where did the man in the parable put his little ewe 
lamb? In his bosom. Christ is boundless in His affection. Then 
there is tender nearness. How near to a man is that which is in His 


1079 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


bosom! Here you see the Lord Jesus Christ does not put His 
people at a distance from Himself, so that He has to stretch out 
His hands for them, but He keeps them near; He needs not 
stretch out His hands at all; so near are they that they could not 
possibly be nearer! Then it is a hallowed familiarity, lambs, when 
put into the bosom, having no intellect, cannot therefore learn 
anything; but the lambs of Christ’s flock, whenever they ride in 
Christ’s bosom, talk with Him; they tell Him all their secrets, 
and He tells them His. “The secret of the Lord is with them 
who fear Him; and He will show them His covenant.” Oh, 
there are some precious love passages between Christ and His 
weak ones when they are snugly housed in His bosom! It is 
almost profanity to talk of the union and communion, the 
fellowship and converse, the delightful interchange of 
everything that is sweet and loving between Christ and His 
chosen ones in His bosom! And then, dear friends, you must 
not fail to remember that there is perfect safety. The dear ones in 
His bosom — who can hurt them? They must hurt the Shepherd 
first. How can they get the lamb out of the Shepherd’s arms? 
Must they not cut off the Shepherd’s arms before they can hurt 
the lamb? Must they not smite Him through His body before 
they can kill the creature whom He embraces? How safe you 
are, O weak believers! You are borne up on eagles’ wings; the 
shot must pierce the parent bird before it can reach you; the 
devil must destroy your Shepherd before he can slay you. Here 
is comfort! Oh, what a soft place to ride! How warm! Oh, how 
the warmth of the Shepherd’s heart cheers His lambs! The 
warmth of Jesus, and the delightful comfort of His presence 
shall be enjoyed by you — the very weakest of you in answer to 
the supplications we put up for you — and as a result of your 
faith in Jesus! 

I do not know what you think after reading this promise, 
but I think I should like to be a lamb again. Some of us have 


1080 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


540 The Lambs and Their Shepherd - 
Isa. 40:11 


outgrown our times of doubts, and fearfulness, and so on. We 
have to take the work of a shepherd. I love to be a shepherd 
under my Master; but there is many a time I envy you. I would 
delight to sit in the pew and hear a sermon instead of preaching, 
sometimes — to be fed instead of feeding you. Some of you 
have grown to be strong men, and are engaged in looking after 
others. You now look back, not with sorrow, exacdy, but with 
some regret upon the sweetness of your young days — when 
you were so little in Israel — but were so daintily fed, so 
wondrously cared for. You remember what the shepherds did 
with Mr. Great-Heart, and all the company when they came to 
the Delectable Mountains. The shepherds said, “Come in, Mr. 
Ready-to-Halt. Come in, Mr. Fearing. Come in, Mrs. Much- 
Afraid.” But they never said, “Come in, Mr. Great-Heart.” We 
look after the feeble! As to you who are strong, we know you 
will take the comforts to yourselves. Ah, but the strongest 
sometimes get very weak, and those who do exploits for God 
at times feel as if they could creep into a mouse-hole, and hide 
their heads anywhere among the very feeblest of the Lord’s 
people if they could but enjoy the comforts which He is pleased 
to give them! 

IV. And now, to conclude, LET US HEAR THE 
SHEPHERD’S VOICE. If you are the lambs, hear the Shepherd’s 
voice which says, ‘"Follow Me.” You who are weak and feeble, 
and young in the divine life, keep close to Jesus. Imitate the 
example of Caleb, of whom we spoke a Sunday or two ago, (see 
Sermon #538) and follow the Lord fully. Be obedient to all His 
commands, and let His faintest wish be your law. Keeping close 
to Jesus, you shall realize the sweetness of the text. To you who 
are not lambs, and as yet are not brought openly into His fold, 
hear His words, “Come unto Me. ” That gentle Shepherd, who 
condescends to carry the lambs, may well entice you to Himself. 
Come, guilty souls, and flee away to Him who will not break 


1081 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the bruised reed nor quench the smoking flax! Take His yoke 
upon you, and learn of Him, for He is meek and lowly of heart, 
and you shall find rest unto your souls. No domineering Lord 
commands you to crouch as a slave at His feet. The generous 
Jesus says, “Come unto Me, all you who labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest.” By His love and by His pity, by 
His deep compassion and His infinite love, I beseech you, 
come to Him! 

Then, too, those of us who are His sheep, let us hear the 
Shepherd’s voice, saying, “Feed My lambs. ” If at any time we 
have offended, and like Peter, backslidden, let this be the token 
of our love — this the seal by which we show Him how true 
our repentance is — let us feed the lambs! O matrons and strong 
men — mothers in Israel, and princes in our host — look well to 
your sons and daughters! See well to your little ones! Train 
them up for Jesus! Where you see the divine spark, blow them 
with your warm breath. Watch for the feeble. “Comfort you, 
comfort you My people, says your God. Speak you comfortably” 
unto the tender ones. Lay yourselves out, beloved, to do good 
to these weak ones. Spend and be spent. Bear their burdens, 
“and so fulfill the law of Christ,” and the Lord accept and bless 
you all, whether sheep or lambs, for His dear sake. Amen. 


1082 



54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, November 22nd, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Stand still and see the salvation of the Lord.” - Exodus 
14:13 

GOD’S GREAT DESIGN in all His works is the manifestation 
of His glory. Any aim less than this were unworthy of Himself. 
He cannot act for the good of His creatures as an ultimate aim, 
for that were for God to be impelled by a motive less great than 
His own nature. Since there can be nothing greater than the 
infinite, and there can be but one infinite — if the infinite God 
is moved by an infinite motive which is the only one worthy of 
Him, that motive must be found in His own glory. It is, then, 
the Lord’s will to manifest His glory to the sons of men. But 
how shall the glory of God be manifested to such fallen 
creatures as we are? man’s eyes are not single; he has always a 
side glance towards his own honor, and so is not qualified to 
behold the glory of his God. Vanity has covered our eyes with 
scales more dense than those which fell from the eyes of Saul 
of Tarsus; we are always prone to put a high estimate upon 
what we are, or may be, or can feel, or do. It is clear, then, that 
self must stand out of the way, that there may be room for God 
to be exalted, and this is the reason, the true secret, why God 
brings His people, oftentimes, into straits and difficulties, that, 
being brought to their wits’ end, and made conscious of their 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


own folly and weakness, they may be fitted to behold the 
majesty of God when He comes forth to work their deliverance. 
A man whose life shall be one even and smooth path will see 
but little of the glory of God, for he has few occasions of self- 
emptying, and therefore, but little fitness for being filled with 
the revelation of God. They who navigate little streams and 
shallow creeks know but little of the God of tempests; but they 
who “go down to the sea in ships and do business in great 
waters, these see the works of the Lord, and His wonders in 
the deep.” Among the huge Atlantic waves of bereavement, 
poverty, temptation and reproach, we learn the power of 
Jehovah, because we feel the litdeness of man! Self-esteem is 
that speck in the eye which most effectually mars human vision; 
the Great Surgeon of souls removes this from us chiefly by 
sanctified afflictions. At the mouth of the furnace, the Great 
Purifier sits as a Refiner to purify the sons of Levi — and when 
this work has been achieved, and they have become pure in 
heart, the divine purpose is accomplished, and then God’s glory 
is manifested, for the pure in heart shall see the Lord. Thank 
God, then, dear brothers and sisters, if you have been led by a 
rough road — it is this which has given you your experience of 
God’s loving-kindness. Your troubles have enriched you with 
a wealth of knowledge to be gained by no other means; your 
trials have been the cleft of the rock in which God has set you 
as He did His servant Moses, that you might behold His glory 
as it passes by. Praise your God, O sons of sorrow that you 
have not been left to the darkness and ignorance which 
continued prosperity might have involved. Bless Him that you 
have been capacitated to show forth His glory by being 
permitted and honored to endure a great fight of affliction! Our 
one aim in life is, I trust, to glorify our God, and if so, are not 
those afflictions precious which enable us to honor Him? We 
will call them friends if they help us to praise God; we will wear 


1084 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


them as jewels and rejoice in them as a bride rejoices in her 
ornaments if they aid us in glorifying our blessed Lord. In this 
spirit, we may almost envy the children of Israel as we see them 
entangled in the wilderness and overtaken by their foes, for 
now shall they see the mighty arm of God made bare! 

Our text exhibits the posture in which a man should be 
found while exercised with trial. I think, also, it shows the 
position in which a sinner should be found when he is under 
trouble on account of sin. We will employ it in both ways. 

I. Take our text first as A PICTURE OF THE BELIEVER 
WHEN HE IS REDUCED TO GREAT STRAITS. Then, God’s 
command to him is, “Stand still, and see the salvation of the 
Lord.” 

In this brief sentence, there are two things very 
conspicuous — first, what is to be done, “Stand still.” And secondly, 
what is to be seen, “See the salvation of the Lord.” 

1. What is to be done ? The man is brought, we will suppose, 
into very extraordinary difficulties. He cannot retreat — that is 
sure destruction; he cannot go forward — that appears to be n 
impossibility. On the right hand, he is shut up by providential 
hindrances — on the left, an adversary prevents him. Here, then, 
is the counterpart of Israel’s position — Egyptians behind, the 
Red Sea in front, the craggy steeps of Pihahiroth on the right, 
and the fortresses of Migdol and Baal Zephon frowning on the 
left. What is the believer to do? The Master’s word is the same 
to him as to Israel, “Stand still.” Brothers and sisters, let me 
warn you of other advisers. Despair whispers, “Cast yourself 
down, lie down and die; complain against God. Give it all up; 
you have been buffeting for years with circumstances, and you 
have made no headway; give up the unfair contest; float with 
the stream, even though you go over the waterfall. Let the 
worst come to the worst, for there is no hope of any success in 
life for you! If the Lord will always give you evil and not good, 


1085 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


then curse God and die; attempt no longer to provide things 
honest in the sight of all men, just let things go as they will; drift 
into poverty, or die in a ditch; God has given you up — evidently 
you have been the butt for all His arrows, the target for all His 
shots. Now, despair, let there be an end of the thing.” Not so, 
says the God of our salvation; He loves us too well to bid us 
yield to despondency; He would have us put a cheerful courage 
on, and even in our worst times rejoice in His love and 
faithfulness. Faith hears the bidding of her faithful God, and is 
not willing to be shut up in the iron cage of despair; no, she 
defies the old giant to put so much as a finger upon her! Lie 
down and die? That, she never will, while her God bids her 
stand! See, beloved, the word stand. What does it mean? Keep 
the posture of an upright man, ready for action, expecting 
further orders, cheerfully and patiendy awaiting the directing 
voice. This is a noble posture, but to despair is mean and 
beggarly. Up, brothers and sisters, play the man, be strong! 
While Jehovah lives, there is no room for fear; a happy future 
awaits you — yes, the present itself is bright with mercy — for 
the Lord’s love is still the same — 

“Behind a frowning providence 
He hides a smiling face.” 

“Ah,” says Cowardice, “Retreat!” Cowardice whispered to 
the children of Israel that it was better to go back into Egypt. 
They are willing to go with ropes on their necks, and their 
hands bound behind them, and give themselves up to Pharaoh. 
To have their lives spared, they will relinquish their liberty! 
Hear them — they are basely talking about their graves while 
they are yet alive! So Cowardice, sometimes, when the Christian 
comes into a great strait, whispers, “Retreat to the worldling’s 
way of action! You cannot play the Christian’s part, it is too 


1086 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


difficult; evidendy there are some men who can have faith in 
God, and can live in this world, but you cannot. If you must be 
in business, it is vain to attempt to be a Christian,” says 
Cowardice. “Do as others do — follow the hollow maxims and 
tricky customs that once ruled you; let the shop be opened 
again on Sunday; adulterate the goods once more; tell lies as 
you once did; be as other men are — go back and be Satan’s 
slave! It is evident that religion will not keep a coat on your 
back and bread on your table; give it up at once; go back! 
Relinquish the ways of God, and be once more a bond slave to 
your own corruptions and to the world’s evil habits.” Ah, 
trembler, however much Satan may urge this course upon you, 
you cannot follow it if you are a child of God! Cowardice may 
bid you do it, friends may advise it, and the devil may drive you 
to it — but if God has quickened you by His divine Spirit, there 
is a something in you which is bound to go forward, which you 
yourself may struggle against, by virtue of the power of the old 
man, but which will get the mastery over you, and lead you into 
a divine captivity! Even when evil is most rampant, the force of 
divine grace within will impel you towards the right, 
constraining you to stand in the ways of God! Where God 
impels forward, hell cannot drive back! O sun, you turn not 
back because of the clouds which veil your splendors. 
Predestinated of the Lord to persevere in your perpetual path, 
you climb, still, the steep of heaven, and soon you descend to 
the western deeps; you pause not for tempest, hurricane, or 
storm; as a strong man runs a race, so do you speed onward 
towards your far-off goal, for the Almighty bade you move, and 
in His might you travel onward evermore! So is it with you, 
Christian, God has said, “Forward.” His divine decree has bid 
you go from strength to strength, and so you shall, and neither 
death nor hell shall turn you from your course. What, if for a 
while, you are called to stand still? This is but to renew your 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


strength for some greater advance in due time. Dream not, I 
pray you, of so much as looking back! Take courage and in 
believing silence possess your soul while your Captain bids you, 
“Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord.” 

Rashness, another evil counselor, cries, “Do something! 
Something or other must be done! Do not despair! Do not turn 
back, but stir yourself, and leave no stone unturned. To stand 
still and wait is sheer idleness! There is no time to be lost, you 
must do something, be it right or wrong.” Yes, but it is well to 
remember that in some cases, the more haste, the worse speed! 
When a Christian is in very sharp trouble, one of his strongest 
temptations is to be in an unbelieving, fretful state of agitation 
which leads him to premature and unwise action. How sadly 
some who are weak in faith are doing and nudging themselves 
by indiscreet haste! If they could but be quiet in faith, and stand 
still in patience until the Master led the way, they would be led 
aright, but they run before the cloud and fall into the net. So in 
a hurry are they to escape from Pharaoh’s clutches that they 
run into them! I am sure that much of the sin which we commit 
when we are in trouble is produced by our being in a flurried 
state of heart, for, then, our soul is like a silly dove without 
heart — which has forgotten the dovecot, and therefore flies 
here and there, round and round — at imminent peril of its life 
from the hawk! We must be doing something at once — we must 
do it, so we think — instead of looking to God, who will not only 
do something but, who will do everything! Many of us, when in a 
strait, are hardly reasonable in our hasty endeavors. Fear 
blindfolds the judgment, and makes fools of us. Why is there 
any need of such speedy leaping — -why not stand still and look? 
Are all means gone forever if not snatched at in an instant? will 
the Lord’s arm grow short if I wait His time? Such questions 
we forget to ask, and therefore on we go, but our rash advance 
sinks us deeper in the mire. Very soon we try something else, 


1088 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


and only plunge into greater trials; we fly to this friend and take 
his advice, and then to that, and get the reverse; then we go by 
our own judgment and are, perhaps, greater fools, still! O that 
we could learn to trust in the Lord with all our hearts, and lean 
not to our own understanding! What the Christian does with 
cool deliberation, when he has waited upon God, when, like 
David, he has said, “Bring here the ephod,” he does with a 
purpose, and God is with him; but what he does when he is 
excited or depressed, with an aching head, and a fluttered heart, 
he will usually find cause to mourn over, and possibly he will 
be involved in more trouble through what he has done himself, 
than through the affliction which God sent him! But faith, I say, 
listens neither to Despair, nor to Cowardice, nor to Rashness — 
it hears God say, “Stand still,” and immoveable as a rock, it 
stands! 

Another hiss of the old serpent is the suggestion of 
presumption. “On, on,” says Presumption, “neck or nothing, 
make or break. If the sea is before you, march into it and expect 
a miracle. It is true you have no divine command, but never 
mind, your own daring will work wonders. You know you are 
ordained to inherit Canaan, and therefore go on towards it, sea 
or no sea! God has not commanded you, and He has not as yet 
divided the sea, but still go on.” Dear brothers and sisters, there 
is much hellish craft in this temptation; it is peculiarly adapted 
to beguile those advanced Christians who know what it is to 
walk by faith. I am afraid it is very easy for us to mistake 
presumption for faith, although there is a wide difference 
between the two. There is so much of dash and dare about an 
incitement to presumption, that brave, Christ-loving spirits 
must be on their guard against it, for presumption will never 
work the wonders of faith. If Christ bids me come on the water 
to Him, faith shall tread the billow; but if I spring upon the 
water myself, to walk to Christ, I must expect to sink far sooner 


1089 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


than Peter did! When our illustrious Commander puts a man 
upon an extraordinary work, He will give him extraordinary 
strength; but if a soldier runs without the captain’s order and 
defies a giant adversary, he may not expect assistance, and will 
be sure to return with defeat. What a necessary prayer is that 
“Show me what I am to do.” In dilemmas between one duty 
and another, it is so sweet to be humble as a child, and wait 
with simplicity of soul upon the Lord. It is sure to be well with 
us when we feel and know our own folly, and are heartily 
willing to be guided by the will of God. Such standing still has 
truer valor in it than the mad charges and dashes of an arrogant 
presuming. My soul, seek earnesdy the divine grace to stand 
still in obedience to your Lord’s behest! 

But in what way are we to stand still dear friends? Surely it 
means among other things, that we are to wait awhile. Time is 
precious, but there are occasions when the best use we can 
make of it is to let it run on. If time flies, that is no reason why 
I am always to fly. Every experienced man knows that by being 
wrongly busy for one hour, he may make mischief which a 
lifetime would hardly rectify. I may cut my fingers if I am too 
fast in reaching down for my sword; and if I run without 
waiting to inquire the way, I may run upon my ruin. Many, who 
have been very busy in helping themselves, had been better off 
if they had been waiting upon their Lord! Prayer is never a 
waste of time. A man who would ride posthaste had better wait 
till he is perfectly mounted, or he may slip from the saddle. He 
who glorifies God by standing still is better employed than he 
who diligendy serves his own self-will. Wait awhile, then. Wait 
in prayer, however. Call upon God, and spread the case before 
Him; tell Him your difficulty, and plead His promise of aid. 
Express your unstaggering confidence in Him — wait in faith — 
for unfaithful, untrusting waiting is but an insult to the Lord! 
Believe that if He shall keep you tarrying even till midnight, yet 


1090 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


He will come at the right time; the vision shall come, and shall 
not tarry. Wait in quiet patience, not murmuring because you are 
under affliction, but blessing God for it — never murmuring 
against the second cause, as the children of Israel did against 
Moses; never wish you could go back to the world again, but 
accept the case as it stands, and put it, as it stands, simply and 
with your whole heart, without any self-will, into the hands of 
your covenant God, saying, “Now, Lord, not my will, but 
Yours be done. 1 know not what to do; I am brought to 
extremities, but I will wait until You shall split the floods, or 
else drive back my foes. I will wait if You keep me many a day, 
for my heart is fixed upon You alone, O God, and my spirit 
waits for You in the full conviction that You will yet be my joy 
and my salvation, my refuge, and my strong tower.” 

Well, brothers and sisters, this is what is to be done. I dare 
say you will think it a very easy thing to stand still, but it is one 
of the postures which a Christian soldier learns not without 
years of teaching. I find that marching and quick marching are 
much easier to God’s warriors than standing still! It is, perhaps, 
the first thing we learn in the drill of human armies, but it is 
one of the most difficult to learn under the Captain of our 
salvation. The apostle seems to hint at this difficulty when he 
says, “Stand fast, and having done all, still stand.” To stand at 
ease in the midst of tribulation shows a veteran spirit, long 
experience, and much divine grace. 

2. But now, secondly, what is to be seen? You are to see, O 
believer, the salvation of God in your present temporal trials, 
you are to see God’s power and love manifested! Now, I think 
I hear you say, “Well, one thing I know, I cannot deliver myself out 
of the dilemma in which I am now placed; I had some 
dependence once upon my own judgment, and upon my own 
ability, but that dependence is entirely gone.” I thank God for 
that! It is a good thing for you, sometimes, Christian, to be 


1091 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


wholly weaned from yourself; when you are made sick of self- 
dependence, it is not long before your spirit shall be in a healthy 
state of trustfulness in your God. “Well, but,” you say, “I cannot 
conceive how God can deliver me; I have tried to think by what 
means He will interpose, but I cannot see a door open, nor a 
way of escape.” This is well, too, for now this shows that 
human wisdom is dead. God has astounded your wit; He has 
made a fool of your judgment; He laughs to scorn all that keen 
intellect of yours which once was your confidence. Now you 
shall see divine wisdom! When self goes, God comes in, and 
when human wisdom goes, then God’s wisdom appears! “Well, 
but,” says one, “whatever God may do for me, I can clearly 
perceive it must be His own doing, for I am powerless, paralyzed. 
I am so utterly broken by the strength of this tremendous 
current, that if it is stemmed, it must be divine energy that 
stems it; I cannot do it.” And this is well, too, for now your 
power is dead; it is now that all the glory will be to God. While 
you had some power to help yourself, you would have shared 
the crown, but now, since all might is centered in the eternal 
arms, the whole of the crown shall be put on the eternal head! 
I am glad that your flesh is thus brought to a state of utter death. 

“Ah, but,” you say, “Sir, I cannot believe it possible that I 
should be delivered. I find my faith, this morning, reduced to 
the lowest ebb; it has run dry; I cannot believe the promise. Ah, 
now,” you say, “even my faith fails me!” Everything that is of 
the creature has now gone; you are like the poor lost one in the 
desert, your tongue fails for thirst; and now the Lord will save 
you, for the God of Israel will not forsake you! Evidendy you 
are reduced to the extremity of an extremity, when hope and 
faith, alike, are drowned; but now it is that the Lord will 
manifest His mighty strength. But you are saying, “What shall 
I see?” Well, I know not precisely what you shall see, except I 
am sure of this — you shall see the salvation of God — and in that 


1092 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


salvation you shall see two or three things, just as the children 
of Israel saw them. You shall see, if necessary, all nature and all 
providence subservient to God’s love. They saw the waters stand 
upright, contrary to nature; the east wind was made at once to 
obey God’s behests, and blow all that night; thus, they saw how 
there was nothing upon earth which could stand against the 
divine will. And you shall see the same. If it is necessary for 
your deliverance, fire shall not burn you, neither shall the floods 
drown you; if you cannot be helped in the common order of 
providence, God will give some extraordinary proofs of His 
power. It may be that as you look back upon the method of 
your deliverance, you will be so surprised at it that you will say, 
“If anybody had told me this beforehand, I would have laughed 
at them; but now I admire and wonder at the love of God.” 
You shall be led to see that all things, even the most deadly, 
work together for good to them who love God. The waters 
cannot drown them , but they shall drown their foes! You will 
see, again, if you will but stand still and see it, that the Lord reigns ! 
You shall have such a picture of Jehovah sitting upon His 
throne, controlling and overruling all things, that you shall extol 
Him with your whole heart as your God and King forever! You 
shall see most distincdy, if you will but wait and look for it, how 
He can make you a wonder. You shall be a wonder to yourself, and 
marvel how it is that God supports you; you shall be a wonder 
to your enemies; you shall do what they cannot do; you shall 
walk through the depths of the sea, which the Egyptians, 
wishing to do, were drowned! You shall see. your enemies utterly 
destroyed, if you will but wait. God’s bow shall be made quite 
naked; He shall make bare His arm. Death and hell shall lie at 
your feet. Your spiritual and your temporal trials, too, shall be 
subdued under you; you shall tread them as straw is trod for 
the dunghill. And as for you, if you will but stand and see it, 
you shall go forth like Miriam with your timbrel of mirth and 


1093 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


with your dance of joy! You cannot think it possible, shivering 
as you now are with the sight of your troubles, alarmed and 
afraid, that you should ever be singing, “O let us sing unto the 
Lord, for He has triumphed gloriously.” But you shall, in this 
life, you shall praise Him; and if not, in the life which is to come! 
On that glorious shore, you shall look back on all these 
perplexities and tribulations, and you shall say, “Let us sing 
unto the Lord, for He has triumphed gloriously; the horse and 
his rider has He cast into the sea.” Only learn to “Stand still, 
and see the salvation of the Lord.” 

I have had this text burnt into my own consciousness. I 
desire to be found in that posture with regard to my own 
position in Christ’s Church, and the work that the Master 
would have me perform. There are hours of perplexity when 
the most willing spirit, anxiously desirous to serve the Lord, 
knows not what part to take. Then, what shall it do? Vex itself 
by despair? Fly back in cowardice, turn to the right hand in fear, 
or rush forward in presumption? No, but just say, “Lord, You 
know what I know not. Make a plain path for my feet; because 
of my enemies, be my guide. Guide me with Your counsel while 
on earth, and afterward, receive me to glory.” Depend upon it, 
beloved, if, by God’s grace, we can get and keep in that frame 
of mind, it will not be long before God shall say to us, as 
distincdy as Moses said to the people, “Go forward;” and we 
shall go forward to our joy rejoicing, praising, and magnifying 
His dear name! 

II. I intend to take the text in reference to THE SINNER 
BROUGHT INTO THE SAME CONDITION IN A MORAL 
SENSE. I will trust that I have in this House of Prayer, this 
morning, some who have been led by God’s Spirit out of the 
Egypt of their sins, where they did eat the leeks and garlic, and 
onions of their own sinful pleasures, but where they were made 
to smart as bond slaves under the law. You have begun to feel 


1094 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


some divine Awakenings; the Spirit of God has somewhat 
delivered you from the corruption of your former estate, but 
you are, as yet, under conviction. You have as yet found no 
peace, no solid peace; your sins are around you; you can hear 
their hoarse voices as they threaten to drag you back or to 
destroy you. Before you flows the tempestuous and deep sea of 
divine wrath — you know how richly you deserve it; and your 
spirit sinks within you as you think how soon it may swallow 
you up! On the right hand and on the left, you see no method 
of escape; you had hoped to deliver yourself by your own 
righteousness, but the law, like Pihahiroth, rises up with craggy 
battlements and blocks the way! On the right hand, you seek to 
escape by ceremonies, but some dreadful threat of God against 
the depravity of your nature at once shuts out all hope in that 
direction. You have come, this day, to a dead standstill. Well, 
now, what are you to do ? What is the Master’s word to you? O 
sinner, thus convicted of sin, my message from the Lord to you, 
is “Stand still” LTnderstand what I mean, however, by it. I do 
not mean stand still in indifference, as though it were a litde 
matter whether you are damned or not; I do not mean stand 
still in inaction, without prayer, without repentance, without 
faith, but what I mean is this — “Stand still” — first in the 
renunciation of all your own righteousness, and of all attempts 
to seek a righteousness by your own doings! man, you have 
been hunting the whole world round to get something that may 
commend you to God — cease your hunting and stand still! You 
have toiled and trod many a weary league of performances, and 
prayers, and thoughts, and willings, and doings — and you are 
not an inch the better for it! You have tried to make yourself 
feel this, and to compel yourself to do the other, but you are 
still as much in darkness as you were at the first! O, leave, leave, 
I pray you, all these attempts to work out a salvation for 
yourself, and with regard to them all, “Stand still.” 


1095 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Trembling soul, how can you hope to save yourself by your 
own doings? Can you keep the law? Remember it is exceedingly 
broad — it takes in all your actions, private as well as public; 
your words, even your idle words — no, it touches your 
thoughts — the imagination and the thoughts of your heart. Can 
you keep a law as spiritual as this? Do you believe that you can 
live without sinful thoughts ? Now, mark you, if you had no acts 
of transgression, yet your thoughts, themselves, were enough 
to send you to the lowest hell! Why, when first of all a Christian 
gets a true view of the spirituality and extent of the divine 
command, when he hears the Master’s words, and understands 
them, “Whoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has 
committed adultery with her already in his heart;” when he 
knows that this is true of every other command — that the 
thought of evil is sin — then he throws down the trowel with 
which he hoped to build himself a Babel tower of righteousness, 
and he says — “I cannot do it; it is impossible; the law is too 
great; I cannot attain unto it.” Besides, remember your own 
weakness, sinner. Have you tried to keep the law? Have you not 
come down from your chamber in the morning full of good 
resolves as ever were in a man’s heart, and yet, before the first 
meal was over, have you not committed yourself by some 
wrong expression, some angry temper? Did you ever pass a day 
without sin? Could you do it? Your many failures all tell you 
that there is no strength in your hands sufficient to open the 
gates of heaven, no power in your feet that shall be strong 
enough to make you tread the weary pathway that would lead 
to salvation by the works of the law. Stand still, sinner! Why 
attempt a task for which you are incapable? Do, I pray you, 
remember that if you could perform it in the future, yet your past 
sins — what about them? Why, man, remember your youth of 
folly? Did you always honor your father and your mother? Did 
your young tongue always speak the truth? Is it not true of you 


1096 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


as the apostle said, “They go astray from the womb, speaking 
lies”? Is it not one of the earliest things a child does — to lie? 
And do not all these things stand in the book of God against 
you? There are your youthful sins. Who among us can look 
back upon our youth, with all its hot blood, without regret? “O 
God, lay not the sins of my youth at my door,” may be the 
prayer of even the most righteous man! And what about the 
crimes of your age? O soul, if you will but look back through 
the glass of the revelation of God, remembering that your 
thoughts and your words come into the account, you will surely 
see it to be a long, black, dismal list of reasons for 
condemnation! You cannot find in your whole life any cause 
why mercy should be extended — but you can see thousands of 
reasons why justice should have its way with you! 

Why, then, do you seek, being already over head and ears 
in debt, to work out your own salvation by the law? You have 
already broken it, why try to keep it? That alabaster vase of 
God’s command — if you could have kept it spotless and whole, 
would have been a passport of entrance for you at the gates of 
heaven, but you have broken it — broken it to shivers, and your 
black and foul fingers have taken away all whiteness from it. O, 
be not so foolish as to seek to do what your past sins have 
rendered impossible! Moreover, soul, I do beseech you to 
remember that you cannot satisfy divine justice. What if you 
should put your poor body through a thousand 
mortifications — starve it in a prison, or stretch it upon a rack, 
or broil it upon the fire, or drown it in the sea? None of these 
things could take away the anger of God against you for your 
sins! No, when you shall lie in hell, though the flames are hot, 
yet, there is no power in the torments of hell to make expiation 
for sin. The sinner is still as much an object of God’s righteous 
detestation, after millions of years of agony, as when first the 
law’s great whip began to fall! Why then, do you go about 


1097 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


hoping to do what the justice of God may well assure you no 
creature of the race of Adam can do? And will you remember, 
too, that if — if you could atone for the past — and ij 'you could 
prevent one sin for the future, yet you, yourself, are vile! Your 
nature is as evil as your actions. The marrow of your bones is 
impregnated with your lusts, and in your blood there rolls a 
black stream of sin. You are yourself loathsome. Not only does 
evil come from you, but there is a fountain of evil within you! 
The leprosy lies deep within. You are yourself an enemy to God, 
and your carnal mind cannot be reconciled to God. No power 
can reconcile it. God can give you a new mind, and a new heart, 
and a right spirit, but the old nature in you is so bad that it 
cannot be mended; it must be dead and buried, crucified and 
slain with Christ, for while it lives, there is no perfection for 
you; it cannot help you, it can only mar God’s work till God 
strikes the nail through its head, even as Jael slew Sisera of old. 
Sinner, why will you be trying your prayers, your church 
attendance, your sacraments, your chapel attendance, your 
baptisms and the like? All these are a lie and a vanity, if you 
trust in them. Even God’s own ordained ordinances become a 
farce and a delusion when once you make them the foundation 
of your hope — 

“None but Jesus, none but Jesus 
Can do helpless sinners good!” 

Sinner, stand still now! 

But now, in the second and last place upon this point, the 
sinner says, “Suppose then, I give up all hope and do no more 
by way of trusting to myself, what shall I see?” Why, you shall see 
the salvation of God! Do remember, dear friends, that all the 
sinner can do is to see this salvation. He is not to work it out — 
he is not to help it on — he is to see it. Yet, mark you that the 


1098 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


sinner cannot even find out that salvation of itself, for if you 
notice, the next sentence to our text is, “which He will show 
you today.” God must show it to us, or else we cannot see it! 
“No man can come to Me, except the Father which has sent 
Me draw him.” There must be a manifestation of Christ to us 
before we shall ever be able to perceive Him! O that the Lord 
would now, while I talk for a few more minutes, reveal His 
great salvation to some sinner who is standing still! Now, soul, 
you are thoroughly prepared to give up your self-righteousness; 
you are willing to be nothing, and to do nothing in order to save 
yourself, then let me tell you, God has worked out and brought 
in a glorious and complete salvation — far more resplendent 
than that which He meritoriously worked for Israel in the Red 
Sea! I will tell you of it. First, it was ordained of old, like that 
deliverance of the Red Sea. God had planned that. Before 
Pharaoh lived, it was written in the eternal decree, “For this 
purpose have I raised you up, that I might show forth My 
power in you.” From old eternity, God had chosen Israel to be 
the objects of His love, and to cast away Egypt that it might 
show His Honor in His terrible justice. The salvation of God’s 
people was ordained of old. Before yonder mountains lifted 
their heads, He ordained to save His people, and long before 
the ancient deeps began to roar in their channels, He had 
chosen them. God did not choose the Israelites because of any 
goodness in them; they were a stiff-necked generation; they had 
no hand in their own choice; He called their father, Abraham, 
as a Syrian ready to perish, and made him His chosen, and made 
a covenant with Abraham’s seed after him. And so God has 
prepared a salvation for His elect, chosen by Him not because 
of any goodness in them, but because He will have mercy on 
whom He will have mercy, and will have compassion on whom 
He will have compassion! Is not this a salvation that will suit 
you, O poor sinner? If God had chosen them out of any merit, 


1099 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


or if that choice depended on anything which men did or could 
do, you were a damned soul, for you have no goodness and you 
can do nothing! If God’s election comes to those who are 
without merit, without hope, without strength — here is hope for 
you! In the next place, the salvation which God shows is one 
worked by a mediator. Moses was the mediator of that time. He 
stretched his rod over the sea. Jesus is the great mediator, of 
whom Moses was the feeble type. Sinner, Jesus Christ has 
divided the Red Sea of God’s wrath, lifting up Himself upon 
the cross, a far mightier weapon than Moses’ rod! He made the 
floods of God’s wrath retire, that all His chosen might march 
through. If you believe in Him; if standing still today you will 
but see the salvation of God, you may discern a path to heaven 
over which no waters of divine wrath can ever dash! Christ 
Himself has substituted His own person for yours — He took 
your guilt, and stood as a sinner in the sight of God. He was 
punished instead of your being punished, and it is impossible, 
according to equity, that God can punish two for the one 
offense! If Christ has paid the debt, the debt is paid! Since Jesus 
was the substitute, wrath is gone. If Christ drank all the hell- 
draught, then there is not a drop left to drink for any of those 
for whom He died; and if you can see this morning (it is all you 
have to do), if you can see that Christ has done this, rest assured 
that God who showed it to you, has not showed you a lie! 

Well do I remember when first my eyes saw the complete 
salvation of Christ Jesus. I had been gadding about after this, 
and that, and the other, but when I heard the gospel message, 
“Look! Look unto Me, and be you saved, all you ends of the 
earth,” I did nothing; I only trusted Christ to save me; I turned 
away from deadly doings and from sonX-dcstsoying fee lings to the 
wounded body of the Savior, and believed that He had saved 
me. I trusted to the merit of His life, and to the prevalence of 
His death, and to the mighty power of His plea, and then, the 


1100 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54i Direction in Dilemma - Ex. 14:13 


Spirit of God bore witness with my spirit that I was born of 
God, and sin was put away! Sinner, if you are standing still — I 
pray God you have been brought to that — then LOOK! Can 
you not see it? Was ever anything plainer? Jehovah’s darling 
Son becomes a man! Oh, mystery of mysteries! God was 
manifest in the flesh as a man! He stands as the representative 
head of all His elect. Being such, when justice cried, “Bring here 
the sinner,” Christ came forward bound like a captive and a 
malefactor. “Strip that sinner,” said Justice; and they stripped 
Him naked to His shame. “Bring forth the whip,” said Justice. 
“Ply it hard.” “He gave His back to the smiters, and His cheeks 
to them who plucked off the hair.” “Drag Him to execution,” 
said Justice, “a sinner must die.” They pierced His hands and 
His feet; they lifted Him up upon the cross; they gave Him 
vinegar to drink in the midst of His bitterest grief; they mocked 
Him in His extreme sorrows; He cried to God, but God could 
not help a sinner, and Christ stood as such, though in Him was 
no sin. That shriek of, “Eloi, Eloi, la?na sabachthani, ” was the 
gathering up of all human misery! Hell did not know a more 
sorrowful cry, than “My God, My God, why have You forsaken 
Me?” 

Let the thunderbolts be launched! Let the lightning scathe 
Him! Let every demon of the pit come up against Him! Let 
every friend forsake Him! Let His heart break, let His tongue 
cleave to His mouth, Let His mouth become a furnace! Let His 
heart be melted like wax; let the joints of His bones be loosened; 
let Him come into the jaws of death — the law requires it all. It 
is done! Justice, have you any more to demand? She answers, 
“No.” The mighty substitute exclaims, “IT IS FINISHED.” 
And finished it is! The Red Sea of justice is effectually and 
perpetually divided. “But,” says one, “is this for the elect?” It 
is, and for them only! “But how do I know whether I am one of 
them?” The elect are known by this — “My sheep hear My 


1101 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


voice, and I know them, and they follow Me.” The true mark 
of election is trust. If you will stand still and trust Christ, you 
are as certainly one of His elect as the apostles who are before 
His throne. Trust is the infallible mark of election; it is by this 
we make our calling and election sure. Believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and you shall be saved! Stand still, then, and see 
salvation in Jesus. “Well,” says one, “but you really do not mean 
to say that I am now, just as I am, to trust Christ to save me, 
and it is all done?” I do! Sinner, you have not misunderstood 
me. It is just that. Sinner, do nothing, either great or small. Jesus 
did it all, long, long ago! To add anything to Him were to insult 
His perfect work; to hope to complete His matchless 
righteousness were impertinence; to imagine that you could 
make better that which He has finished were an idle, soul- 
destroying dream! Take a finished Savior just as He is, and you 
are saved now, even though you have no good thing of your 
own. Away with those rusty farthings of your own merit, those 
proposals and vows of your own doings! Take Jesus as He is, 
and that act of accepting Christ through His merit saves your 
soul! After you have done this, then will come the command — 
“Go forward.” For the present, all we have to say to you, poor 
trembler, is, “Stand still, and see the salvation of God.” May 
the Lord bless these last words to the sinner, and my first words 
to the saint, and, by His Grace, we will together stand still and 
see what the Lord has worked; we will together sing unto Him, 
for He will triumph gloriously, and all our enemies shall be cast 
into the midst of the sea! The Lord bless you for Jesus’ sake. 
Amen. 


1102 



542 Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, November 29th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“Bring the cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when you 
come — and the books, but especially the parchments.” - II 
Timothy 4:13 

FOOLISH PERSONS have made remarks upon the trifles of 
Scripture. They have marveled why so litde a matter as a cloak 
should be mentioned in an inspired book; but they ought to 
know that this is one of the many indications that the book is 
by the same author as the book of nature. Are there not things 
which our short-sightedness would call trifles in the volume of 
creation around us? What is the peculiar value of the daisy upon 
the lawn, or the buttercup in the meadow? Compared with the 
rolling sea, or the eternal hills, how insignificant they seem! 
Why has the humming bird a plumage so wondrously 
bejeweled, and why is so much marvelous skill expended upon 
the wing of a butterfly? Why such curious machinery in the foot 
of a fly, or such a matchless optical arrangement in the eye of a 
spider? Because to most men these are trifles, are they to be left 
out of nature’s plans? No; because greatness of divine skill is as 
apparent in the minute as in the magnificent — even so in Holy 
Writ — the litde things which are embalmed in the amber of 
inspiration are far from inappropriate or unwise! Besides, in 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


providence are there not trifles? It is not every day that a nation 
is torn by revolution, or a throne shaken by rebellion — far 
oftener a bird’s nest is destroyed by a child, or an anthill 
overturned by a spade. It is not at every hour that a torrent 
inundates a province, but how frequendy do the dewdrops 
moisten the green leaves? We do not often read of hurricanes, 
tornadoes, and earthquakes, but the annals of providence could 
reveal the history of many a grain of dust borne along in the 
summer’s gale, many a withered leaf torn from the poplar, and 
many a rush waving by the river’s brim. Therefore, learn to see 
in the little things of the Bible, the God of providence and 
nature! Observe two pictures, and you will, if thoroughly skilled 
in art, detect certain minute details, which indicate the same 
authorship if they are by the same hand; the very little things 
often, to men of artistic eye, identify the painter more certainly 
than the more prominent strokes, which might far more easily 
be counterfeited. Experts detect handwriting by a slight 
quivering in the upstrokes, the turn of the final mark, a dot, a 
cross, or even less matters. Can we not see the legible 
handwriting of the God of nature and providence in the very 
fact that the sublimities of revelation are interspersed with 
homely, everyday remarks? But they are not trifles, after all. I 
venture to say that my text has much in it of spiritual instruction. 
I trust that this cloak may warm your hearts this morning, that 
these hooks may give you instruction, and that the apostle himself 
may be to you an example of heroism, fitted to stir your minds 
to imitation! 

I. First, let us LOOK AT THIS MEMORABLE CLOAK which 
Paul left with Carpus at Troas. Troas was a principal seaport 
town of Asia Minor. Very likely the apostle Paul was seized at 
Troas on the second occasion of his being taken before the 
Roman emperor. The soldiers usually appropriated to 
themselves any extra garments in the possession of an arrested 


1104 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


person, such things being considered as the right of those who 
made the arrest. The aposde may have been forewarned of his 
seizure, and therefore prudendy committed his few books and 
Inis outer garment, which made up all his household stuff, to 
the care of a certain honest man named Carpus. Although 
Troas was a full 600 miles’ journey from Rome, yet the aposde 
Paul is too poor to purchase a garment, and so directs Timothy, 
as he is coming that way, to bring his cloak. He needs it badly, 
for the sharp winter is coming on, and the dungeon is very, very 
chilly. This is a brief detail of the circumstances. What kind of 
cloak it was, certain learned commentators have spent whole 
pages in trying to discover; but as we know nothing at all about 
it, ourselves, we will leave the question to them — believing that 
they know as much as we do, but no more. 

1. But what does the cloak teach us? There are five or six 
lessons in it. The first is this — let us perceive here, with admiration, 
the co?)jplete self-sacrifice of the apostle Paul for the Lord’s sake. 
Remember, my dear friends, what the aposde once was. He was 
great, famous, and wealthy; he had been brought up at the feet 
of Gamaliel; he was so zealous among his brethren that he 
could not but have commanded their most sincere respect. He 
was attended by a guard of soldiers when he went from 
Jerusalem to Damascus. I do not know whether the horse on 
which he rode was his own, but he must have been a man of 
importance to have been allotted so important a post in 
religious matters. He was a man of good standing in society, 
and doubdess everybody looking at young Saul of Tarsus 
would have said, “He will make a great man; he has every 
chance in life; he has a liberal education, a zealous temperament, 
abundant gifts, and the general esteem of the Jewish rulers; he 
will rise to eminence.” But, when the Lord met him that day on 
the road to Damascus, how everything changed with him! Then 
he could truly say, “But what things were gains to me, those I 


1105 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX ClassicChristianLibrary.com 

counted loss for Christ. Yes, doubdess and I count all things 
but loss for the excellence of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my 
Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do 
count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in 
Him.” He begins to preach — away goes his character! Now 
nothing is too bad for Paul among his Jewish associates. “Away 
with such a fellow from the earth; it is not fit that he should 
live,” was the exact expression of Jewish feeling towards him. 
He continues his labors, and away has gone his wealth — he has 
either scattered it among the poor, or it has been sequestered 
by his former friends. He journeys from place to place at no 
small sacrifice of comfort. The wife to whom he was probably 
once united — for no unmarried man could vote in the 
Sanhedrim as Paul did against Stephen — had fallen sick and 
died, and the aposde now preferred a life of singleness, that he 
might give himself entirely to his work. If only in this world he 
had hope, he would have been of all men the most miserable! 
He has at last grown gray, and now, the very men who owed 
their conversion to him have forsaken him. When he first came 
into Rome they stood with him, but now, they have all gone 
like winter’s leaves, and the poor old man, “such a one as Paul 
the aged,” sits with nothing in all the world to call property, but 
an old cloak and a few books — and those are 600 miles away! 
Ah, how he emptied himself, and to what extremity of 
destitution was he willing to bring himself for the sake of Christ! 
Do not complain that he mentions his clothes — a greater than 
he did so, and did so in an hour more solemn than that in which 
Paul wrote the Epistle! Remember who it was who said, “They 
parted My garments among them, and upon My vesture did 
they cast lots.” The Savior must die in absolute nakedness, and 
the aposde is made something like He as he sits shivering in the 
cold. 


1106 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


Brothers and sisters, was Paul right in all this? Were his 
sacrifices reasonable? Was the object which he contemplated 
worthy of all this suffering and self-denial? Was he carried away 
by an excessive heat of fanaticism to spend upon an inferior 
object what was not required of him? No believer here thinks 
so! You all believe that if you could give up substance, and 
talent, and esteem, yes, and your own life, also, for Christ, it 
would be well spent. I say you think so, but how many of us 
have ever carried it out? 1 think it would be better to say, how 
few of us. There are some who seldom have an opportunity for 
sacrificing for Christ at all; what they give is spared from their 
overabundance — they never feel it. It is a high luxury when a 
man has such a love for J esus that he is able to give until he 
pinches himself. If Paul were reasonable, what are you and I? 
If Paul only gives as a Christian should do, how ashamed 
should we be of ourselves? If he will bring himself to poverty 
for Christ, what shall we say of those base-born professors who 
will not lose a trifle in their trade for honesty’s sake? What shall 
we say of those who say, “I know how to get money, and I 
know how to keep it, too,” and look with scorn upon those 
who are more generous than they? If you are content to 
condemn Paul, and charge him with folly, do so, but if not, if 
this is but a reasonable service, and such as the infinite grace of 
God which Paul experienced required of him, then let us do 
something of the like sort! If you have experienced as much 
love, love the Lord as much, and spend, and be spent for the 
Lord Jesus! 

2. Secondly, dear friends, we learn how utterly forsaken the 
apostle was by his friends. If he had not a cloak of his own, could 
not some of them lend him one? Ten years before, the aposde 
was brought in chains along the Appian way to Rome; and 50 
miles before he reached Rome, a litde band of members of the 
church came to meet him; and when he came within 20 miles 


1107 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of the city, at the “Three Taverns,” there came a still larger 
group of the disciples to escort him, so that the chained 
prisoner, Paul, went into Rome attended by all the believers in 
that city! He was then a younger man, but now, for some reason 
or other, 10 years later, nobody comes to visit him! He is 
confined in prison, and they do not even know where he is, so 
that Onesiphorus, when he comes to Rome, has to seek him 
out very diligendy. He is as obscure as if he had never had a 
name, and though he is still as great and glorious an aposde as 
ever, men have so forgotten him, and the church has so 
despised him, that he is friendless! The Philippian Church, 10 
years before, had made a collection for him when he was in 
prison; and though he had learned in whatever state he was, to 
be content, yet he thanked them for their contribution as an 
offering of a sweet smelling savor unto God. Now he is old, 
and no church remembers him! He is brought to trial, and there 
are Eubulus, and Pudens, and Linus — will not some of them 
stand by his side when he is brought before the emperor? “At 
my first answer no man stood with me.” Poor soul, he served 
his God and worked himself down to poverty for the church’s 
sake, yet the church has forsaken him! Oh, how great must have 
been the anguish of the loving heart of Paul at such ingratitude! 
Why did not the few who were in Rome, if they had been ever 
so poor, make a contribution for him? Could not those who 
were of Caesar’s household have found a cloak for the aposde? 
No; he is so utterly left, that although he is ready to die of fever 
in the dungeon, not a soul will lend or give him a cloak! 

What patience does this teach to those similarly situated! 
Has it fallen to your lot, my brother, to be forsaken of friends? 
Were there other times when your name was the symbol of 
popularity, when many lived in your favor like insects in your 
sunbeam? And has it come to this, now, that you are forgotten 
as a dead man out of mind? In your greatest trials do you find 


1108 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


your fewest friends? Have those who once loved and respected 
you fallen asleep in Jesus? And have others turned out to be 
hypocritical and untrue? What are you to do now? You are to 
remember this case of the apostle; it is put here for your 
comfort! He had to pass through as deep waters as any that you 
are called to ford, and yet remember, he says, “Notwithstanding, 
the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me.” So now, when 
man deserts you, God will be your friend. This God is our God 
forever and ever — not in sunshiny weather only, but forever and 
ever! This God is our God in dark nights as well as in bright 
days. Go to Him, spread your complaint before Him. Murmur 
not. If Paul had to suffer desertion, you must not expect better 
usage. Let not your faith fail you as though some new thing had 
happened to you. This is common to the saints. David had his 
Ahithophel, Christ his Judas, Paul his Demas — and can you 
expect to fare better than they? As you look at that old cloak, 
as it speaks of human ingratitude, be of good courage, and wait 
on the Lord, for He shall strengthen your heart. “Wait, I say, 
on the Lord.” 

3. There is a third lesson. Our text shows the apostle’s 
independence of mind. Why didn’t the aposde borrow a cloak? Why 
did he not beg one? No, no, no! That is not to the aposde’s 
taste at all. He has a cloak, and though it is 600 miles away, he 
will wait until it comes. Though there may be some who may 
lend, he knows that they who go a borrowing go a sorrowing, 
and that they who beg are seldom welcome. I do not think a 
Christian should blush to borrow or to beg if he is absolutely 
brought to it, but I never like that class of people who do either 
systematically; I wish many of the poor would not damage the 
charity of others by being so ready to beg on every pretense of 
necessity. A Christian would do well to remember that it is 
never to his honor, though it is not always to his dishonor, to 
beg. “I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed,” said the unfaithful 


1109 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


steward, and if he had been a faithful one, he would have been 
more ashamed, still! I say again; when it comes to the pinch, 
and a man must ask of his fellows, let him do it boldly. But let 
him never be too ready to do it, but, like the aposde, as long as 
he can do without it, let him say, “I have labored with my own 
hands, and eaten no man’s bread for nothing.” Paul taught that 
the minister of God had a right to be supported by the people. 
“If you partake of their spirituals,” he said, “it is right that you 
give of your temporals.” He insists upon it that they are not to 
muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn; yet though 
he holds this as a great general principle, he never takes 
anything himself! He follows his trade of tent making; he 
stitches away at the canvas, and earns his own living so that he 
is chargeable unto no man. Noble example! How anxious all 
Christians ought to be to see that they do not come to want in 
their old age! Yet Paul does come to poverty — but his 
independent spirit is not broken at the last, for he will wait till 
his own cloak is brought 600 miles rather than ask any man to 
give or lend. Let the Christian be quite as independent, for 
though independence is not a Christian grace, yet it is a 
common grace which, when wreathed with Christianity, is very 
beautiful, and befits the character of a Child of God. 

4 . The fourth remark is — see here, how very little the apostles 
thought about how they were dressed. Paul wants enough to keep him 
warm; he asks no more. There is no doubt whatever that the 
other parts of his garments were getting very dilapidated — that 
he was, indeed, in a state of rags, and so he needed the cloak to 
wrap about him. We read in olden times of many of the most 
eminent servants of God being dressed in the poorest manner. 
When good Bishop Hooper was led out to be burnt, he had 
been long in prison, and his clothes were so gone from him 
that he borrowed an old scholar’s gown, full of rags and holes, 
that he might put it on, and went limping with pains of sciatica 


mo 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


and rheumatism to the stake. We read of Jerome of Prague, that 
he lay in a damp, cold dungeon, and was refused anything to 
cover him in his nakedness and cold. Some ministers are very 
careful lest they should not always be dressed in a canonical or 
gentlemanly manner. 1 like that remark of Whitefield’s, when 
someone of a bad character wondered how he could preach 
without a cassock. “Ah,” he said, “I can preach without a 
cassock, but I cannot preach without a character.” What 
matters the outward garment, so long as the character is right? 
This is a lesson to our private members, too. We sometimes 
hear them say, “I could not come out on Sunday — I had not fit 
clothes to come in.” Any clothes are fit to come to the house 
of God with, if they are paid for, no matter how coarse they 
may be! If they are the best God has given you, do not murmur! 
Inasmuch as the trial of raiment is a very sharp one to some of 
the poorest of God’s people, I think this text was put into the 
Bible for their comfort. Your Master wore no soft and dainty 
raiment; His garment was the simple peasant’s smock-frock — 
woven from the top throughout without seam — and yet He 
never blushed to wear it in the presence of kings and priests! I 
shall always believe that the Christian ought to cultivate a noble 
indifference to these outward things; but when it comes to the 
pinch of absolute need of clothing, then he may comfort 
himself in this thought, “Now I am companion with my Master; 
now do I walk in the same temptation as the aposdes; now I 
suffer even as they also suffered.” Every saint is an image of 
Christ, but a poor saint is His exact image, for Christ was poor. 
So, if you are brought to such a pinch with regard to poverty 
that you scarcely know how to provide things decent by way of 
raiment, do not be dispirited, but say, “My Master suffered the 
same, and so did the apostle Paul.” And so take heart and be 
of good cheer! 


1111 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


5. Paul’s cloak at Troas shows me how mighty the apostle was 
to resist temptation. “I do not see that,” you say. The aposde had 
the gift of miracles. Our Savior, though able to work miracles, 
never worked anything like a miracle on His own account; nor 
did His apostles. Miraculous gifts were entrusted to them with 
gospel ends and purposes — for the good of others, and for the 
promotion of the truth of God; but never for themselves. Our 
Savior was tempted by the devil, you will remember, when He 
was hungry, to turn stones into bread. That was a strong 
temptation — to apply miraculous powers which were intended 
for other ends — to His personal comfort. But He rebuked 
Satan, and said, “Man shall not live by bread alone.” Paul also 
had power to have created a cloak if he had liked; why couldn’t 
he? His very shadow healed the sick! If he had willed it, he could 
have prevented the cold and damp from having any effect upon 
himself; he who had once raised to life, dead Eutychus, when 
he had fallen from a loft, and brought back the vital heat, could 
certainly have kept the heat in his own body if he had chosen! 
And, I am bold to say, the devil often came to him and said, “If 
you are an apostle of God, if you can work miracles, command 
this atmosphere to rise in temperature, or these rags to be 
joined together and form you a comfortable cloak.” You do not 
know — you cannot tell, for you were never put to it — what 
were the stern struggles the apostle must have had in resisting 
the foul temptation to use his miraculous gifts for himself! O 
brothers, I am afraid you and 1 are much more ready to give 
way to self than was the aposde. We preach the gospel, and if 
God helps us, oh, directly the devil will have us to take some 
of the praise. “You preached a good sermon this morning,” 
said one to John Bunyan, as he came down the stairs. “You are 
too late,” said honest John, “the devil told me that when I was 
preaching.” Yes, God works the miracles, but we take the 
honor to ourselves. There is the temptation for any man who 


1112 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


has gifts to use them to his own purposes, and if he does, he is 
an unfaithful steward to his Master. I do beseech you, whether 
in the Sunday school or the church, never let the miracle- 
working power, which God has given you, be used for 
yourselves! You can do for Christ’s sake mighty things through 
faith and prayer, but never let prayer and faith be prostituted to 
so base a purpose as to minister unto the flesh. I know carnal 
minds will not comprehend this, but spiritual minds, who know 
the temptations of the devil, will know how stern must be a 
life-long batde to keep ourselves back from doing that which 
might apparently make us happy, but which would at the same 
time make us unholy. 

6. The sixth lesson from this cloak is we are taught in this 
passage how precisely similar one child of God is to another. I know we 
look upon Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob as being very great 
and blessed beings — we think that they lived in a higher region 
than we do. We cannot think that if they had lived in these 
times, they would have been Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We 
suppose that these are very bad days, and that any great height 
of divine grace, or self-denial is not very easily attainable. 
Brethren, my own conviction is that if Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob had lived now — instead of being less, they would have 
been greater saints — for they only lived in the dawn, and we 
live in the noon. We hear the aposdes often called, “Saint” Peter 
and “Saint” Paul; and thus they are set up on high as on an 
elevated niche. If we had seen Peter and Paul, we would have 
thought them a very ordinary sort of people — wonderfully like 
ourselves; and if we had gone into their daily life and trials, we 
would have said, “Well, you are wonderfully superior to what I 
am in grace, but somehow or other, you are men of like 
passions with me. I have a quick temper, so have you, Peter. I 
have a thorn in the flesh, so have you, Paul. I have a sick-house, 
Peter’s wife’s mother lies sick of a fever. I complain of the 


1113 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


rheumatism, and the apostle Paul, when aged, feels the cold and 
needs his cloak.” Ah, we must not consider the Bible as a book 
intended for transcendental super-elevated souls — it is an 
everyday book, and these good people were everyday people, 
only they had more divine grace, but we can get more grace as 
well as they could — the Fountain at which they drew is quite as 
full and as free to us as to them! We have only to believe after 
their fashion, and trust to Jesus after their way — and although 
our trials are not the same as theirs, we shall overcome through 
the Blood of the Lamb. I like to see religion brought out in 
everyday life. Do not tell me about the godliness of the 
Tabernacle; tell me about the godliness of your shop, your counter, 
and your kitchen! Let me see how divine grace enables you to be 
patient in the cold, or joyful in hunger, or industrious in labor. 
Though divine grace is no common thing, yet it shines best in 
common things. To preach a sermon, or to sing a hymn, is but 
a paltry thing compared with the power to suffer cold, and 
hunger, and nakedness for Christ’s sake. Courage then, courage 
then, fellow Pilgrims! The road was not smoothed for Paul any 
more than it is for us. There was no royal road to heaven in 
those days any more than there is now. They had to go through 
sloughs, and bogs, and mire — just as we do — 

“They wrestled hard as we do now 
With sins and doubts and fears,” 

but they have gained the victory at last, and even so shall 
we! So much, then, for the cloak which was left at Troas with 
Carpus. 

II. We will LOOK AT HIS BOOKS. We do not know what 
the books were, and we can only form some guess as to what 
the parchments were. Paul had a few books which were left, 
perhaps wrapped up in the cloak, and Timothy was to be 


1114 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


careful to bring them. Even an apostle must read. Some of our very 
ultra-Calvinistic brothers and sisters think that a minister who 
reads books, and studies his sermon must be a very deplorable 
specimen of a preacher. A man who comes up into the pulpit, 
professes to take his text on the spot, and talks any quantity of 
nonsense is the idol of many! If he will speak without 
premeditation, or pretend to do so, and never produce what 
they call a dish of dead men’s brains — oh, that is the preacher! 
How rebuked are they by the apostle! He is inspired, and yet he 
needs books! He has been preaching for at least 30 years, and 
yet he needs books! He had seen the Lord, and yet he needs 
books! He had had a wider experience than most men, and yet 
he needs books! He had been caught up into the third heaven, 
and had heard things which it was unlawful for a man to utter, 
yet he needs books! He had written the major part of the New 
Testament, and yet he needs books! The apostle says to 
Timothy, and so he says to every preacher, “Give yourself unto 
reading.” The man who never reads will never be read; he who 
never quotes will never be quoted; he who will not use the 
thoughts of other men’s brains proves that he has no brains of 
his own! Brothers and sisters, what is true of ministers is true 
of all our people. You need to read. Renounce as much as you 
will all light literature, but study as much as possible sound 
theological works, especially the Puritan writers, and 
expositions of the Bible. We are quite persuaded that the very 
best way for you to be spending your leisure time is to be either 
reading or praying. You may get much instruction from books 
which afterward you may use as a true weapon in your Lord 
and Master’s service. Paul cries, “Bring the books” — join in the 
cry! 

Our second remark is that the apostle is not ashamed to confess 
that he does read. He is writing to his young son, Timothy. Now 
some old preachers never like to say a thing which will let the 


1115 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


young ones into their secrets. They suppose they must put on 
a very dignified air, and make a mystery of their sermonizing; 
but all this is alien from the spirit of truthfulness. Paul needs 
books, and is not ashamed to tell Timothy that he does; and 
Timothy may go and tell Tychicus and Titus if he likes — Paul 
does not care. 

Paul herein is a picture of industry. He is in prison; he cannot 
preach — what will he do? As he cannot preach, he will read! As 
we read of the fishermen of old and their boats, the fishermen 
were out of them. What were they doing? Mending their nets! 
So if providence has laid you upon a sick bed, and you cannot 
teach your class — if you cannot be working for God in public, 
mend your nets by reading! If one occupation is taken from 
you, take another, and let the books of the aposde read you a 
lesson of industry. 

He says, “Especially the parchments. ” I think the books were 
Latin and Greek works, but the parchments were Oriental; and 
possibly they were the parchments of Holy Scripture. Or, as 
likely, they were his own parchments, on which were written 
the originals of his letters which stand in our Bible as the 
Episdes to the Ephesians, the Philippians, the Colossians, and 
so on. Now, it must be, ‘Especially the parchments” with all our 
reading; let it be especially the Bible. Do you attach no weight to 
this advice? This advice is more needed in England now than 
almost at any other time, for the number of persons who read 
the Bible, I believe, is becoming smaller every day. Persons read 
the views of their denominations as set forth in the periodicals; 
they read the views of their leader as set forth in his sermons 
or his works; but the Book, the good old Book, the divine 
fountainhead from which all revelation wells up — this is too 
often left! You may go to human puddles until you forsake the 
clear crystal stream which flows from the throne of God. Read 
the books, by all means, but especially the parchments! Search 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


human literature, if you will, but especially stand fast by that 
book which is infallible, the revelation of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ! 

III. We now want to have AN INTERVIEW WITH THE 
APOSTLE PAUL HIMSELF, for we may learn much from him. 

It is almost too dark to see him — we will find him in that 
frightful den! The horrid dungeon — the filth lies upon the floor, 
till it looks like a road which is seldom scraped — the draft 
blows through the only little slit which they call a window. The 
poor old man, without his cloak, wraps his ragged garment 
about him. Sometimes you see him kneeling down to pray, and 
then he dips his pen into the ink and writes to his dear son, 
Timothy. No companion, except Luke, who occasionally 
comes in for a short time. Now, how shall we find the old man? 
What sort of temper will he be in? 

We find him full of confidence in the religion which has cost him so 
much; for in the first chapter, at the 12th verse, we hear him say, 
“For this reason I also suffer these things: nevertheless, I am 
not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am 
persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have committed 
unto Him against that day.” No doubt, often the tempter said 
to him, “Paul, why you have lost everything for your religion? 
It has brought you to beggary; look, you have preached it, and 
what is the reward of it? The very men you have converted have 
forsaken you! Give it up, give it up, it cannot be worth all this. 
Why, they will not even bring you a cloak to wrap round you; 
you are left here to shiver, and very soon your head will be 
struck from your body. Take your hand from the standard and 
retire.” “No,” says the aposde, T know whom I have believed.” 
Why, I have heard of professors who say, “Ever since I have 
been a Christian I have lost in my business, and therefore I will 
give it up.” But our beloved aposde clings to it with a life grip! 
And oh, there is no heart in our piety if our afdictions make us 


1117 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


doubt the truth of our religion, for these trials, inasmuch as 
they work patience, and patience experience, and experience 
hope, render us such that we are not ashamed, but we do the 
more firmly hold on to Christ! Imagine you hear the apostle say, 
“I know whom I believe.” It is very easy for us to say it. We are 
very comfortable, sitting in our pews; we shall go home to our 
plentiful meal; we shall be clothed comfortably; we have friends 
about us who will smile at us, and it is not hard to say, “I know 
whom I have believed.” But if you were vexed on the one hand 
by Hermogenes and Philetus, and on the other hand by 
Alexander the coppersmith, and Demas, you would not find it 
quite so easy to say, “The Lord is faithful.” Behold this noble 
champion who is just as much unmoved at the worst as he was 
at the best times! “I know how to be full,” he once said, and 
now he can say, “I know how to suffer hunger — I know how 
to abound, and how to suffer loss.” 

But he is not only confident. You will notice that this grand 
old man is having communion with Jesus Christ in his sufferings! Turn 
to the second chapter, at the 10th verse. Did ever sweeter 
language than this come from anyone? “Therefore I endure all 
things for the elect’s sakes, that they may also obtain the 
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. It is a 
faithful saying: For if we are dead with Him, we shall also live 
with Him: if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him; if we deny 
Him, He also will deny us: if we believe not, yet He abides 
faithful: He cannot deny Himself.” Ah, there are two in the 
dungeon — not only the man who is suffering trouble as an 
evildoer, even unto bonds — but there sits with him one like 
unto the Son of Man, sharing all his griefs, and bearing all his 
despondencies, and so lifting up his head! Well may the apostle 
rejoice that he has fellowship with Christ in his sufferings, 
being made conformable unto his death. But this is not all. Not 
only is he confident for the past, and in sweet communion for 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


the present, but he is resigned for the future. Look at the fourth 
chapter and the 6th verse. “I am now ready to be offered, and 
the time of my departure is at hand.” It is a beautiful emblem 
taken from the sacrificial bullock. There it is, tied to the horns 
of the altar, and ready to be offered. So the apostle stands as a 
sacrifice ready to be offered upon the altar. I am afraid that we 
cannot all say we are ready to be offered. Paul was ready to be 
a burnt offering. If God willed it, he would be burnt to ashes at 
the stake. Or he would be a drink offering as he did become, 
when a stream of blood flowed under the sharp sword. He was 
ready to be a peace offering if God willed it, to die in his bed. In 
any case, he was a free-will offering unto God, for he offered 
himself voluntarily. As he says, “I am now ready to be offered, 
and the time of my departure is at hand.” Glorious old man! 
Many a professed Christian has been clothed in scarlet, and 
fared sumptuously every day, and yet could never say he was 
ready to be offered, but rather he looked upon the time of his 
departure with grief and sorrow! As you think, then, of poor, 
shivering, ragged Paul, think of the jewel which he carried in 
his breast; and O you sons of poverty, remember that the 
magnificence of a holy life, and the grandeur and nobility of a 
consecrated heart can deliver you altogether from any shame 
which may cling to your rags and poverty; for as the sun at 
setting, paints the clouds with all the colors of heaven, so your 
very rags, poverty, and shame may make your life the more 
illustrious as the splendor of your piety lights them with 
heavenly radiance! 

We have not quite concluded with the aposde; for we find 
him not only resigned, but triumphant. “I have fought a good 
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.” See the 
Grecian warrior just returned from batde? He has many 
wounds, and there is a gash across his brow; his chest is 
streaming here and there with cuts and flesh wounds; one arm 


1119 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


is dislocated; he limps, like Jacob, on his thigh; he is covered 
with the smoke and dust of batde; he is smeared with much 
blood; he is faint, and weary, and ready to die, but what does 
he say? As he lifts up his right arm, with his buckler tightly 
clasped upon it, he cries, “I have fought a good fight, I have 
kept my shield!” That was the object of ambition with every 
Grecian warrior; if he kept his shield he came home glorious. 
Now , faith is the Christian’s shield. And here I see the aposde, 
though he wears all the marks of the conflict, yet he triumphs 
in these marks of the Lord Jesus, saying, “I have fought a good 
fight; my very scars and wounds prove it; I have kept the faith.” 
He looks to that golden shield of the faith fastened to his arm, 
and rejoices in it. The tyrant Nero, nor all the warriors of Rome 
ever had such triumph as the aposde Paul! None of them had 
such true glory as this solitary man, who has trod the winepress 
alone, and of the people — there were none with him — who has 
stood against the lion, a solitary champion, with no eye to pity, 
and no arm to save, still triumphant to the end? Brave spirit! 
Never mind the old cloak at Troas, as long as your faith is safe! 

Once more; he not only triumphs in the present, but he is 
in expectation of a crown. When the Grecian wresder had fought a 
good fight, a crown was presented to him; and so Paul, who 
writes about the old cloak, also writes — “Henceforth there is 
laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the 
righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, 
but unto all them also who love His appearing.” When I was 
picturing Paul, and talking of the poverty of many believers — 
“Ah,” said the sinner, “who would be a Christian? Who would 
suffer so much for Christ? Who would lose everything as Paul 
did?” Worldly minds here are thinking — “What a fool, to be 
led away by such an excitement!” Ah, but see how the tables 
have turned! “Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown!” 
What if he had been robed in scarlet, had rolled in wealth, and 


1120 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


54a Paul - His Cloak and His Books - 
II Tim. 4:13 


been great? And what if there had been no crown for him in 
heaven? No joy hereafter — but a fearful looking of judgment? 
See, he springs from his dungeon to his throne! Nero may cut 
off his head, but that head shall wear a starry crown! Courage, 
then, you who are downtrodden, afflicted, and despairing! Be 
of good cheer, for the end will make up for the way, and all the 
roughness of the pilgrimage will be well recompensed by the 
glory which shall await all those who are resting upon Christ 
Jesus! 

We close, having done with this old cloak, when we say, is 
it not beautiful as you read this episde, and, indeed, all the 
aposde’s letters, to see how everything which the apostle thought of 
was connected with Christ; how he had concentrated every passion, 
every power, every thought, every act, every word — and set the 
whole upon Christ. 1 believe that there are many who love 
Christ after a sort, just as the sun shines today; but you know if 
you concentrate the rays of that sun with a magnifying glass, 
and fix all the rays upon any object, then what heat there is, 
what burning, what flame, what fire! So many men scatter their 
love and admiration on almost any and every creature, and 
Christ gets a little, as we all get some rays of the sun; but that is 
the man, who, like the aposde Paul, brings all his thoughts and 
words to a focus. Then he burns his way through life; his heart 
is on fire; like coals of juniper are his words; he is a man of 
force and energy, he may have no cloak, yet for all that, he is a 
great man, and the Czar in his imperial mande is but a driveling 
dwarf by the side of this giant in the army of God. O, 1 wish 
we could set our thoughts on Christ this morning. Are we 
trusting Him this morning? Is He all our salvation, and all our 
desire? If He is, then let us live to Him! Those who are wholly 
Christ’s are not many. O that we were espoused as chaste 
virgins unto Christ — that we might have no other lover, and 
know no other object of delight! Blind are these eyes to all but 


1121 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Christ; and deaf these ears to any music but the voice of Christ; 
and lame these feet to any way but that of obedience to Him; 
palsied these hands to anything but work for Him; and dead 
this heart to every joy if Jesus cannot move! Even as a straw 
floats upon the river, and is carried to the ocean, so would I be 
bereft of all power and will to do anything but that which my 
Lord would have me do — and be carried along by the stream 
of His grace right onward, ready to be offered up, or ready to 
live, ready to suffer, or ready to reign just as He wills — only 
that He may be served in my living and dying! 

It will little matter what cloak you wear, or if you have not 
any at all, if you have but such a concentration of all your bodily 
and mental powers, and spiritual energies upon Christ Jesus, 
and upon Him alone. May those of you who have never trusted 
Jesus be ready to rely upon Him now. He did not forsake Paul, 
even in extremity, and He will not forsake you — 

“Trust Him, He will never deceive you, 

Though you hardly of Him deem. 

He will never, never leave you, 

Nor will let you quite leave Him.” 

Therefore trust Him now and forever, for Jesus’ sake. 
Amen. 


1122 



543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, December 6 th, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“And it shall come to pass, that as you were a curse among 
the heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel, so will I 
save you, and you shall be a blessing. Do not fear, let your 
hands be strong.” - Zechariah 8:13 

AS THESE WORDS CAME from the lips of Zechariah, 
doubtless they referred to the seed of Abraham, including the 
two tribes of Judah and the ten tribes of Israel. They have 
already received a minor fulfillment; but their most glorious 
accomplishment is yet to come. The Jews have for many a 
generation been cursed by all people. For ages no one had a good 
word or a kind look for the Jew. In every nation, they have been 
persecuted and hunted like beasts of prey. The followers of the 
tierce Mohammed have not been their only enemies, for the 
children of the Babylonian harlot have equally thirsted for their 
blood! In our own country, in the dark ages, it was accounted 
God’s service to afflict the Israelites, and the day upon which 
the Church celebrated our Savior’s passion was chosen for the 
public stoning of His own brethren if they ventured into the 
streets! To be a Jew was, in the estimation of that era, to be 
deserving of all scorn and cruelty, and of no pity or 
consideration. To what exactions, to what fines, to what 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


imprisonments and tortures have not the sons of Jacob been 
subjected by the professed followers of the Messiah? It is 
perhaps the greatest of all modern miracles that there should 
be one Jew upon earth who is a Christian — for the treatment 
they have received from pretended Christians has been enough 
to make them hate the name of Jesus; it has been not simply 
villainous, but diabolical. Devils in hell could not be cruder to 
their victims than professed Christians have been to the sons 
of Abraham! They have been a curse, indeed. The whole 
vocabulary of abuse from “dog,” down to “devil,” has been 
exhausted upon them; among all nations they have been a 
hissing and a byword. But the day is coming, yes, it dawns 
already, when the whole world shall discern the true dignity of 
the chosen seed, and shall seek their company, because the 
Lord has blessed them. In that day, when Israel shall look upon 
Him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for their sins, 
the Jew shall take his true rank among the nations as an elder 
brother and a prince. The covenant made with Abraham, to 
bless all nations by his seed, is not revoked — heaven and earth 
shall pass away, but the chosen nation shall not be blotted out 
from the Book of Remembrance. The Lord has not cast away 
His people; He has never given their mother a bill of divorce; 
He has never put them away; in a little wrath He has hidden 
His face from them, but with great mercies will He gather them. 
The natural branches shall again be engrafted into the olive 
together with the wild olive grafts from among the Gentiles. In 
the Jew, first and chiefly, shall divine grace triumph through the 
King of the Jews. O time, fly with rapid wing and bring the 
auspicious day! 

Another meaning has been given to the passage by some 
very eminent expositors, namely, that the Jews have been for 
ages the model of a curse to all people. As old Master Trapp says, 
they bear upon their backs the wheels of God’s rod, or, as he 


1124 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


puts it yet more strongly, like Cain, they carry upon their 
foreheads the mark of God’s wrath. They have been a people 
scattered and peeled, not numbered among the nations, men of 
weary foot and haggard countenances. Their nation has been 
the football of providence, and the butt of misfortune. They 
have been shipwrecked upon every sea, overturned by every 
storm — the victims of every calamity, and the objects of every 
misery. Everywhere have they been men evidendy accursed of 
God and given up to His wrath. When men needed a name to 
curse by, they said, “Let me be as accursed as the Jew.” But the 
day is to come when they are to be quite as manifesdy the 
blessed ones of God! Their conversion shall show how God 
favors them — their gathering to their own land, the splendor 
of the reign of Messiah in their midst, and all those latter-day 
glories which are dimly shadowed in the Book of the Revelation, 
and in the Book of the Vision of Daniel the Prophet — when all 
these shall come to pass — then the sons of men shall speak of 
the Jewish people as a royal priesthood and a peculiar people! 
The seed of Abraham, God’s friend, are very dear to Him — the 
darlings of His bosom, the flock of His pasture, and the sheep 
of His hand. Oh, that the dark night would soon be over! Long 
has the Christian Church slept in forgetfulness of the Jew; even 
faithful men have scarcely given a thought to Israel, and have 
left the Jew to perish as though his heart were too hard to be 
melted by divine love. I trust that mistake has been discovered, 
and that there are many now anxiously praying for the 
restoration of the glory unto Israel, but too many are still 
indifferent where earnestness is needed. May the Lord in His 
infinite mercy first put it into His people’s hearts to pray for 
Israel, and then to work in love, and labor in faith. May He 
hasten in His own time the fulfillment of His promises to 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and then shall the whole earth be 
covered with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover 


1125 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the sea! We may work and we may toil, but till Israel is gathered, 
God’s glory cannot be universal, nor even widely spread. Until 
the Jew acknowledges Jesus of Nazareth as the Messiah, the 
fullness of the times of restitution shall not have arrived. Make 
no tarrying, O our Lord! Come quickly and send as the herald 
of Your coming — Your own brethren who once despised You 
when You came to Your own, and Your own received You not. 

You can clearly understand the text now in its literal 
significance without another word of exposition — “As you 
have been a curse among all nations, O house of Judah, and 
house of Israel; so will I save you, and you shall be a blessing.” 

We feel ourselves perfectly justified in using the text in a 
broader sense. Our text teaches us that the unconverted are a curse; 
secondly, that when converted they become a blessing thirdly, the text 
tells the means by which the transformation is worked — “I will save 
you” — and it closes with a word of encouragement to those who desire 
salvation — “Do not fear; let your hands be strong.” 

I. Unconverted men are a curse. This they are 
positively, for every unconverted man, no matter what may be 
Iris moral character, adds in his degree to the amount of evil in the 
world — he adds another handful of leaven to leaven the whole 
lump, another breath of death-bearing wind to scatter the 
plague of sin among the sons of men. Every unrenewed heart 
casts another stone upon the heap of iniquity, and assists the 
rising Babel of rebellion to lift its head more proudly. As I see 
the ungodly advancing one by one, I hear the prince of 
darkness cry, “Here comes another soldier to swell the ranks of 
evil, another lance for Satan, and another sword for the powers 
of evil.” To the black banner, every man that is unconverted is 
a recruit; let him do as he may, and think as he will, he who is 
not with Christ is against Him! He who is not for the right, is 
on the side of the wrong. How is the body corporate of 
humanity poisoned more and more as each man adds his grain 


1126 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


of evil! How is the torrent swollen with another and another 
stream! A deluge of iniquity is but a collection of all the 
contributions from every fountain of the great deep. Every 
graceless spirit binds another millstone about the neck of the 
human race to sink it to the lowest hell. Every sinner is a 
positive mischief-maker in the world. He is a deadly upas 
tree — every leaf distilling poison. It is impossible that it should 
be otherwise, for as a black and filthy fountain must send forth 
unclean streams, so by a law of nature, as long as man is himself 
evil, he must do evil. One sinner destroys much good, and 
whatever sort of sinner he may be, whether his sin is written on 
his forehead, or only carried concealed in his right hand, he 
infects the world with evil. The sinner is a curse, then, because 
he adds to the positive evil in the world! 

He is yet more — he is a curse because he helps to bring down 
the wrath of heaven upon the world. Another destroying angel to cry, 
“O Lord, how long before You smite iniquity, and bathe Your 
sword in the blood of rebels?” Another voice to cry, “Awake! 
Awake! O sword of justice! Smite the sinner and let him perish 
from the face of the earth.” Doubtless every sin is a God- 
provoking thing. It stirs Him to jealousy. As the blood of Abel 
cried, “Vengeance,” so does sin. It is a thorn in the side of 
justice, a stab at the heart of truth. God’s great patience is 
expended at a tremendous rate by the sins of men. You 
unconverted men! You make every day a draft from the 
account of long-suffering, and the day shall come when the 
golden sun shall all be expended, and then, woe unto the world, 
for then shall the last plagues be let loose, and the last vials shall 
be poured out! 

Even when the ungodly man dies, he has not finished his evil work. 
His life may be over, but the moral death caused by his life still 
continues. As the tree that has borne evil fruit sends to the 
winds its seeds, and these are buried in their appointed places, 


1127 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


where young saplings spring up to become a forest of evil, so 
is it with the ungodly man — his words and his example, like 
seeds in the ground, germinate and bring forth the same in 
other men! Like produces like. His children in nature and spirit 
arise after him, and these prolong the echo of the dreadful curse 
which his life has pronounced upon the race. He cannot stay 
that curse even if he would — it is given to the course of time 
as a feather to the wind and on it must go forever! Those 
saplings which sprang from him, as from the parent tree, will 
all grow into death-yielding trees, and these will scatter their 
seeds and so on, and on, and on, as long as the human race 
lasts — no, even in eternity the victims of his sin lie in torment, 
and blaspheme God world without end, so that his curse is an 
everlasting curse, and the evil which he does lives on when he 
himself sleeps with the clods of the valley. The ungodly man is 
everlastingly a positive curse! 

But he is also a curse negatively. It is deplorable to think how 
much of good a man who knows not God keeps from this 
world. He cumbers the ground in which he grows. He extracts 
nourishment from the ground and covers it so that it cannot 
yield nourishment to any other plant, and yet he, himself, brings 
forth no fruit. Is this your position, my hearer, this morning? 
Are you a do-nothing? If you are, remember that the spot 
which you occupy might have been occupied by a man who 
would have glorified God, and done much for the spread of 
true religion. You have much time upon your hands, but you kill 
it. If another had it, it would be occupied with visitation of the 
sick, teaching the ignorant, comforting the weary, and other 
acts which would glorify the name of Jesus. You have the time 
and it is ill-spent. You have money. You spend perhaps upon a 
feast for your own pleasure as much as might have sent a herald 
of the cross to a foreign land! Many a man, if he had your means, 
would put clothes upon the backs of the naked, and bread into 


1128 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


the mouths of the hungry. In one respect, money answers all 
things, but you make it answer to nothing except your own 
gratification. Ah, how much mischief you do in this way! You 
have influence — it may be you are an employer with many 
employees, or placed in such a position that many wait upon 
you, and your example is followed, and your words are weighty. 
If another had your place, how would he lead a whole troop to 
heaven! With what earnestness would he seek to bless those 
who dwell under his shadow; but you, what do you do? You 
cumber the ground! These many years there has not been 
found upon you one single ripe fruit such as may be acceptable 
to the Lord of the vineyard! Beware; beware lest He cut you 
down! Don’t you see what evil you are doing to others? The 
minister is preaching to you this morning, and he has to do it 
often; if it were not for stray sheep such as you are, he would 
have more time to see after the lambs of the flock. If he had 
not to cry out after you, and against your sins, he might be led 
into the deep things of God, to the comfort and edification of 
the Lord’s chosen. While you are in this house, you are spoiling 
the song — you are marring the prayer by the wandering and 
wantonness of your thoughts! If you should come into the 
midst of a company of God’s people who were talking of divine 
things, you would be like an iceberg, chilling the atmosphere 
about you! How many young Christians you have hindered in 
their zeal by your indifference! If you did nothing else but 
damage the good, stop up the stream of love, and quench the 
light of the truth of God, you would have done enough to make 
them a curse among men, and to provoke God to smite you 
with the curse that withers body and soul forever and ever. 

This is true of every unconverted man. Many of you moral men , 
whose lives are admirable, have not your hearts right with God. 
What is the lesson that men learn from your conversation? Why, 
when the infidel wants to prove that there may be goodness 


1129 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


apart from religion, he quotes you as an argument against the 
word of God, and against the necessity of a new heart and a 
right spirit! Have not many in your own position been hardened 
in their halt between two opinions by your example? Young 
people say, “There is Mrs. So-and-So, and Mr. This-and-That, 
what good people they are, and yet, they have never given their 
hearts to God. Surely,” they say, “such people must know, and 
if there were anything in religion, they would certainly have 
followed in the right road, and have put their trust in Christ.” 
The better you are, the more do I deplore that you should be 
upon the wrong side. If my country were at war, it would be 
very litde comfort to me to know that my enemies were good 
soldiers. No, I had rather that they were bad ones, for there 
were then the more hope of overcoming them! The weight of 
your character makes it the more sad that it should be thrown 
into the scale of self-righteousness. I say, the very excellence of 
your morals renders it a more serious crime that you should not 
take your stand with Christ, the lover of holiness. You do 
mischief, I am sure. Possibly there is a measure of moral good 
effected by your example, but there is a more abundant spiritual 
evil . , because many stop where you stop; being affected by your 
example, they halt at your halting place, and as you will perish 
unless you are born again, so will they, and the blood of their 
souls will lie at your door because your example was a curse to 
them! 

If this is true of the moral unconverted man, how much 
more certainly is it of the open follower of vice! Shall I continue? 
No. I will scarcely so much as use my pencil to portray the 
mischief which the follower of vice brings upon others. How 
does the drunk drown multitudes in his cups? How does the 
man of lust destroy and damn both the body and the soul of 
his victims? How does the man who leads a licentious life 
spread poison by his very eyes — like the basilisk, doing 


1130 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


mischief by his glance? “His feet,” we may truly say, “are swift 
to shed blood.” His hands are full of drawn swords and flaming 
firebrands to destroy souls. The profane swearer — -what a pest 
he is! Young ears are bombarded with sin by him, and young 
hearts learn the crimes of old rebels. Ah, you are a curse, indeed! 
Better for someone to walk the streets with a deadly plague 
about him, and to spread it in every house, than to have such 
as you are living in society, for you have the death plague and 
the damnation plague upon you; you are a walking malaria, a 
breather of pestilence — a myrmidon of hell — a jackal to the 
infernal lion, the lackey and the slave of the destroyer! 

Perhaps there are a few such here, therefore let us be brief 
upon that point. It is the same with the sinner who tnakes ungodly 
men his associates — he is a curse. You do not drink as they do, 
you say, nor go to their excess of riot, nor curse with their 
curses, but yet you herd with them. You make them your 
associates, and if you need a little pleasure, you seek their 
acquaintance. Sir, you are a curse; you are a curse to these men! 
I will not say you make them sinful, but I must say you add to 
their comfort in their sin. They see such as you are with them, 
and as association always hardens the sinner, they grow more 
confirmed in evil. Many a drinking club would break up if it 
were not for the two or three sensible men in it, and yet, what 
is the effect of their morality? Not so much to check the others 
as to keep the whole together, and put a respectable face upon 
mischief! You who lie in the same bed with the wicked must 
take care when God smites the house, that you do not perish 
in its overthrow; you who eat at their feasts, and drink of their 
cups, and laugh at their jokes, and revel in their vices, and take 
pleasure in their wantonness, mind when the Lord spreads His 
net to take these foul birds, He will take you in the same net, 
and award you a portion with those who were His enemies! 


1131 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Nor can we spare here the men of thoroughly bad principles; the 
men who pretend to doubt the existence of a God, who 
question the Inspiration of the Scripture, deny the Deity of 
Christ, or impugn the veracity of gospel promises — all such 
men are great destroyers of good! They will always be on the 
face of the earth, and we must never expect to see them rooted 
up until the Lord’s coming. It is amazing that in England they 
should be so miserably small a party. If again infidelity should 
be as prevalent as Christianity, I should not much marvel, for 
it so suits the natural heart of man, that the wonder is that there 
is not more of it abroad. But one infidel — O what a curse he is! 
In a workshop, that one man of sharp shrewd sense will very 
soon make disciples! Like the Pharisees of old, they compass 
sea and land to make one proselyte. Too often the believer does 
not give that attention to the reading of Scripture, and to the 
finding of arguments for his faith which the ungodly man will 
give in order to find arguments to shake the faith of others. I 
would that our members were more industrious, both in 
searching the Scriptures, and in studying the evidences of their 
Inspiration and authenticity, that they might have their 
weapons ready to meet the attacks of infidels, for these 
infidels — men of much thinking, and shrewdness, and wisdom, 
and wit — placed in the midst of poor uneducated Christians are 
terrible as wolves in the midst of a flock of sheep, and they do 
much havoc! Though they cannot turn one truly blood-bought 
child of God out of the flock, nor yet make one that is born- 
again apostatize from the truth of God, yet they bring much 
misery into the heart, and doubdess many who are undecided 
are led by them into decisions for Satan, and go straight away 
from all hopefulness of being converted to God. Now, of such 
a one, we may say he is a curse, indeed. 

But now, I hear another say, “Well now, I do not come 
under the description of immoral, nor yet of those who spread 


1132 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


infidel principles and practices.” Ah, but still you may be a curse, 
if you have an evil spirit towards religion. There are some who say 
but litde, but who hate the very name of Christ. Even if they 
hold their tongues, that shrug of the shoulder, that look; that 
cold, heardess reception which they give to the truth of God, 
must infallibly be observed by others. Children and those 
around them cannot help detecting what they are, and who they 
are, and they will thus become very successful servants of the 
Prince of darkness! O dear friends, I fear that some of you 
know in your own conscience without any words of mine, that 
up to now your lives have been no blessing to your fellows, but 
rather, wherever you have gone, you have been a curse! 

I shall conclude this point by noticing that the unconverted 
man is a curse everywhere. In the family, what a curse he is! His wife, 
perhaps, is a Christian — what a life he leads her! Does he strike 
her? Perhaps not; but his words wound her even more than 
blows would have done! What about the children? Why, they 
will go as the father goes — his crooked words they learn to 
speak, and his crooked actions they will learn to do. It is not 
likely, though by divine grace it is possible, that they should be 
better than he. If we were to put a black cross upon every house 
where there is a husband who is a curse to the household, how 
many streets in London might have the black cross half the way 
down? Are you an ungodly man — and does your life teem with 
iniquity? Then think that the black cross is there as you go 
home and say, “Yes, I am a curse to this house; 1 lead them 
away from God.” He is a curse in the workshop. As soon as he 
goes to it, those who would be decent are led to the public 
house by him, and to places where sin is accustomed to be 
allowed. Let him become what is more respectable, as we say, in 
life; but he is a curse even there. Make him an employer, and 
give him many employees — then how haughty and how 
domineering he will be if he meets an employee who is a 


1133 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


professor of religion! His misspending of his Sundays will be 
known to all his working men, and they are always willing 
enough to follow the example of their employers in doing evil! 
Make him wealthy, he can indulge himself in all sorts of pleasures, 
and his gold is spent in the service of Satan. Give him 
abilities — talents of thought and speech — he becomes a sort of 
sergeant-major in the ranks of Satan, a commander of others. 
Satan employs him as a decoy to bring others into the net. Now, 
he goes abroad and is the call-bird of others, so that others, 
hearing his sweet notes, are lured into the fowler’s snare, and 
are taken and destroyed! Put him on a throne, and he curses an 
empire! Give him but a small village, over which he shall be the 
squire, and he is a curse to the entire parish. Let him become a 
professor and oh, this is the place where he can do the most 
mischief! Clothe him with the garments of a Christian while his 
heart is rotten — and now, while pretending to be a disciple of 
Jesus — he will become more than ever a successful servant of 
Satan! Make him a minister, and you have given him the worst 
possible position; in fact, the better the man’s place, the more 
evil he can do. Oh, to be a minister — to be thought to be sent 
of God to the people, and then to be delivering lies! To be, 
either by one’s life, or one’s teaching, contradicting the oracles 
of God! Of such a man we may well say his damnation is sure, 
but this is not the worst of it, for, before he goes down to the 
pit of hell himself, he drags, as with a hundred ropes, multitudes 
of others down the dreadful steep! 

II. But secondly, here is a gracious promise made that 
THEY SHALL BE A BLESSING. 

Dear friends, the true Christian is a blessing temporally in the 
world. If there were no life to come, yet is a converted man a 
blessing — since he delays the judgments of God. Sodom shall stand 
if there are 10 righteous found in it. The world shall last as long 
as there is salt enough in it to keep it from putrefaction. The 


1134 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


world shall not be given up to blackness forever, as long as 
there are a few lights still shining in it. As the conducting rod 
prevents the dwellings of men from being destroyed by 
lightning, so believers in a state, or in a town, are its 
preservation from the avenging judgments of God. Who will 
deny, again, that the Christian, the true Christian promotes 
morality — that his godly life settles the foundation of order? 
Where are the most revolutions? Where is the least of religion? 
Where has the guillotine fallen with its fatal drop? Where have 
heads rolled by hundreds in a basket? Where have streams of 
blood crimsoned the street? Where is there an empire, never 
safe except as the throne is supported by bayonets? Look 
across the Channel and you will see that the absence of religion 
is the absence of order in the State! It is England’s Bible which 
is the keystone of England’s institutions! The flag of old 
England is nailed to the mast, not so much by her soldiers and 
sailors, as by the men who love her God, and bring down the 
blessing upon her continually by prayer. Do you think that we 
should have had a famine in the north, and a stoppage of the 
mills without riot if it had not been for the wide spread of 
religion among the working men? The blessed restraints of 
holiness and goodness have produced order and patience! Dear 
friends, the Christian is the truest patriot; he is a blessing to his 
country, be he where he may! 

Does not the Christian aid in every good work? He is no 
Christian if he does not. If there is a hospital, does he not 
delight as much to contribute towards the relief of sickness of 
the body, as for the removal of disease of the soul? If education 
is needed by the lower classes, who shall be found to teach in 
the Sunday school, and who will support institutions on the 
weekday more readily than Christians? Anything which is pure 
and lovely, and of good repute in this world, owes, if not its 
origin, yet its main support to the godliness of believers! No 


1135 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


one shall be able to estimate how much the presence of a good 
man in the State is a preventative as well as a cure. It prevents 
the breaking out of the more frightful forms of vice, or else 
drives it into seclusion, and makes it hide its head for very 
shame. The Christian, I believe, is to a nation one of the 
greatest temporal blessings which God can send to it! 

And as for eternity, truly a Christian is a blessing there. If his 
example shall lead men to seek after God — if his words shall 
teach the sinner his need of a Savior — shall point him to the 
cross — shall show him the wounds — oh, if his prayers shall be 
heard, and the Spirit of God shall descend, and his family shall 
be converted, and his kinsfolk shall be reclaimed, then eternity 
shall know the music of the blessing which he scattered among 
the sons of men! You cannot bless men forever, in any other 
way than by yourself being a true follower of Jesus, and then 
seeking to bring them to knowledge of the truth of God! Now, 
as I said of the ungodly, that every ungodly man is a curse, so 
will I venture to say that every Christian is a blessing in the 
degree in which he is true to his Christianity. If he has been 
moral before, now that he becomes a Christian, how that tells 
upon men like he! How those who would have been undecided 
are moved to go forth! The force of his former character, and 
the excellence and amiability of his deportment operate upon 
those who knew him. If he has been a drunk and a swearer 
before, this will not hinder him from being a blessing now. His 
old companions hear of the great change; they inquire how it 
was worked; they go with him to the house of God, and they, 
too, are brought to Christ. Some of those who have brought 
more saints to God than others were once themselves the 
greatest of sinners! Let no one suppose that because his 
character has been up to now very vile, therefore, if converted, 
he would be of no use — sometimes he will even be of the more 
use. What would all your old mates say when they saw you were 


1136 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


a Christian? “There must be something in it,” they say, “if 
drunken William is saved.” What if the swearer should wash his 
mouth, and should preach God’s Word? What if yonder voice 
should be heard at the prayer meeting, although once so loud 
in a brothel? Oh, would not men wonder, and would not there 
be many who would suddenly feel attracted to the cross, as you 
have been, and say, “We will go with you, for we perceive that 
God has blessed you.” 

Such a man, even if he has been an infidel, now becomes a 
blessing — sometimes most a blessing to those to whom he was 
most a curse. Now, he refutes himself; now, his own example 
becomes the best answer to his former false teaching! Now, his 
love to Jesus is observed and noticed — all those whom he 
taught to hate the Lord will help to adore His sacred person, 
and if the man has been through and through of a bad spirit, 
though he has not openly spoken against the things of God, yet 
when converted, how serviceable he becomes, for even if he is 
almost silent, and can say but litde, yet, as the bad spirit oozed 
through him, so now the Spirit of God will shine through him! 
There shall be a difference about his very face and the manner 
of his walk and conversation shall be such that it will betray 
him; out of the midst of him shall flow rivers of living water, 
whereof multitudes shall drink! No matter, O Christians, how 
poor you may be, or how ignorant you are, or how little 
influence you may have — you are and shall be a blessing, if God 
gives you a new heart and a right spirit! 

The converted man is a blessing everywhere. He is a 
blessing to his family. Daily prayer, Bible reading, teaching of the 
children — all these make his house a little paradise. When he 
goes to the workshop, if any learn vice, it is not from him; if there 
are any who despise Christ, it is not from his example; he has a 
good word for Jesus. Now, he begins to lament and pray over 
the sins of his fellow men; he speaks of the cross of Christ, and 


1137 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


perhaps he brings some of them to repentance, and to a saving 
faith. You may put him anywhere with safety. Make a king of 
him — he rules his dominions in the fear of God; give him a 
large estate, and you will find his substance expended as it 
should be. Now the hungry shall have their portion, and the 
needy their share; the Church at home and missions abroad 
shall all be prospered by him. Let him make a profession — he 
does not dishonor it. He puts golden chains about the neck of 
piety by the excellence of his deportment. You may put him 
into the pulpit with safety. With a new heart, he can be trusted, 
even at the altars of God! His soul, having been renewed, there 
will be nothing in his example, or word, of which a Christian 
could complain. Now you may take him to heaven itself, for 
even there, he shall be a blessing, and help to swell the song of, 
“Hallelujah unto Him who washed our robes, and made them 
white in His blood.” 1 would to God we had a holy ambition 
to be more a blessing than we have been, for remember — if 
you have been converted, and are not living consistently with 
your religion — then your life is not much of a blessing. Oh, it 
is so sad, so sad, to my own soul when I see those who might 
be a blessing, by some weakness or folly throw away their 
golden opportunities! There are some of you — I cannot tell 
what good you might do in the world, but either through 
natural infirmity or sin, you are of little service! Do not, I pray 
you, destroy your own power to bless your fellow men! Do not 
so act in the family, and in business, and in the church as to 
make yourself a little blessing, when you might have been a 
great one! Ask the Lord to fill you so full with His grace that 
you may be like a great cloud of mercy, resting continually over 
the sons of men, and pouring forth its gracious shower day by 
day! 

III. The third point is, HOW IS ALL THIS TO BE 
BROUGHT ABOUT? How is the man who was a curse to be 


1138 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


made a blessing? Can he do it himself? Rests there a power in 
human will that, by the magic of its might, men who were once 
a curse may be made a blessing? Ah no! This abides not in the 
creature, but with the Creator! So runs the text — “1 will save 
you.” You who have been a curse, “I will save you.” Swearer, 
drunkard, whoremonger, whoever you may be, “I will save you, 
to show what sovereign grace can do.” “I will save you and 
make you a blessing.” But you say, “How, then, may I be saved?” 
Salvation from sin is one, but yet it is a salvation from sin in 
two senses — from the guilt of it, and from the power of it. Sinner, 
cursed of God, and cursing others — all the sin that you have 
done can be blotted out! No matter though it is red like scarlet, 
it may be as wool; and though it is as crimson, God can make 
it whiter than snow! In a moment, all your sins can pass away 
so that if they were sought for, they could not be found; yes, 
though an inquisition were made to search them out, yet could 
they not be discovered. And this can be done by the blood, the 
precious blood of Jesus! Jesus the substitute, the Son of God, 
and yet the Son of Man, took the sins of all believers upon 
Himself, and suffered the punishment of all their sins — 

“He for the sins of all the elect 
Has a complete atonement made! 

And justice never can expect 

That the same debt should twice be paid.” 

If you believe, that is, if you trust in Christ, all the sins you 
have ever done were laid upon Christ. Your believing is the sign 
and mark of this; and from now on, you have no sin, your sin 
is gone; you are an accepted and pardoned man! No, more — 
you are justified. The righteousness of Christ is yours; and in the 
sight of God you stand accepted in the beloved. And all this is 
to be had by the simple act of trusting. Whoever you may be, 


1139 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


“He who believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.” But then, 
you say, “But how can I be delivered from the power of sin? If 
all my past sins were forgiven, yet I might go back and do as 
before, and so remain as vile as ever.” Yes, there is power in 
the Holy Spirit to make a new man of you. He can put into your 
heart the holy influences of divine grace so that though you 
naturally go towards evil, you shall, by supernatural influence, 
go towards the right. He shall give you that fiery motion, which, 
as the flame always ascends towards heaven, shall make your 
heart ascend towards holiness! He shall subdue in you the 
powers of evil which now reign, shall keep your sins under your 
feet, and eventually cast them out forever, and make you perfect 
before the Lord! 

Remember, this is to be done for you, not by you. You 
cannot make yourself a new man; it is impossible for you to 
work regeneration. One look at Jesus will take away past sins, 
and will kill the power of sin for the future. Sprinkle His blood 
upon the old serpent, and it dies. Put the water which flowed 
with the blood from Christ, and the foulness of nature only 
remains to be subdued, and eventually to be cast out when the 
believer shall be taken up in perfection to dwell before the 
Father’s throne. God can save you, whoever you may be, and 
whatever your past life may have been! No doings of your own, 
no prayers, no penances, no almsgivings, are required. Simply 
trust Jesus who died for you, and you are saved, saved on the 
spot — saved forever! 

IV. And then comes the last point. The text GIVES A 
WORD OR TWO OF ENCOURAGEMENT from this — “Do not 

fear, let your hands be strong. ” 

Though you have been a curse until now — if you sincerely 
desire to be made a blessing. And if the Holy Spirit has made 
you willing to accept the perfect righteousness of Christ, and 
to be washed in His most precious blood, then, “Do not fear.” 


1140 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


543 Once a Curse But Now a Blessing 
- Zech. 8:13 


Let not conscience make you fear; God will answer to your 
conscience; the blood of Christ shall purge it from dead works. 
Let not a sense of divine justice make you fear, Christ has 
satisfied divine justice, and justice is your friend. Let not the 
remembrance of past sins make you fear; they shall be cast into 
the depths of the sea — not one of them shall rise to accuse you. 
Let not the thoughts of judgment make you fear; you shall have 
an advocate at the last great day to plead your cause. Fear not, 
but come and welcome! Christ invites you by His wounds; the 
Father bids you come and trust His only-begotten Son. He 
earnesdy entreats you to come unto Him and live. “Do not fear,” 
He says; and if doubts and fears stand at the door to keep you 
from coming, yet rush forward through them all, saying — 
“God has bid me fear not, and, therefore, I will not fear, but 
boldly venture upon the finished work of Christ; and if I perish, 

I perish.” “Let your hands be strong,” especially the hand with 
which you grasp the Savior. Lay hold upon Him, sinner; O may 
the Spirit of God help you to lay hold upon Him now! “Let 
your hands be strong.” Grasp Him. Lay hold on eternal life. As 
a sinking man lays hold upon the rope that is cast to him, so lay 
hold on Christ! It is now or never with you. If Christ saves you 
not, you are damned forever! Grasp Him, then! He passes by. 
He may never pass this way again. This morning, He comes in 
mercy to you to turn you, you cursed one, into a blessing! Grasp 
Him. Even as Jacob laid hold upon the angel, lay hold on Christ! 
And if He struggles with you, and seems as though He would 
not bless you, say unto Him — 

“No, I must maintain my hold, 

It is Your goodness makes me bold. 

I can no denial take, 

Pity me for Your love’s sake.” 


1141 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


O for strong hands to grasp the Savior! Let your hands be 
strong to lay hold on His promises. They are such as these — 
“Though your sins are as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; 
though they are red like crimson, they shall be as wool.” 
“Whoever comes to Me, I will in no wise cast out.” “Believe on 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved.” “He is able also 
to save them to the uttermost who come unto God by Him.” 
Lay hold on these; take them before God and say to Him, “Can 
You lie? Can You be untrue? If You are true, keep this promise 
for me. Have You not said, ‘As you have been a curse, so I will 
make you a blessing’? I have been a curse — I admit it. I lament 
it. Make me a blessing, Lord. By the sufferings of Jesus — by the 
agony and bloody sweat — by His cross and passion — by His 
precious death and burial — make me a blessing, Lord! You 
have but to speak the word and I, even I, shall repent! You have 
but to will it, and I shall behold Your face in Christ, and believe 
in Him. Your Spirit is not to be resisted — send Him forth to 
raise my dead soul from the grave. Come and work in me! Turn 
the lion to a lamb, the raven to a dove.” Sinner, if you can 
believe that God will do it, He will do it; for anything you will 
believe of Him, however high and great, He can do and will do, 
for He will never let your faith be in excess of His power — His 
unbounded power! Trust in Him; rest upon Him! God help you 
to do it, and may these poor stammering words of mine, by 
their very weakness, be fitted for your conversion, because my 
Master’s glory shall shine the better through my weakness, and 
His Power to save shall be the more resplendent because of my 
feeble words! If it is so, I would sooner be dumb than speak 
with the tongues of men and angels, if He were not to be 
honored. Father, glorify Jesus! Glorify Him now in bringing 
some who have been a curse, to the making of them a blessing, 
for His Name’s sake! Amen. 


1142 



544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, December 13th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 

“And on the Sabbath we went out of the city by a riverside, 
where prayer was customarily made; and we sat down and 
spoke to the women who met there. Now a certain woman 
named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, who 
worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that 
she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.” - 
Acts 16:13-14 

PHILIPPI is FAMOUS in classic history as the spot where the 
world’s future trembled in the balance when Octavius met 
Brutus and Cassius in terrible conflict. The two republican 
generals here ended their stormy career, and universal empire 
crouched at the feet of Caesar. As long as time endures, or 
human slaughter is thought worthy of a record, Philippi will be 
remembered as one of the greatest names in martial history. 
But when time shall have passed away, and the records of 
human guilt shall have been cast into oblivion, Philippi will still 
have a name as the place where the first herald of the cross 
cried, “Europe for Jesus,” struck the first blow at the demon 
of evil, and won his first victory in that quarter of the world. 
More fraught with blessings to the human race was that 
conquest of a woman’s heart than all the laurels which Octaves 
had reaped upon the bloody field! Angels looked on while Paul 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


threw down the gaundet of defiance to all the powers of 
darkness, and invaded our fair continent in the name of Jesus 
of Nazareth. We may well look back with admiration to the 
gallant advance of the little band, the apostle and his few 
companions, who were the pioneers of the Lord’s elect army in 
the western world! Philippi is enrolled forever in the record of 
the batdes of peace! 

The introduction of Christianity into Europe is a very 
humble affair. There is nothing very stately in the architecture 
of the house where Jesus is first preached; in fact, we have no 
evidence that there was any building at all — probably it was an 
open-air service by the riverside. Happy omen of the results of 
open-air preaching in later times! There were not enough Jews 
in the military city of Philippi to admit of the erection of a 
synagogue, and therefore, a few women met in a quiet spot by 
the river’s bank. A stranger might walk through Philippi a 
hundred times and never know of the existence of the Jews’ 
meeting place; it was a nook so retired and frequented by so 
few. Heathendom might seem to the ordinary observer to be 
universal in its reign, for who would care to notice the feeble 
company who met in retirement to offer prayers unto the Most 
High God of Israel? We will go to the meeting place this 
morning, and in spirit mingle with the few women, and listen 
to that strange man who in burning accents is addressing them, 
and mark the result produced in the heart of yonder seller of 
purple, who has come with her wares from the city of Thyatira. 

First, we shall consider Lydia’s conversion in itself; secondly, 
in contrast with another which is recorded in the chapter; thirdly, in 
comparison with that other; and lastly, as a type and model of multitudes 
of conversions in our own day. 

I. First, in LYDIA’S CONVERSION there are many points 
of interest. 


1144 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


Observe that it was brought about by providential 
circumstances. She was a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira. 
That city was famous for its dyeing trade which had flourished 
there ever since the days of Homer. The mode of producing a 
peculiarly delicate and valuable purple seems to have been 
known to the women of Thyatira. It may be that Lydia had 
come to Philippi upon a journey, or that while her 
manufactures were carried on at Thyatira, she resided during a 
part of the year at Philippi to dispose of her goods. The 
communication between the two places was very easy, and she 
may have frequently made the journey; at any rate, providence 
brings her there when the hour of her conversion is come. You 
will remember that Thyatira was situated in that part of the 
country into which Paul was forbidden by the Spirit to go and 
preach; therefore, had Lydia been at home, she could not have 
heard the truth of God; and as “Faith comes by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God,” she would have remained 
unconverted! But providence brings her to Philippi at the right 
time. Here is the first link of the chain. 

But how is Paul to be brought there? He must, first of all, 
be kept out of Bithynia; and he must be silenced in his journey 
through Mysia; he must be brought to Troas, close by the 
margin of the sea; he must look across the blue sea, and muse 
upon Europe’s needs. He must fall asleep, and in the visions of 
the night, he must be prompted to cross to Macedonia; he shall 
ask for a ship — that ship shall be bound for Samothrace, and 
for no other place. He must land at Neapolis, and by the same 
instinct, he must make his way to Philippi; he cannot go in any 
other direction. He must be brought there at the very time 
when Lydia is present; he must discover the little oratory by the 
river’s brink, for God ordains that Lydia shall be saved. Now, 
how many different threads were all interwoven here to make 
up the fabric of her providential conversion? In this case God 


1145 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


rules and overrules all things to bring that woman and that 
aposde to the same spot; and, beloved, everything in God’s 
providence is working together for the salvation of His elect! If 
there is an elect soul whom God predestinates to be converted 
by my word, He may have fetched him home from Australia 
today by some troublesome accident, as it seems to him; or He 
may have set sail for America, and the ship may have been 
drifted back; but this I know — God will shake heaven and earth 
sooner than allow one elect soul to miss the predestined 
moment. When the eternal counsel runs — “On such a day that 
man shall be convicted by sovereign grace, and shall be made 
willing in the day of God’s power,” happen what may, and 
occur whatever may, God’s purpose shall stand! He will do all 
His pleasure. We do not well if we forget the expectant 
providences which work before our conversion to bring us 
unto that spot where God was pleased to manifest Himself 
unto us! 

Observe next, that in Lydia’s case there was not only 
preventing providence, but there was also divine grace in a certain 
manner preparing the soul. The woman did not know the Savior; 
she did not understand the things which make for her peace, 
yet she knew many truths of God which were excellent 
steppingstones to knowledge of Jesus. If not a Jewess by birth, 
she was a proselyte of the gate, and therefore well acquainted 
with the oracles of God; she was one who worshipped God — 
no, she was one of the most devout of God’s Worshippers 
among the Jews! Though she was far away from the 
synagogue — some forget the Sabbath when they travel in 
foreign lands — yet when the day came round, she was found 
with that little handful at the riverside oratory. I doubt not that 
she had read Isaiah the prophet, and that she could carry in her 
heart and remember such words as these, “He is despised and 
rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with 


1146 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


grief. . .He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep 
before her shearers is dumb, so He opened not His mouth.” 
As in the case of the Ethiopian eunuch, the Scriptures she had 
read, though they were not understood for lack of some man 
to guide her, had prepared her mind — the ground had already 
been plowed for the good seed; it was not a hard rock as in the 
jailer’s case. She worshipped God; worshipped Him in sincerity; 
worshipped Him looking for the coming of the Messiah, 
Israel’s consolation; and so her mind was prepared for the 
reception of the gospel! Doubdess, dear friends, in many of us 
there was a preparation for Christ before Christ came to us in 
quickening grace. I know that in some of our cases the pious 
example of a godly father, and the loving instruction of a tender 
mother had softened us somewhat, so that though we were still 
unsaved, and still out of Christ, yet we were like the man who 
laid at the pool of Bethesda, we were close by the edge of the 
healing stream, and there was not in our case that sudden, that 
astounding change which we have seen in others. Still, dear 
friends, we ought to ascribe all this preparatory work to 
sovereign grace, for grace — free favor — does much in which 
no grace of effectual salvation is perceptible! I mean that before 
divine grace renews the heart, there is grace preparing us for 
grace — grace may be setting the mind in activity, clearing us 
from prejudice, ridding us of a thousand infidel and skeptical 
thoughts, and so it is raising a platform from which divine grace 
conducts us into the region of the new life. Such was the case 
of Lydia, such is the case of many; providence and grace co- 
work before the effectual time is come. 

Note, concerning her conversion, in the third place, that it 
took place in the use of the ?>ieans. On the Sabbath she went to her 
gathering of her people. Although God works great wonders, 
and calls men when they are not hearing the Word, yet usually 
we must expect that being in the way, God will meet with them. 


1147 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


It is somewhat extraordinary that the first convert in Europe 
was converted at a very small prayer meeting. There were only 
a few women there; we have no reason to think that there were 
any more males than just Paul and his friend Luke; and these, 
you see, had called in, as we say accidentally, and had been 
moved to give an address at the prayer meeting, and that 
address it was which was the means in God’s hand of opening 
her heart! beloved friends, let us never neglect the means of 
divine grace; wherever we are, let us not forget the assembling 
of ourselves together, as the manner of some is. I say again, 
God may bless us when we are not in His house, but we have 
the best reason to hope that He will when we are in 
communion with His saints! Oh, what a joy it is to see so many 
constantly thronging our house of prayer, because we have 
good hope that the God of salvation will meet with them. No, 
it is not mere hope, but a confident expectation, for I suppose 
there never is a sermon preached in this house which is not the 
means of the conversion of some. We have, ourselves, 
abundant testimony that so often as Christ is lifted up here, the 
wounded in the camp forbear to die. May it always be the case, 
and may you always have, even if as yet you are unconverted, a 
love for the courts of the Lord’s house, and to the place where 
His people meet together! Love the prayer meeting — do not 
say of it — “Only a prayer meeting!” God loves to put honor 
upon prayer, upon the assembly of His people directly for His 
Worship; and you may hope, dear friends, that even if the 
sermon shall not have been useful, and if the common Sunday 
service may not have been blessed, yet, perhaps, on the Monday 
evening — perhaps, too, in that litde cottage, when there are 
only a few women present — you may meet with God, who did 
not appear to you in the greater assembly! Be diligent in the use 
of the means! Be constandy in God’s house, as often as the 


1148 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


doors are open, and your engagement will prevail, for Lydia’s 
conversion takes place in the use of the means ! 

Note again, for we will only hint at these things rather than 
dwell upon them, that it was assuredly a work of divine grace, for we 
are expressly told, “whose heart the Lord opened.” She did not 
open her own heart. Her prayers did not do it; Paul did not do 
it; the Lord Himself must open the heart to receive the things 
which make for our peace. To operate savingly upon human 
hearts belongs to God, alone. We can get at human brains, but 
God alone can arouse human affections. We may reach them, 
we grant you, in the natural and common way, but to reach 
them as that the enemy of God shall become His friend, and 
that the stony heart shall be turned into flesh, is the work of 
divine grace and nothing short of divine power can accomplish 
it! We pray, brothers and sisters, you never forget this. We think 
it meet, according to Scriptural warrant and example, to speak 
to you and exhort you to arise from the dead, that Christ may 
give you life; but we remind you, and trust you never may forget 
it — that all the work must always be of the Holy Spirit, and of 
Him alone! I am told, in preaching the gospel, to command you 
to, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved.” 
But I am well aware, and may you be aware of it, too, that faith 
is the gift of God! Though the Scripture bids us say, “Wash you, 
make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before 
My eyes; cease to do evil.” Though it cries, “Let the wicked 
forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let 
him return unto the Lord, and He will have mercy upon 
him” — though our Savior, Himself, puts it, “Strive to enter in 
at the strait gate. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but 
for that which endures unto eternal life,” yet we know that 
salvation is neither by your striving, nor by your laboring, nor 
by your reforming and amending, but that all these are the fruit 
of an inward and mysterious work which the Holy Spirit alone 


1149 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


can perform! Give unto God the glory if you have been 
converted, praise Him alone — “Not by might, not by power, 
but by My Spirit says the Lord.” He alone can cut the bands 
which fasten the heart; He alone can put the key into the hole 
of the door and open it, and get admittance for Himself. He is 
the heart’s master as He is the heart’s maker, and conversion in 
every case is the Lord’s work, alone. 

Yet — because one truth of God must always march arm in 
arm with another, and no man gets at correct ideas by merely 
grasping one truth — he has two eyes and two hands, so let him 
be content to use them both. Although the Lord opened the 
heart, Paul’s words were the instrument of her conversion. The 
heart may be opened and willing to receive, but then, if the 
truth of God enters not, what would be the use of an open 
door? But God always takes care to open the heart at a time 
when the messenger of mercy shall be going by, that the heart 
may give him admittance. There shall be the plowed field, but 
there shall be no cry, “Where is the sower?” for when the plow 
has done its work, here comes the sower, and begins to scatter 
the seed! Paul speaks the word as surely as God opens the heart. 
Do not decry the ministry. It is a temptation of modern times 
to be always talking as though the ministry were a magnifying 
of man, as though to listen to the preacher were a glorification 
of the creature at the expense of the Maker. Now, I believe there 
is nothing in the world which shows our humility of spirit, and 
tends more to glorify God than a cheerful willingness to receive 
at His hands the golden treasure of His grace out of an earthen 
vessel! The weakness of the preacher becomes a foil to set forth 
His glory, and by no means derogates from the honor due to 
the Lord Himself. God has worked, and always will work by 
means — by chosen men upon whom He puts the anointing of 
His Spirit — and when the men are lacking to serve the Lord, 
then is the Church always in a weak state. While she has her 


1150 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


Pauls to preach, she shall not be without her God to open 
hearts to receive His Word! 

Now, only one more thought upon her conversion — it was 
distinctly perceptible by the signs which followed. She was baptized. As 
soon as she had believed in Jesus, she put on, together with her 
household, the profession of her faith in Christ Jesus. Happy 
Lydia, to have a household which believed in Jesus! Happy 
Lydia, to see them all baptized with her! Now there is a danger 
in certain sections of the church to make too much of baptism 
by linking it with regeneration, as baptismal regeneration; but 
there is an equally great danger among us who are called 
Baptists of making too little of baptism. We cannot make too 
much of it, because our belief that none ought to be baptized 
but those who are already regenerate, will always be a healthy 
check for our making too much of it; but we may make too little 
of it. We ought to insist very strongly upon the duty of all 
believers who have found the Savior to obey the second gospel 
command. “He who believes and is baptized, shall be saved.” 
We do not doubt but that all who believe shall be saved, but 
still for our part, when we see baptism put in so close 
connection with believing, we would not be disobedient to our 
Master’s command. We think it to be a sweet sign of a humble 
and broken heart, when the child of God is willing to obey a 
command which is not essential to his salvation — which is not 
forced upon him by a selfish fear of damnation. We say it is a 
great sign of divine grace, when, as a simple act of obedience, 
and of communion with Iris Master in his burial to the world 
and resurrection to a new life, the young convert yields himself 
to be baptized. Lydia was baptized, but her good works did not 
end at the water; she then would have the apostles come to her 
house. She will bear the shame of being thought to be a 
follower of the crucified Jew, a friend of the despised Jewish 
apostle, the renegade, the turncoat — she will have him in her 


1151 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


house; and though he says, “No,” out of his bashfulness to 
receive anything, yet she convinces him, for love is in her heart, 
and she has a generous spirit; and while she has a crust, it shall 
be broken with the man who brought her to Christ! She will 
give not only the cup of cold water in the prophet’s name, but 
her house shall shelter him. Brothers and sisters, I do not think 
much of a conversion where it does not touch a man’s 
substance — and those people who pretend to be Christ’s 
people, and yet live only for themselves, and do nothing for 
Him or for His Church, give sorry evidence of having been 
born-again! A love to the people of God has always been a 
distinguishing mark of the true convert. Look, then, at Lydia, 
and remember that she is but a specimen of many, let her case 
rest before you, and let the prayer go up, “Lord, bring in Lydias 
this morning, according to Your mighty grace.” 

II. We now look at the case again BYWAY OF CONTRAST. 

There is another story in the chapter. Read it carefully, for 
there is a remarkable contrast between the two. In the case of 
the jailer, we see nothing like a previous preparation for the reception of 
the Word. He seems to be coarse, rough, brutal; it may be he did 
no more than his orders required of him when he treated Paul 
so harshly, for it is written, “Having received such a charge, he 
thrust them into the inner prison.” But the probabilities are that 
he did this with a very hearty goodwill; and, looking with a 
thorough contempt upon the two enthusiasts who had plunged 
themselves into this trouble, he was not at all likely to adjust 
the stocks in any comfortable manner, or see to their ease in 
any way! He was probably a rough, veteran soldier, who had 
been elevated to the jailer’s office. He had gone to sleep; no 
preparation, surely, in sleep for the reception of the Word of 
God! The earthquake comes; the man springs out of his bed in 
terror! He grasps his sword, and would have killed himself — he 
is in the very act of committing suicide, when a voice is heard — 


1152 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


“Do yourself no harm, we are all here.” Now, we cannot 
discover the slightest atom of preparation for his conversion. 
He is as far off from hope as a man can be, and is just upon the 
edge of hell — near to running before the bar of his Maker with 
hands red with his own blood! Beloved, there are conversions 
such as these. They may not be very plentiful, but there are such, 
and there have been such in this house of prayer. Men have 
come under the sound of the Word with an intention of 
despising and laughing at it; they have come with their hearts 
full of venom and enmity; they have despised the preacher, and 
despised the truth of God; they have come fresh from the 
foulest haunts of sin, and they were proposing, yet further, to 
plunge into the depths of iniquity! They were enemies to God 
by wicked works; they made their hearts hard as a stone, and 
yet, all of a sudden, the ponderous hammer of the Word has 
come upon them, and the flint was made to fly into a thousand 
splinters! And, by God’s grace, the proud sinner became 
humble as a little child! Paul’s case is somewhat similar to that 
of the jailer; you will remember it, and there are cases of 
persons here today who can, as they read the jailer’s story say, 
“Such was I once — as great a stranger from God as he, and as 
little likely to be called by divine grace as he was — and yet grace 
came and made me a new creature in Christ Jesus.” Here was 
no preparation, while in Lydia’s case there was much which 
went to prepare the way for the grace of God. 

Another contrast is perceptible in the fact that she was in the 
way where the grace of God was likely to meet with her. She 
was in God’s house, at least in the spot which had been 
dedicated to His Worship; she was engaged in prayer, and 
though not a formal prayer, but as far as her light went, it was 
acceptable to God, and was, at any rate, sincere, coming from 
her heart. But not so the jailer! He is not in a place where the 
gospel is at all likely to come; his office keeps him in the midst 


1153 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of felons, of murderers, and criminals of all sorts; if divine grace 
shall come to the jail, it will come to a graceless place, indeed! 
His occupation was not that which would foster any religious 
ideas; superstitions, doubtless, were present, and there was no 
point upon which a Roman was more superstitious than 
concerning an earthquake. It was one of the things which made 
the stout hearts of Roman soldiers tremble in a moment; it was 
the earthquake which made the guards at the tomb of our 
Savior become like dead men, swooning from fright; and this 
earthquake had much the same effect upon the jailer. He was 
not seeking after God; he had not a thought about God — his 
thoughts were hellish, and his course was towards the pit of 
hell. But in a moment, at God’s voice, the current of his 
thoughts changes its direction, and flows where it had never 
gone before! So have I known men who have been going on 
with all their might towards the realms of darkness with their 
free and stout will, determining to inherit eternal damnation; 
but the hour has struck, sovereign Mercy has come forth — and 
they, wonders to all — but greatest wonders to themselves, have 
suddenly become heirs of God and children of the Most High! 
May such wonders still be worked. 

Yet further, we do not find in Lydia’s case that there was anything 
like an earthquake; there were no great shakings and alarms; it 
was a “still, small voice.” The jailer sprang in and came 
trembling. We doubt not that Lydia felt her need of a Savior, 
and that her cry was, “What must I do to be saved?” But still 
we find very little about her trembling, or being overwhelmed 
with the terrors of conscience; she was gently led by the finger 
of the eternal Father. The light dawned upon her as the 
morning’s dawn, a gradual enlightening of the darkness. Grace 
came upon her as the shower which first begins as a mist, then 
thickens into a heavy dew, and then becomes a gentle 
sprinkling, and afterward empties the clouds upon the soil. To 


1154 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


the jailer it was like an April storm beginning with big drops, 
and dashing into a torrent in a few moments — to the jailer it 
was as though the sun should rise in an instant, and turn the 
thickest night into full blaze of noon! Not so, in Lydia’s case. 
Now do note, dear friends, these differences, because they may 
help to solve many of your difficulties. Do not expect all to be 
converted in the same way! Do not suppose you are all to pass 
through the same terrors, nor all to be led by the same gentle 
methods, for our God is the God of variety. In creation and in 
providence there are no two things exactly alike, and in the 
works of divine grace we are not to have Christians run into a 
mold, or dropped down like shot, all fashioned in the same 
shape, but there must be in every conversion a something, 
distinct and separate from every other — and every man must 
expect to perceive in the glass of his experience some things 
about the features of his conversion different from those of 
any other. Why, do you not see that the means which converted 
Lydia would not have been of any use to the jailer? The jailer 
would not go to the place by the riverside; he would have 
laughed at the idea of sitting down with a parcel of women! 
You would not find him listening to Paul; he would smile at the 
very thought — “1 go and listen to a renegade Jew, whom his 
own nation has cast off? No way!” 

On the other hand, an earthquake would not have been 
appropriate to Lydia’s character. Good, gentle soul, it might 
have frightened her out of her wits and instead of making her 
cry, “What must I do to be saved?” it is very likely she would 
have been in a swoon, if not altogether dead! The same quantity 
of alarm which will bring a stronger man down into something 
like reason, may just drive a woman out of her reason altogether. 
Gende Lydia and the rough jailer are two very different people; 
they were of different sexes to begin with, and the woman is 
more easily moved by that which gendy appeals to the 


1155 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


affections than is the man; she, again, had been a moral and 
excellent woman; he has, probably, been tutored in sin. There 
must be different methods with different temperaments. Does 
the farmer use the same machines in threshing different kinds 
of grain? Are all seeds sown after the same fashion? Do we not 
feel with regard to our children that we can speak a sharp word 
to one, and he will scarcely feel it, but that the same expression 
will break another boy’s heart? One child needs the rod, and 
there are others upon whom a touch of the rod might work 
mischief. Certainly, then, it must be so in the constitution of 
the soul; and therefore, God deals with each of us in different 
ways, and we are not to question the sincerity of our conversion 
because it is not precisely like our favorite model, but we are 
rather to see whether its fruits are the same, whether it comes 
of God, whether it leads to Christ, and if it does all this, it 
matters not in what mold it is formed! 

III. So much for that point, but here, as I generally like, if 
I can, to place two truths side by side, we have our third point, 
namely, THE COMPARISON BETWEEN THE TWO, because 
they are essentially alike, though circumstantially different. 

In both cases, dear friends, providence co-mrked with divine 
grace. Providence brings Lydia to Philippi — providence shakes 
the prison. God makes the realm of Nature subservient to His 
Will in both cases. There is a demand for purple at Philippi. I 
do not know how it came about; I cannot tell whether there 
were new fashions among the ladies at Philippi at that time, or 
what it was — but for some reason or other Lydia gets to 
Philippi because there is a great market for her purple. Well 
now, that is providence which brings her there. The same 
providence by another revolution of its wheel has appointed 
that particular jailer to head the prison. Why was he jailer to 
that particular prison? Why is Paul brought to Philippi at all? 
And how is it that through the circumstance of the demoniac 


1156 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


woman having been healed, Paul is beaten with rods, and thrust 
into prison? Then comes the earthquake! Link within link, and 
wheel within wheel, providence works its way. So is it in every 
case — whether it is conversion by thunder and lightning, or by 
the “still, small voice.” 

There was in both cases a distinct work of God. We see it in 
Lydia’s case, and have dwelt upon it; even more distinctly we 
perceive it in the jailer’s case, for what but irresistible grace 
could have made him cry, “What must I do to be saved?” 

In both instances, too, the Word of God is essential, for 
we read concerning the jailer, as we did before, concerning 
Lydia, “They spoke unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all 
who were in his house.” The earthquake cannot dispense with 
the minister; and though the mighty power of God can take the 
natural bonds from every prisoner, yet He does not choose to 
take away the spiritual bonds from any one soul without the 
proclamation of the Word. It pleases God, “by the foolishness 
of preaching to save them who believe.” 

And again, in both cases, the same signs followed. The jailer is 
baptized with all his house, and we are told that they all believed. 
He washes Paul and Luke’s stripes; just as Lydia had 
entertained them, so he begins to wash their poor backs which 
were all black and blue, and probably bleeding with the hard 
blows of the lictor’s elm rods. He sets meat before them, and 
entertains them with the best he has, and glad enough is he in 
the morning, when he finds they are not to be kept in durance 
any longer, but may go their way! Here is the same result, the 
same love to the brethren, the same obedience to the divine 
command, “Arise and be baptized.” There is an unmistakable 
likeness among all the people of God. All the children have the 
Father’s features, yet they are not any one of them precisely like 
his fellow. They are all brought by divine grace, and grace does 


1157 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


its work in the same way; yet, as to the minutiae of the details 
of their conversion, they are as wide as the poles asunder! 

IV. We take Lydia’s conversion to be A MODEL OF 
MULTITUDES OF CONVERSIONS WHICH ARE GOING ON IN 
OUR MIDST AT THE PRESENT TIME, AND IN OTHER 
CHURCHES, WHERE GOD IS MAKING BARE HIS ARM. 

The expression used is, “The Lord opened Lydia’s heart, to 
attend to the things that were spoken.” Now what is meant by 
this? I think we have a summary of the work of the Holy Spirit 
here. There are several things meant. No doubt the Lord removed 
prejudice. This prejudice is an evil which we have to fight against 
in very many. In Lydia’s case it would be Jewish prejudice — 
perhaps the report had reached her, as it had most of the Jews, 
concerning Jesus of Nazareth; she knew that her race had 
hounded Him to death, that her nation had even said, “His 
blood be on us, and on our children.” Paul the aposde, was the 
subject of much of this prejudice among the Jews, inasmuch 
that when writing his Episde to the Hebrews, you will observe 
that he does not begin with his name, as he does in all the other 
Episdes, because he felt that the very name “Paul,” from the 
fact of his having been an eminent Pharisee, and having 
become a Christian, was distasteful to the Hebrew people. But 
God removed all this prejudice from Lydia’s mind — she sat 
down to listen to Paul with a determination to give him a fair 
hearing, and to weigh the matter and see whether these things 
were so or not — somewhat like the Bereans of old, who also 
had their hearts in a measure opened, for they searched the 
Scriptures to see whether things were so. The devil often covers 
men from head to foot in a coat of mail, so that when they 
come where the arrows of God are flying, there is very little 
hope of their being wounded because there is scarcely a joint 
of the harness which the devil has not protected by an iron rivet 
of prejudice! You know how he tries in these days to do it. 


1158 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


Some silly tales are set afloat about the minister — some 
inventions of addled brains — or else some old stories which 
were true of eccentric men whom the worms have eaten one 
hundred years before — all these are appended to the preacher 
so that he may be made to appear in a ridiculous light, in order, 
as the devil thinks, that there may be a prejudice against the 
Word which comes from his lips. Or else it is the denomination 
or the sect, as it is called, to which the preacher belongs. “Of 
course, I can get no good from him,” says one, “I am a 
Churchman.” Or says another, “I could not expect that I 
should be blessed under him — I am an Arminian.” So these 
things raise prejudices, and many make up their minds 
beforehand that they will not like the preaching — and they 
come into the place, as it were, with their ears stuffed full of 
wool — and you cannot get a word in; they have their hearts 
already so occupied with certain set notions, that though an 
angel from heaven should minister the truth, it would need to 
have the earthquake of the jailer before the truth could enter in. 
In Lydia’s case there was nothing of the sort; she was willing to 
hear and to give a candid attention to the preacher. Much is 
gained when this is done. 

In the next place, when her heart was opened, her desires were 
awakened. She felt now a wish to understand this matter, and if 
there was anything in what the apostle was saying about eternal 
salvation — about complete pardon by the blood of Him who 
was the “Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world,” 
she said to herself, “I should like to know about it; I hope it 
may be true; I wish I may get an interest in these things.” So 
she listens, anxiously desiring to be impressed by the Word. She 
has a hunger and a thirst — and these people have this blessing, 
“They shall be filled.” When we get our people, by God’s grace, 
as far as hungering and thirsting, then we are very thankful to 
say this is the opening of the heart! As the oyster when the tide 


1159 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


comes up opens its shell, so when the tide of grace is coming, 
God often makes men open their hearts, so that now they may 
get the spiritual supply. 

Well, there was a desire awakened, but this was not all, 
there came another kind of opening — her understanding was now 
enlightened. “Yes,” as the apostle went from one point to the 
other point — “yes, I see that God did promise a prophet like 
unto Moses. This man Jesus is like Moses, for He is a prophet 
mighty in word and deed, which none of our prophets were, 
except Moses. Yes,” she said, “yes, Isaiah does speak of Him 
as being ‘despised and rejected of men.’ That is right, and David 
does say, ‘They pierced My hands and My feet, they parted My 
garments among them; for My vesture did they cast lots.’ Yes,” 
she said, “I see it — in the person of the man Christ Jesus, whom 
Paul preaches, I perceive the Messiah who is spoken of in the 
law and in the prophets.” And when he went on to say that 
faith in this Christ Jesus, who was fastened to the tree, would 
take away all sin, because this same Christ Jesus had carried 
upon His blessed shoulders the transgression of all believers. 
“Yes,” she said,” I see that this is a reasonable doctrine, that of 
substitution. I can see how God is just, for He does punish sin 
in Christ; and I can see how He is gracious, too, for He is able 
now to freely give out of the fullness of His heart, such divine 
grace as poor sinners require.” So her understanding was 
opened; she clearly viewed the gospel; she could see in its 
height, and depth, and length, just that which her soul needed! 

Then came something else; now her affections were excited, she 
felt growing within her a love to Him who, though He was 
equal with God, yet took upon Himself the form of a Servant. 
As she heard Paul describe His sufferings, as she pictured to 
herself the scene around the cross, she thought she could hear 
the death-shriek, and mark the flowing blood, and she seemed 
to think, “Yes, I love that man; I love that God; my heart goes 


1160 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


544 Lessons from Lydia’s Conversion 
- Acts 16:13-14 


after Him; O that He were mine! Yes,” she said, “I love that 
preaching; sweet to my ears are those doctrines of mercy.” She 
began, already, to rejoice and, “Blessed are the people who 
know the joyful sound,” for if they do not yet walk in the light 
of God’s countenance, yet they shall, for so the promise runs! 
All this, I think, is included in the term, “Her heart was opened.” 
Her affections were now kindling towards divine things. And 
then came faith; she believed the whole of the record. She took it to 
be absolutely true, as Paul had stated, that there had been a 
Messiah; that He, according to Scripture, was the Son of God, 
and was also the Son of Man; that He had suffered, the Just for 
the unjust, and that she, believing in Him, had her sins forgiven! 
Faith came now through hearing. She took God at His word; 
she simply and humbly put her soul at the feet of that cross 
where the blood was dropping, believing that as it fell from 
heaven, it pleaded for her, and as it dropped on her it gave her 
peace with God through Jesus Christ. 

Faith being given, all the graces followed. Now she hated her 
sins, she repented. Now she loved righteousness, she sought 
after holiness. Now she had a bright hope of the many 
mansions in the Father’s house. Now she began to run with 
holy and happy feeling in the ways of obedience to Christ’s 
commands, and she became, not merely a believer in the 
elements of Christianity, but she went on towards perfection, 
adding to her faith courage, and to her courage, experience, and 
to her experience, brotherly kindness, and to brotherly 
kindness, love. Onward she went in the way of her God. All 
this the Master did by opening her heart to attend to the things 
that were spoken of by Paul! 

And now, beloved, the practical lesson is that we must pray 
for those who are round about us, and the many hopeful ones, 
that God would make them like Lydia. Let us put up this 
petition for our sons and daughters that the God who has put 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


them in the way of the means and, to a degree, has prepared 
their minds for the reception of the truth of God, would be 
pleased to work effectually and savingly, and bring them to 
accept the Savior. 

As for those in whom God is thus working, O that the 
Word I speak this morning might lead them to lay hold on Jesus! 
Remember, there is nothing for you to do — you have but to 
trust Jesus, and you are saved; and to do this, as your warrant, 
there are no good works required, nor good feelings, nor deep 
experiences, either. You have, just as you are, to believe that 
Christ can save you, and trust yourself to Him as the Savior, 
and He will save you! He will save you NOW with a great, 
present, and complete salvation! The Lord help you to trust in 
Him, and He shall have the praise. Amen. 


1162 



545 The Holy Child, Jesus -Acts 4:30 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, December 20th, 1863, 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“That signs and wonders may be done by the name of Your 
holy child, Jesus.” - Acts 4:30 


The OPPOSITION OF THE WORLD is often a very great 
blessing to the Church. If it is met by holy boldness, it is sure 
to yield a glorious triumph for the servants of God. Sanctified 
by the Holy Spirit, out of the eater comes forth honey, for it 
becomes an incentive to greater zeal. Now that the enemy is 
determined to conquer, the Church will be resolved to hold its 
own. Pressure from without drives the members of the Church 
together, and so promotes holy love, and when love and zeal 
come together, then there is such a blessed unity of action, and 
such a power in every effort that great success must follow! 
Woe unto the world when it persecutes the Church, for it kicks 
with its naked foot against the pricks; it stirs up a nest of 
hornets about its own ears; yes, it provokes the Lion of the tribe 
of Judah to spring upon His enemies! 

Our text is a portion of an apostolic song which celebrated 
the release of Peter and John and the confusion of the priests 
and scribes. Every persecution shall yield songs of victory for 
the people of God! There is one sweet result which always 
flows from the opposition of the world, namely, that it draws 
true disciples nearer to their Master. You will perceive that they 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


sing concerning the birth, and death, and resurrection of J esus 
Christ — the Lord is the theme of their grateful song! The dtle 
by which they salute Him, “Your holy child, Jesus,” is most 
appropriate to their case. The history of the Church is Christ’s 
life written out in length. Our Lord enters the world a holy 
child — when the Church begins her history, she is as a holy 
child, too, and therefore rejoices in the childhood of her 
gracious Lord. How precious is it to see Jesus as made in all 
points like His people and how rapturous for His people to see 
their Redeemer’s features drawn by the pencil of fellowship in 
themselves. Trial is often sanctified to this noble end. Let the 
world oppress the Church; let the members of that Church be 
thoroughly weaned from any other ground of comfort; let the 
Lord Jesus be their only rock and refuge, and they will soon 
perceive analogies in the history of Christ beautifully explaining 
their own — analogies which they never would have discovered 
except in the glare of the furnace. In the chapter before us, the 
aposdes are thrown back upon the person of Jesus for comfort, 
and they revel in the thought of His being a child, because they 
discover in this His likeness to the Church, which, in its infancy, 
the enemy sought to destroy, even as Herod sought to slay the 
newborn King of the Jews! 

Brothers and sisters, whenever we endure adversities, or 
tribulations, or distresses, it is ours to turn to Christ, and 
consider the Aposde and High Priest of our profession; for we 
may rest assured that the black finger of our distresses will 
often point out beauties in the person of Immanuel up to now 
unseen. There is a certain spot from which alone each glorious 
trait in the Savior’s character can be seen — and many of our 
most painful positions are ordained for us in order that we may, 
from their vantage ground, behold the Lamb of God! 

Our subject this morning may, perhaps, be suitable to the 
experience of some — may the Lord make it useful to all! Taking 


1164 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


the text as we find it, we shall, first of all, meditate upon the 
humanity of Christ as here declared. Secondly, we shall view it as here 
described — “A holy child.” And thirdly, we shall then behold it in 
the glory which surrounds it — signs and wonders are worked by the 
name of the holy child, Jesus. 

I. First, then, dear friends, may our hearts be enlightened 
to see, as the aposdes did, the beauty and excellence of THE 
REAL HUMANITY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOR JESUS 

Christ. 

While we always contend that Christ is God, very God of 
very God, let us never lose the firm conviction He is most 
certainly and truly a man. He is not a God humanized, nor yet 
a human being deified; but, as to His Godhead, pure Godhead, 
equal and co-eternal with the Father; as to His manhood, 
perfect manhood — made in all respects like unto the rest of 
mankind, sin alone excepted. His humanity was real ,for He was 
bom. He lay hidden in the virgin’s womb, and, in due time, was 
born into a world of suffering. The gate by which we enter 
upon the first life, He also passed through; He was not created, 
nor transformed, but His humanity was begotten and born. As 
He was born, so in the circumstances of His birth, He is completely 
human; He is as weak and feeble as any other baby. He is not 
even royal, but human. Those who were born in marble halls 
of old were wrapped in purple garments, and were thought by 
the vulgar to be a superior race. But this baby is wrapped in 
swaddling clothes and has a manger for His cradle — that the 
true humanity of His being may come out. More than a man, 
He is a Prince of the House of David. He knows the woes of a 
peasant’s child. As He grows up, the very growth shows how 
completely human He is. He does not spring into full manhood 
at once, but He grows in stature, and in favor both with God 
and man. When He reaches man’s estate, He gets the common 
stamp of manhood upon His brow. “In the sweat of your brow 


1165 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


shall you eat bread” is the common heritage of us all, and He 
receives no better! The carpenter’s shop must witness to the 
toils of a Savior, and when He becomes the preacher and the 
prophet, still we read such significant words as these — “Jesus, 
being weary, sat thus on the well.” We find Him needing to 
betake Himself to rest in sleep, He slumbers at the stern of the 
vessel when it is tossed in the midst of the tempest. Brothers 
and sisters, if sorrow is the mark of real manhood, and “man is 
born to trouble as the sparks fly upward,” certainly Jesus Christ 
has the true evidence of being a man! If to hunger and to thirst 
are signs that He was no shadow, and His manhood no fiction, 
you have these. If to associate with His fellow men, and eat and 
drink as they did, will be proof to your mind that He was none 
other than a man — you see Him sitting at a feast one day — at 
another time, He graces a marriage supper, and on another 
occasion, He is hungry, and “has not where to lay His head.” 
Since the day when the prince of the power of the air obtained 
dominion in this world, men are tempted and He, though He is 
born pure and holy, must not be delivered from temptation — 

“The desert His temptation knew 
His conflict and His victory, too.” 

The garden marked the bloody sweat, as it started from 
every pore, while He endured the agony of conflict with the 
prince of this world. If, since we have fallen and must endure 
temptation, we have need to pray, so had He — 

“Cold mountains and the midnight air 
Witnessed the fervor of His prayer.” 

Strong crying and tears go up to heaven mingled with His 
pleas and entreaties! What clearer proof could we have of His 


1166 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


being man of the substance of His mother, and man like 
ourselves, than this, that He was heard in that He feared? There 
appeared unto Him an angel strengthening Him; to whom but 
men are angels ministering spirits? Beloved, we have never 
discovered the weakness of our manhood more than when 
God has deserted us. When the spiritual consolations which 
comforted us have been withdrawn, and the light of God’s face 
has been hidden from us, then, we have said, “I am a worm and 
no man,” and out of the dust and ashes of human weakness 
have we cried unto the most high God. Let, “Eloi! Eloi! lama 
Sabachthani” assure you that Christ has felt the same! Follow 
man wherever you will, and you find the footprints of the Son 
of Mary. Go after man where you will, into scenes of sorrow 
of every hue, and you shall find traces of Jesus’ pilgrimage there. 
You shall find in whatever struggle and conflict of which man 
is capable, the Captain of our salvation has had a share! Leave 
out sin, and Christ is the perfect picture of humanity. Simple as 
the truth of God is, and lying as it does at the very basis of our 
Christianity, yet, let us not despise it, but try to get a personal 
grip of it if we can. Jesus, my mediator, is a man — “Immanuel, 
God with us.” He is a child born. He is better than that, for 
“Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given.” He is to us a 
brother; He is bone of our bone today. As a man leaves his 
father and mother, and cleaves unto his wife and they, two, 
become one flesh, so has He left the glory of His Father’s house 
and become one flesh with His people. Flesh and bone, and 
blood and heart, that may ache and suffer, and be broken and 
be bruised, yes, and may die — such is Jesus; for herein He 
completes the picture. As the whole human race must yield its 
neck to the great iron-crowned monarch, so must Christ 
Himself say, “Into Your hands I commend My spirit, Father,” 
and He, too, must yield up the ghost. Oh, Christian, see your 
nearness to Him and be glad this morning! Oh, sinner, see His 


1167 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


nearness to you! Come to Him with confidence, for in body 
and soul He is completely human! 

Having thus, insisted upon the humanity of Christ, let us 
gather a few reflections from it. There are a thousand things 
which it indicates, but, as the garden is too full of flowers for 
us to bring them all, we have gathered but a handful. 

As the first meditation, let us marvel at His condescension. It 
is the greatest miracle that was ever heard or read of, that, “The 
Word was made flesh and dwelt among us.” Cyprian well said, 
“I do not wonder at any miracle, but I do marvel at this, which 
is a miracle among miracles, that God should become man.” 
That God should make a creature out of nothing is certainly a 
marvelous manifestation of power, but that God should enter 
into that creature, and should take it into intimate union with 
His own nature — this is the strangest of all acts of 
condescending love! Indeed, so marvelous is it, that in all the 
heathen mythologies — though imagination has there played 
strange freaks — in their theology, we do find instances of the 
gods appearing in the likeness of men — yet never do we find 
anything like the hypostatical union of the two natures in the 
person of Christ. Human wisdom, in its most happy moments, 
has never risen to anything like the thought of Deity espousing 
manhood that man might be redeemed! To you and to me, the 
marvel lies in the motive which prompted the incarnation. 
What could it have been that brought Immanuel to such a 
stoop as this? What unrivalled, indescribable, unutterable love 
was this that made Him leave His Father’s glory, the adoration 
of angels, and all the hallowed joy of heaven, that He might be 
made a man like ourselves, to suffer, to bleed, to die? “He was 
seen of angels,” says the aposde, and this was a great wonder, 
for the angels had worshipped at His throne! But their created 
eyes could not bear to look upon the brightness of His 
person — they veiled their faces with their wings when they 


1168 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


cried, “Holy! Holy! Holy!” And yet, angels saw the Son of God 
lying in a manger! They saw the Lord of all wrestling with a 
fallen spirit in the wilderness! They saw the Prince of Peace 
hanging upon the tree on Calvary! “Seen of angels” was one of 
the wonders concerning the incarnation of Christ; but that He 
should be seen of men? No, that He should be the associate of 
the worst of men, that He should be called the friend of 
publicans and sinners, so perfectly incarnating Himself and 
condescending so low that He comes to the very lowest state 
of humanity — all this, my brothers and sisters, is 
condescension concerning which words fail me! A prince who 
puts aside his crown, and clothes himself with beggar’s rags to 
investigate the miseries of his country, is but a worm 
condescending to his fellow worm. An angel that should lay 
aside his beauty, and become decrepit and lame, and walk the 
streets in pain and poverty to bless the race of man were 
nothing, for this were but a creature humbling himself to 
creatures a little lower than himself; but, here is the Creator 
taking the creature into union with Himself! The Immortal 
becoming mortal, the Infinite an infant, the Omnipotent taking 
weakness, even human weakness, into union with His own 
person! We may truly say of Jesus that He was weak as the dust, 
and yet, as mighty as the Eternal God. He was subject to 
suffering, and yet, God over all blessed forever. O the depth of 
the love of Jesus! 

Let us reflect upon another theme. See the fitness of Christ for 
His work ! He is perfect man — He could not be a priest if He 
were not. But now, “He can be touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities, seeing He was tempted in all points like as we are.” 
being not ashamed to call us brothers and sisters, He can 
compassionate the ignorant and those who are out of the way. 
O brothers and sisters, if He were not man, He could not have 
been our substitute; man sinned, and man must pay the 


1169 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


penalty — He must be perfect man to make atonement! If He 
were not man, His righteousness would not have availed us, for 
while we need a divine righteousness to cover the infiniteness 
of God’s demands, we need a righteousness which is human, for 
it is that which the law requires. O Soul, if you are in sadness 
and sickness today, let your arms embrace the man, Christ Jesus. 
Feel, in the fact that He is your brother, how suitable is such a 
Savior to your poverty, your weakness, and your sin! 

Let us think, too, of another thought. Inasmuch as Christ 
is man, think of His near relationship and union to His people. He is 
no stranger of whom we speak — He is our brother — no, more 
than that, He has become our Head. Not a head of gold, and 
feet of clay, or limbs of baser metal; but, as we are, so was He, 
that as He is, so might we be. It is manhood which is at the 
head of the Church, as it is manhood which constitutes the 
members. LTnion to Jesus is, I think, the sweetest doctrine in 
revelation. There are other doctrines which possess a more 
transcendent grandeur, but the doctrine of union is the 
quintessence of all delights. What is heaven, but union to Christ 
realized? And what shall be the foretaste of heaven, but union 
to Christ believed? As you see Him, then, completely — such as 
you are — know, Christian, how near, how dear, how intimately 
one with Him you are, and be glad this day! 

Let me give you another flower. See the glory of manhood now 
restored! Man was but a little lower than the angels, and had 
dominion over the fowl of the air, and over the fish of the sea. 
That royalty he lost; the crown was taken from his head by the 
hand of sin, and the beauty of the image of God was dashed by 
his rebellion. But all this is given back to us! We see Jesus, who 
was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of 
death, crowned with glory and honor; and, at this day, all things 
are put under Him, waiting, as He does, and expecting the time, 
when all His enemies shall be beneath His feet, and the last 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


enemy, Death, shall be destroyed by man — by the very man 
whom he boasted that he had destroyed! It is our nature, 
brothers and sisters, Jesus in our manhood, who is now Lord 
of Providence; it is our nature which has hanging at its belt the 
keys of heaven, and earth, and hell; it is our nature which sits 
upon the throne of God at this very day! No angel ever sat 
upon God’s throne, but a man has done it, and is doing it now! 
Of no angel was it ever said, “You shall be King of kings, and 
Lord of lords, they who dwell in the wilderness shall bow 
before you, and your enemies shall lick the dust.” But this is 
said of a man! It is the man who shall judge the world in 
righteousness; a man who shall distribute crowns of reward — 
a man who shall denounce, “Depart, you cursed”; a man, the 
thunder of whose words shall make hell shrink with fright! Oh, 
how glorious is renovated manhood! What an honor it is, my 
brothers and sisters, to be man, not of the fallen first Adam, 
but man made in the image in the second Adam! Let us, with 
all our weaknesses, and infirmities, and imperfections, yet bless 
and praise God, who made us what we are by His divine grace, 
for man, in the person of Christ, is second only to God — no, 
is in such union with God, that he cannot be nearer to Him! 

When we think of the true and proper manhood of Christ, 
ought we not to rejoice that a blessed channel is opened by which 
God’s mercy can come to us ? “How can God reach man?” was once 
the question; but now, brothers and sisters, there is another 
question — “How can God refuse to bless those men who are 
in Christ?” The everlasting Father must bless His only-begotten 
Son, and, in blessing Him, He has blessed a man, and that man, 
having all the elect in His loins, they are necessarily all blessed 
in Him. Look upon the person of Christ as that of a 
representative individual. Whatever Christ is, all His elect are, 
just as whatever Adam was, all men who were in him became. 
If Adam fell, all manhood fell; if Christ stands and is honored 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


and glorified, then all who are in Christ — that is the goodly 
fellowship of His elect — are all blessed in Him! Now, it is 
utterly impossible but that God should bless Jesus Christ, for 
Jesus Christ is forever one with God, and His manhood is also 
One with Godhead. As an old writer observes, “The nearest 
union that we know of is the union between the humanity and 
the divinity in the person of Christ. That of the three persons 
in the Trinity may rather be called a unity than a union — but this 
is the closest union we know of — the union between humanity 
and Deity in Christ.” So complete is it that you cannot think of 
Christ aright as a man apart from God, nor as God apart from 
man. The very idea of Christ has in it the two natures, and it is 
a clear impossibility that the Godhead should not impart of its 
blessedness to the manhood, and that manhood, being thus 
blessed, every elect soul is necessarily blessed, also. O see what 
a channel is thus opened; a channel through which the stream 
cannot but flow; a golden pipe through which divine grace 
cannot but come! The laws of nature might be reversed, but 
not the laws of God’s nature, and it is a law of God’s nature 
that, in the person of Christ, the Deity must bless the manhood, 
and that manhood, being blessed, it is another law that elect 
manhood must be blessed, since that elect manhood is forever 
indissolubly bound up with the person of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
See what a deep and broad river is here opened for us, and what 
a fullness there is in that river — for all the fullness of the Deity 
dwells in Christ, and the fullness of that Deity, thus, flows to 
man. 

See again, beloved, what a door of access is thus opened between 
us and God! I am a man; Christ is a man. I come to the man 
Christ Jesus — No, I have not even to do that — I am in the man 
Christ! If I am a believer, I am a portion of Him. Well, being a 
portion of the man Christ, and God being united with Him, I 
am very near to God. I have such nearness of access, then, to 


1172 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


God, that whatever may be my desires and my prayers, I have 
no need to climb to heaven nor to descend into the depth in 
order to obtain them, for God’s ear must be near to me 
inasmuch as God is in Christ, and, my soul being in Christ, I 
am very, very near to God. Christ’s body is the veil that hangs 
before the majesty of God, that veil was torn; and whoever, by 
a living faith, knows how to come through the torn body of the 
man, Christ, comes at once into the presence of God! Such 
communion, such sacred commerce — such blessed 
interchanges between mankind and God could never have 
taken place in any other plan. That ladder which Jacob saw was 
but a faint and dreamy picture of this. This is no ladder, but the 
access is such as though God, who was at the top of Jacob’s 
ladder, had come down to Jacob as he lay sleeping there. There 
is no ladder needed now — the person of Christ brings God to 
man; and brings man to God in closer contact than the ladder 
can ever picture! Brothers and sisters let us come boldly unto 
the throne of the heavenly grace, to obtain grace to help in 
every time of need! 

Another thing I cannot leave out is this — beloved, do see 
it, do see it — how safe we are! Our soul’s estate was once put in 
the hands of Adam — he was a fallible man — how unsafe our 
salvation was then! The salvation of every believer now is in the 
hand of a man; it is the man Christ Jesus! And what a man! Can 
He fail? Can He sin? Can He fall? O no, beloved, for the Deity 
is in intimate union with the manhood, and the man Christ 
Jesus, since He can never sin, can never fall, and is, therefore, 
a sure foundation for the perpetual salvation of all the elect. 
When the angels were all in heaven, before the fall of Satan, I 
think they could never be perfecdy happy because they knew 
that if they sinned they would perish, and this surely would mar 
their bliss — because there was a fear of their losing all their 
glory. But, beloved, our salvation does not rest with ourselves, 


1173 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


we may have all the joy of perfect security because it rests in 
the hands of one who cannot by any possibility sin, one who 
cannot err, cannot fail, but who stands fast forever, from 
everlasting to everlasting, God! See then, the comfort and 
security of God’s people! But, indeed, there are so many 
sheaves in this field of incarnation that I cannot possibly 
unbind them all for you. You must come and pluck an ear or 
two for yourselves, and rub them in your hands on this Sunday 
that your hunger may be relieved. 

Beloved, do you not see that here is jour adoption ? You 
become sons of God because Christ becomes a Son of man. 
Do you not perceive that here is jour acceptance ? The man, Christ, 
is accepted, and you, since He stands for you, are accepted in 
Him. No, there is not a mercy in the covenant; there is not a 
single stream of blessing which flows to the believer, that does 
not spring from the fact that Christ is to be called the “holy 
child Jesus,” being most certainly and properly a man. Thus 
much, then, upon the first point. 

II. Now, let us VIEW THE HUMANITY AS IT IS HERE 
DESCRIBED. The words teach it to us — holj child. 

Christ’s humanity was perfectly holj. Upon this doctrine, you 
are well established; but you may well wonder that Jesus was 
always holy. He is conceived of a woman, and yet, no sort of sin 
comes from His birth. “That holy Thing which is born of you 
shall be called the Son of God.” He is educated in the midst of 
sinful persons. It could not be otherwise, for there were none 
on earth who could be called good — all having become 
unprofitable — and although residing in the midst of sinners, in 
Him is no taint or trace of sin! He goes into the world, and as a 
physician must mingle with the sick, so He is found in the very 
worst of society. The harlot may speak to Him, and from the 
publican He turns not away, yet, from none of these did He 
receive any corrupt influence. He is tempted, and it is usually 


1174 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


supposed that a man can scarcely be tempted; even should he 
overcome the temptation, without receiving some injury to his 
innocence. But the prince of this world came and had nothing 
in Christ; his fiery darts fell upon the nature of Christ as upon 
water, and were quenched at once. Satan was but as one who 
should whip the sea; he left no mark upon the perfect holiness 
of Christ. Imputation of sin would be the nearest approach to 
making our Lord a sinner; but let it always be remembered that, 
though Jehovah made Him to be sin for us, yet, He knew no sin. 
The world’s sin was put upon the shoulders of Christ, and yet, 
He had no sin for all that; the imputation was accomplished in 
such a manner that it did not in any sense or in any degree 
derogate from His tide to perfect holiness. I have read sermons 
upon the imputation of sin to Christ which have left painful 
impressions upon my mind, because I remember to have met 
with the expression that Christ was the greatest sinner who ever 
lived, because He stood in the place of millions of sinners! Now, 
it is true that Jesus took the sinner’s place, but yet, He never 
was a sinner, nor ever can in any sense be thought of as unholy. 
The great Redeemer stood perfect, pure, spotless; and even in 
the conflict, when all the powers of hell were let loose against 
Him, and when God Himself had withdrawn — that withdrawal of 
God from us would have hardened our hearts — but it did not 
harden His heart. The taking away of God’s grace from us is 
the ruin of our graces; but He had a wellspring of divine grace 
within Himself, and His purity lived on when God had 
withdrawn from Him. From the first dawn of His humanity in 
the womb to the time when He is laid in the new tomb, He is 
“holy.” 

The next word is one that requires most attention. Why is 
Christ called a “holy child”? 'Wit can understand His being called 
a child while He was so, but why a “holy child” now that He is 
ascended up on high? Why, dear friends, because the character 


1175 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of Christ is more aptly pictured by that of a child than that of 
a man! If you conceive of a perfecdy holy child, you have, then, 
before you a representation of Christ. There is that in 
childhood, in holy childhood, which you cannot find even in 
holy manhood! You note in childhood its simplicity — the 
absence of all cunning. We dare not in manhood usually wear 
our heart upon our sleeve as children do; we have lost the 
trustfulness of our youth, and are upon our guard in society. 
We have learned by very painful experience to suspect others, 
and we walk among our fellow men often with our heart locked 
up with many locks, thinking that, when thieves are abroad, 
good housekeepers must not leave the door open. We have to 
practice the wisdom of serpents, as well as the harmlessness of 
doves. 

But a child is perfecdy guileless; it pratdes out its litde heart; 
it has no caution or reserve; it cannot scheme, for it cannot go 
round about with the skillful words of the politician; it knows 
not how to spin the web of sophistry; it is plain, transparent, 
and you see through it. Now, such was Christ! Not foolish, for 
there is much difference between simplicity and folly. He was 
never foolish; they who mistook Him for such and sought to 
entrap Him, soon discovered that the child was a wise child. 
Still, He is always a child — He tells His heart out everywhere. 
He eats, He drinks like other men. They call Him a drunk and 
a wine-bibber; does He, then, from prudential motives, cease 
to eat and drink as other men? O no! He is quite a child. In 
everything that He does, there is an artless simplicity. You see 
through Him, and you can trust Him, because there is 
trustfulness about His whole nature; He knows what is in man, 
yet, He does not act with suspicion towards men, but always 
with simplicity. 

In a child we expect to see much humbleness. There is a 
humbleness of association. There is a little child yonder — it is 


1176 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


a king’s daughter, and here is another litde child belonging to a 
gypsy woman. Leave the two in a room, and see if they will not 
be at play together in five minutes. If it had been the queen and 
the gypsy woman, they would have sat as far apart as possible. 
O no! They do not associate together at all! Distinctions of rank, 
and all that kind of thing, they studiously maintain, and 
therefore, remain isolated. But the two children will be down 
on the floor together, and if there happens to be some litde 
heap of dust or a few pieces of broken crock, the princess will 
find in them almost as much mirth as the beggar woman’s child! 
Here is humbleness of mind. So with Christ — He is King of 
kings and Prince of the House of David — yet, He is always with 
the poor and needy, and sympathizes with them just as heartily 
as though He were altogether such as they were. You do not 
find litde children sitting down and planning how they shall win 
crowns — in what way they shall obtain popularity or applause. 
O no! They are quite satisfied to do their father’s will, and live 
on his smile. It is so with Christ. What a childlike act that was — 
when they would have made Him a king, He went and hid 
Himself! And how childlike does He seem when He rides upon 
the colt, the foal of an ass, through the streets of Jerusalem, and 
must have the mother ass there, too, lest either of the two 
creatures should be distressed. He is the friend of the brute 
creation as well as of man in general — so thoughtful and so 
kind, so simple, so humble in all that He does! 

We picture a holy child as being all obedient. You have but 
to say to it, “Do this,” and it does it. It asks no questions. Was 
it not so with Jesus His whole life? “My meat and My drink is 
to do the will of Him who sent Me.” “Know you not that I 
must be about My Father’s business?” 

So, again, we look in holy children for a forgiving temper. We 
know that sometimes the blood comes up in the litde face, and 
a litde angry quarrel ensues, but it is soon over, and with their 


1177 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


arms about each other’s neck, and many a loving kiss, it is soon 
made up again by the little ones. Well, with Jesus this 
characteristic of childhood is carried out to the fullest extent, 
for His latest Words are, “Father, forgive them, for they know 
not what they do.” Ah, holy child! No fire from heaven do You 
call, like John. No denunciations come from Your lips against 
sinners. “Neither do I condemn you; go and sin no more,” says 
He to the woman taken in adultery. He is the child all through. 
Scripture calls Him the man-child and what if we call Him the 
great child-man? He was a child when He had become a man! 
He never had childish things to put away in the sense in which 
the apostle speaks of it, for as to all the folly, and the littleness, 
and giddiness of youth, Christ knew not these. He knew 
everything that is beautiful, and lovely, and just, in the virgin 
innocence of a pure and holy child — such as children would 
have been, if their parents had not fallen, all this you see in the 
person of Christ Jesus! 

Beloved, I think there is something very sweet in this 
picture of Christ’s humanity, because we are none of us afraid 
to approach a child. Men who are childlike men — we are never 
afraid of. You know certain people in the world — you could 
not tell your trouble to them; they have a haughty manner; they 
look down upon you; you feel that you can never reach their 
hearts. There are certain others with an open and honest face, 
and you instinctively feel, “There, I can tell that man anything; 
1 know I can. If 1 were in any kind of distress, or trouble, I 
would go to him — I know he would help me if he could.” Well, 
that is because such a man has a degree of childlikeness about 
him. Now, in the person of Christ there is all this carried out to 
the fullest degree! Come, then, and tell Jesus everything. 
Whatever your trouble or difficulty may be, stand not back 
through shame or fear. Will you fear Immanuel, or dread the 
Lamb of God? Will you be afraid of a holy child? No, rather 


1178 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


come, and like Simeon, take Him in your arms, and 
acknowledge Him as your consolation and your trust. I would 
I could get a hold, this morning, on those timid ones who 
always say, “I am afraid of Jesus.” Why, dear friends, how can 
you talk so? You do Him wrong. You know Him not, or you 
would not thus speak! This is the unkindest cut of all, to think 
that He is unwilling to forgive. Dying for you, living as a holy 
child for you — O can it be, can it be possible that He should 
be hard to forgive and receive you? 

Thinking of a holy child while I looked through this verse, 
I turned to Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe’s story of Eva and little 
Topsy. She gives a graphic picture there of a holy child, indeed. 
There is the law in the person of Miss Ophelia — she whips the 
child, but the more she whips her, the worse she is; she gets no 
further than, “I’s so wicked, I can’t help it; I’s so wicked.” That 
is all the law can do; it can only make a man feel he is “so 
wicked,” that he cannot help it, and he goes on sinning. But 
what a picture is that when St. Clair draws the curtain and sees 
the two little children sitting with their cheeks together. Eva 
says, “What does make you so bad, Topsy? Why won’t you try 
and be good? Don’t you love anybody, Topsy?” “Don’t know 
nothing ’bout love; I loves candy and sich, that’s all,” said 
Topsy. “But you love your father and mother?” “Never had 
none, you know; I telled you that, Miss Eva.” “Oh, I know,” 
said Eva sadly, “but hadn’t you any brother, or sister, or aunt, 
or — ” “No, none of ’em — never had nothing nor nobody.” 
“But, Topsy, if you’d only try to be good, you might.” 
“Couldn’t never be nothin’ but a Nigger, if I was ever so good,” 
said Topsy. “O Topsy, poor child, I love you!” said Eva, with a 
sudden burst of feeling. And laying her little thin white hand 
on Topsy’s shoulder, she said, “I love you because you haven’t 
had any father, or mother, or friends — because you’ve been a 
poor, abused child! I love you, and I want you to be good. I am 


1179 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


very unwell, Topsy, and I think I shan’t live a great while; and 
it really grieves me to have you be so naughty. I wish you would 
try to be good for my sake. It’s only a little while I shall be with 
you.” The round, keen eyes of the black child were overcast 
with tears — large, bright drops rolled heavily down, one by one, 
and fell on the little white hand. Yes, in that moment, a ray of 
real belief, a ray of heavenly love had penetrated the darkness 
of her heathen soul! She laid her head down between her knees, 
and wept and sobbed — while the beautiful child, bending over 
her, looked like the picture of some bright angel stooping to 
reclaim a sinner. 

Now, something like this, only in a far nobler style, Jesus 
Christ has behaved towards us. He sees us lost and ruined, 
wicked — hopelessly wicked — and He comes as a holy child and 
sits down by our ruined humanity. And He says, “I love you — 
I love you because you are so lost, so ruined, so hopelessly 
ruined — because I know the dreadful doom into which you 
will fall. There is nothing in you that makes Me loves you, but 
I do love you; I cannot bear to see you die like this. I would 
sooner die than you should remain a sinner. I would sooner die 
and bear My Father’s wrath for you, than that you should be a 
sinner and disobedient to Him.” The holy child sits down by 
you, this morning, and weeps for you. Will you grieve 
Immanuel? Will you break the heart of Jesus, your soul’s lover? 
Oh, will you open His wounds afresh and crucify Him again? 
If you would not, then trust Him now — fly to Him — give 
yourselves up to Him! He waits to be gracious to you; His 
loving arms are wide open to receive you. “Whoever will,” He 
says, “let him come, and he who comes to Me I will in no wise 
cast out.” Such is the coming of the “holy child Jesus.” 

III. To conclude — it seems that the name of this holy child 
is to work great wonders. Only for one second, let us turn aside, 
and behold THE GLORY OF HIS HUMANITY. 


1180 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


Although Christ was a man, all the powers of nature knew 
their Master and crouched at His feet. He could command the 
sea or the boisterous wind — diseases, the myrmidons of death, 
and Death their prince, all owned allegiance to Him who is 
immortality and life. After His resurrection, He endowed His 
disciples with His own power and more than His own power — 
“For greater works than these shall you do, because I go unto 
My Father.” The name of Jesus was uttered, uttered by feeble 
men — and devils fled, dumb mouths began to sing, lame men 
leaped like a hart, and the blind began to see — no, in several 
instances the grave, itself, yielded up its prey when the name of 
Jesus sounded through its hollow vaults! The age of miracles 
passed off, it was well it should. Miracles are but the cradle in 
which the man-child, the Church, must be rocked. When the 
Church became strong enough to stand alone, she left her 
swaddling bands behind her; but the name of Jesus has not less 
power today because no risen dead, no opened eyes follow in 
our train. At this hour, dead souls hear the voice of God and 
live! At this moment, spiritual eyesight is restored — hearts that 
were stone are turned to flesh — and tongues that were ready 
enough at cursing begin to sing! The miracles of the spirit world 
are infinitely greater than those of the natural. It is litde to turn 
a stone into bread, but it is much to turn a stony heart mto flesh! 
It is comparatively little to open a blind eye, but it is divine, 
indeed, to enlighten the understanding, and illuminate the dark 
heart! The name of Jesus is just as mighty in this Tabernacle, 
today, as it was on the lips of Paul upon Mars Hill, or when he 
stood in his own hired house in Rome! Do not say that you 
entertain a doubt concerning it; look around and see the proofs! 
O brothers and sisters, you and I have been the willing trophies 
of the power of that great name in this house, or in the Surrey 
Music Hall and elsewhere, where that name was proclaimed! 
We received a broken heart — we who once had hearts hard as 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


adamant! There, the tears of repentance began to flow; there, 
the griefs, the heavy glooms of our spirit, were scattered by the 
Sun of Righteousness. If we have been made to walk in holiness, 
this is one of the signs and wonders of His name; if 
drunkenness and lust have been shaken off, this, too, is to His 
praise! If the demoniac, the man who was full of devilry, has 
been clothed and made to sit in his right mind at the feet of 
Jesus, this is another of the signs and wonders in this place — 
not only in this great chamber, but below stairs in our classes, 
and in our Sunday schools, too, signs and wonders are worked 
by the name of the holy child, Jesus! And in other places of 
worship in London, wherever Christ is lifted up — wherever His 
sacrifice is made the prominent theme — the dry bones in the 
valley come together — the Spirit breathes upon them, and they 
live as an exceeding great army! We defy the whole world to 
show anything comparable to the power of Jesus’ name! There 
is more magic in it than ever was in Moses’ rod; it is more 
mighty even than his voice, though he divided the Red Sea and 
brought water out of the rock! 

Brothers and sisters let us spread His name; let it be always 
on our tongues! Let us each, in our proper sphere, declare His 
glory, and we shall see His kingdom come, and His will shall be 
done on earth, even as it is in heaven! I wonder whether there 
is anyone here who will be a sign and wonder of the love of 
Christ! Do you wish to be? Ah, then, I hope you are! Do you 
wish to be? Then the door is open! “Whoever believes in Him 
is not condemned.” One look at Jesus and you are saved — a 
trustful casting of yourself on Him, and you are delivered! God 
enable you to do this now, and you shall see in the change 
which is worked within you, an internal evidence of the majesty 
of Christ’s person which shall never fail you! You shall be 
established by that which you feel within, in so sure and certain 
a manner, that the arguments of infidelity or deism shall never 


1182 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


545 The Holy Child, Jesus - Acts 4:30 


be able to shake you off the rock. May God grant this for His 
holy name’s sake! Amen. 


1183 



546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


A Sermon 

Delivered on Sunday Morning, December 27 th, 1863 , 

by the 

REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
At The Metropolitan Tabernacle, Newington 


“I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the 
first and the last.” - Revelation 22:13 

EVERY Sunday school child knows that there is no great 
mystery hidden in the words, “Alpha and Omega.” We have 
here the names of the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, 
so that the sense would be, “I am A and great O,” in the Greek, 
or in plain English, “I am A and Z.” “Jesus is the Alpha and 
Omega — A and Z — the beginning and the end, the first and 
the last.” 

Our text demands no preface. Indeed, I do not know how 
I could venture to put a single letter before Alpha. Let us 
therefore come to our subject at once. 

In three ways I shall talk of the text. First, I shall bring certain 
doctrines to it; secondly, we will look at the doctrines which are really in 
it; and then thirdly, at the lessons which naturally flow from it. 

I. At the outset, WE SHALL BRING CERTAIN TRUTHS OF 

God to the text. 

This is a much too common method of preaching and, one 
which I am very far from admiring as a custom. When some 
preachers get a text, the inquiry is not what truth is in the 
passage, but what sense shall they thrust upon it? Full often the 
poor text is served as a cook treats a bird; it is first killed, and 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


then stuffed with any kind of fancies that the preacher may 
have chopped up ready to hand. By frankly stating that my first 
observations are not in the verse before us, I shall avoid 
sanctioning such methods of abusing God’s Word. The 
thoughts to which I now give utterance have been suggested by 
many commentators, and certainly, if they are not the legitimate 
offspring of the text, are closely connected with it. 

1. Of things which we may fairly bring to the text, let us 
notice first that our Lord may well be described as the Alpha and 
Omega in the sense of rank. He is Alpha, the first , the chief, the 
foremost, the first-born of every creature, the Eternal God. 
man, by nature is not the first even among creatures, for angels 
excel him by far; nor are angels the chief, for our glorious Lord 
infinitely transcends them. He who made is greater than they 
who are made; and He who sends is greater than those who are 
sent. Jesus Christ stands Alpha in honorable degree; no angel 
can vie with Him. “Being made so much better than the angels; 
as He has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than 
they.” “For unto which of the angels said He at any time, you 
are My Son, this day have I begotten you?... And again, when 
He brings in the first-begotten into the world, He said, And let 
all the angels of God worship Him.” As for the Son, He has 
appointed Him heir of all things, by whom also He made the 
worlds, but of the angels it is asked — “Are they not all 
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be 
heirs of salvation?” 

Alpha was frequently used by the Hebrews to signify the 
best, just as we are accustomed to use the letter A. We say of a 
ship, for instance, that it is, “A 1.” So Jesus Christ may truly be 
said to be the Alpha, the first in this sense. Call Him by 
whatever title Scripture has affixed to Him, and He is the first 
in it. Is He a prophet? Then all the prophets follow at a humble 
distance, bearing witness of Him. Is He a priest? Then He is 


1185 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the Great High Priest of our profession; He is the fulfillment 
of all that which the priest did but typically set forth. Let Him 
mount His throne as King, then He is King of kings and Lord 
of lords. “His dominion is an everlasting dominion, and His 
kingdom is from generation to generation.” If He is the builder 
of His Church, He is the wise Master-builder; if a shepherd, He 
is the Great Shepherd who shall appear; if the cornerstone, He 
is the chief cornerstone — in fact, it matters not what title, or 
which character He bears, He is in all these respects the Alpha, 
as much surpassing all things that may be compared to Him, as 
the sun excels the stars, or as the sea exceeds the drops of the 
dew! But, beloved, though our blessed Lord is thus Alpha — 
the first — He was once in His condescension made Omega, the 
last. How shall I describe the mighty descent of the Great 
Savior? Down from the loftiness of His Father’s glory, and 
from the grandeur of His own divine estate, He stooped to 
become man! There is a vast distance from the Alpha of Deity, 
down to that letter which stands for manhood; but to this He 
came, He was made a little lower than the angels, for the 
suffering of death. But this is not enough; He stoops lower than 
man, yes, there is a verse in which He seems to put Himself on 
a level with the least of all creatures that have life — He says, “I 
am a worm, and no man, a reproach of men and despised of 
the people.” His Father forsook Him — the wrath of heaven 
rolled over Him. He was so utterly crushed and broken, that 
He was poured out like water, and brought into the dust of 
death. Marshal the creatures of God in their order, in the dread 
day when Jesus hangs upon the Cross, and you must put Him 
for misery, for weakness, for shame as the last — the Omega! 
How marvelous is this tremendous sweep of His humiliation, 
that from the highest throne in glory He should descend into 
the lowest depths of the tomb! Death brings the creature to its 
very lowest degradation, and makes it as though it were nothing. 


1186 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


Jesus died, and as I see the incorruptible body lying in Joseph’s 
sepulcher, I can but marvel that ever the great Alpha should 
come so low as to yield up the ghost, being subjugated beneath 
the power of the last adversary. 

Now, this is not in the text, but it may be fairly brought to 
it, I think, and, without any compulsion, it may shake hands 
with the passage as being near of kin to it. 

2. We will make another observation which is not in the 
text, but which is still a very precious truth of God, namely, 
that Jesus Christ is Alpha and Omega in the Book of holy Scripture. 
Open the first page, and a discerning eye will see Jesus Christ 
in Genesis. We know that the worlds were made by Him, and 
as we hear that majestic sentence, “Let Us make man in Our 
own image after Our Likeness,” we at once discern Him as one 
of the sacred Trinity. We go onward to the fall, and at the gates 
of Eden the promise of the woman’s seed consoles us; we 
advance to the days of Noah and lo, we see the Savior typified 
in the ark, which bears a chosen company out of the old world 
of death into the new world of life; we walk with Abraham, as 
he sees Messiah’s day, we dwell in the tents of Isaac and Jacob, 
feeding upon the gracious promise. We leave the venerable 
Israel talking of Shiloh on his deathbed; we see his seed brought 
out of Egypt, and eating the Lamb of God’s passover; we reach 
the age of the law, and here the types crowd in upon us; but 
time permits not even a glance — suffice it to say, in brief, that 
we view the face of Jesus in almost every page and behold His 
Character painted to the life in nearly every book! Prophets and 
kings, priests and preachers, all look one way — they all stand as 
the cherubs did, over the ark, desiring to look within, and to 
read the mystery of God’s great propitiation! In the New 
Testament we find our Lord the one constant theme of every 
page. It is not an ingot here and there, or dust of gold thinly 
scattered — but here you stand upon a solid floor of gold — for 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


the whole substance of the New Testament is Jesus crucified. 
What would be left of the evangelists if you could remove 
Christ from them? What are Paul’s Epistles if Jesus is taken 
away? The whole of the Pauline literature sinks in a moment if 
Jesus is withdrawn. And what have Peter, James, Jude, or John 
to write upon but the same subject? Is it not still Jesus? Do not 
shut the book too hastily, for see its closing sentence is 
bejeweled with the Redeemer’s name. “Surely I come quickly. 
Amen. Even so, come, Lordjesus. The grace of our Lordjesus 
Christ be with you all. Amen.” Brothers and sisters, we should 
always read Scripture in this light; we should consider the Word 
to be as a mirror into which Christ looks down from heaven; 
and then, looking into it, we see His face reflected as in a 
glass — darkly, it is true, but still in such a way as to be a blessed 
preparation for seeing Him as we shall see Him face to face! 

This volume contains Jesus Christ’s letters to us, perfumed 
by His love. These pages are the garments of our King, and 
they all smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia. Scripture is the 
golden chariot in which Jesus rides, and it is paved with love 
for the daughters of Jerusalem. The Scriptures are the 
swaddling bands of the holy Child, Jesus — unroll them and you 
find your Savior! Talk not to us of bodies of divinity — the only 
body of divinity is the person of Christ! As for theology, Christ 
is the true theology — the incarnate Word of God; and if you 
can comprehend Him you have grasped all truth! He is made 
unto us wisdom; getting Him you have the wisdom of the 
Scriptures. The quintessence of the Word of God is Christ! 
Distill the book — reach its essential quality and you have 
discovered Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God, and the King of 
the Jews! He is the Alpha and Omega of Holy Scripture. 

3. Another fact is also sweetly true, although not, perhaps, 
in our text. Jesus Christ is the Alpha and Omega of the great law of 
God. Beloved, the law of God finds not a single letter in human 


1188 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


nature to meet its demands. You and I are neither Alpha nor 
Omega to the law, for we have broken it altogether. We have 
not even learned its first letter — “You shall love the Lord your 
God with all your heart,” and certain I am we know but very 
little of the next — “your neighbor as yourself.” Even though 
renewed by divine grace, we are very slow to learn the holiness 
and spirituality of the law; we are so staggered by the letter that 
we often miss its spirit altogether. But, beloved, if you would 
see the law fulfilled, look to the person of our blessed Lord and 
Master. What love to God is there! O brothers and sisters, 
where shall we find anything to be compared to it? “The zeal 
of Your house has eaten Me up.” “Know you not that I must 
be about My Father’s business?” “My meat and My drink is to 
do the will of Him who sent Me.” What love to man you find 
in Him. Talk not of the good Samaritan; here is One who is 
better than he — the Samaritan did but give his wine and his oil, 
and his two-pence. Jesus gives Himself — gives His heart’s 
blood instead of wine, and the anointing of the Holy Spirit 
instead of oil, while for food He gives His own flesh and blood 
for poor humanity to feed upon! Jesus loved in such a way that, 
as we said on Thursday night, all the love that ever gleamed in 
human bosoms, if it could be gathered together, would be but 
as a spark, while His great love to man would be as a flaming 
furnace heated seven times hotter than human imagination can 
conceive! Do not, beloved friends, if you are in Christ Jesus, 
permit legal fears to distress you at the remembrance of your 
failures in obedience, as though they would destroy your soul. 
Seek after holiness, but never make holiness your trust. Seek 
after virtue; pant for it; but when you see your own 
imperfections, do not despair. Your saving righteousness is the 
righteousness of Christ — that in which God accepts you is 
Christ’s perfect obedience; and we say of that again, in the 
words of the text, Jesus Christ is, “Alpha and Omega, the 


1189 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


beginning and the end.” There is not a precept which He has 
not fulfilled in its widest sense. As for the spirit of the law, it 
breathes through His whole life of holiness and service; and as 
for the letter of the law, He has carried it out to its extremity. 
The commandment may be exceedingly broad, but not broader 
than the life of Christ; the law may ask perfection, but it could 
not ask, and could not have a greater perfection than is found 
in the person of Him whose name is “The Lord our 
righteousness.” 

Brothers and sisters, these three matters I cannot affirm to 
be in the text, but can you blame me for bringing them forward? 
They stand in such a near connection with the exact sense of 
the passage, that they cannot well be omitted. May the Lord 
bless them to you. 

II. Now we will take the text itself. And show what ARE 
THE TRUTHS WHICH WE ASSUREDLY BELIEVE TO BE IN IT. 

1. Our Lord Jesus is Alpha and Omega in the great alphabet 
of being. Reckon existences in their order, and you begin — “In 
the beginning was the Word.” Proceed to the conclusion, 
suppose that all the universe has melted like the hoarfrost of 
the morning — imagine that all worlds are extinguished as the 
sparks from the forge — conceive that, as a painted bubble 
passes away forever, so the whole creation has departed — What 
then? What is the Omega? Why assuredly Jesus Christ would 
still be “God over all, blessed forever. Amen.” This we are quite 
sure is in the text, because the expression, “Alpha and Omega,” 
is only used four times in Scripture, and on the second occasion 
we find it in the 11th verse of the first chapter of the Book of 
the Revelation, in a connection which leads us to conclude that 
it must relate to the eternity and self-existence of our Lord; for 
the 17th verse explains the 11th thus, “Fear not; I am the first 
and the last: I am He who lives and was dead; and, behold, I 
am alive forevermore. Amen; and have the keys of hell and of 


1190 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


death.” Those expressions manifestly refer to the eternity of 
Christ; to His selfexistence, His having life in Himself; to the 
fact that death did by no means destroy His self-existence, and 
that now since His resurrection, He lives forevermore, death 
has no more dominion over Him. 

Beloved, this is a great theme. When we begin to talk of 
the eternity of the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, we are 
overwhelmed by the glory of our subject. We need the eagle 
eyes, and the eagle wings of John to see and soar into heavenly 
things. 1 read the other day a word by an ancient author, and in 
the chapter upon the eternity of God I could not help noticing 
that there was hardly a word of more than one or two 
syllables — sure sign of the sublimity of the theme, and of the 
inability of man to see more than its most simple outline. Will 
you go back 6,000 years, when the world has newly emerged 
from darkness? Will you fly on, if you can, through all the ages 
of the geological periods, if such there were? Can you journey 
back millions of years? Can you, can you? Can you reach in 
spirit the time when as yet cherubim were not born, when the 
solemnity of silence had never been disturbed by song of 
seraph, when the unnavigated ether had never been stirred by 
the wings of angels? There is no world, no sun, no stars — space 
alone exists. Can you go further back till space is gone? You 
cannot. It is impossible; you are lost; for you can only think of 
space and time. But if you could by any stretch of imagination 
multiply the millions of years of which we dreamed just now, 
by another million times, and that a million, million, million 
times more — and those on still as far as ever human arithmetic 
can go — yes, and beyond the possibilities of angelic 
computation, yet even then you have not begun to fathom the 
eternity in which God has dwelt alone! Certainly there was an 
age in which God was dwelling alone, not in solitude, for, as 
the fathers very rightly say, you must not use the term “solitude” 


1191 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


in reference to God, since the three divine persons everlastingly 
delighted in each other, and so knew no solitude — yet there was 
and is an aloneness in our God, since He is before all things. 

Can your thoughts attain to that age of God in lonely 
glory — in that eternity we know that Jesus was? He, whom 
though we have not seen His face, unceasingly we do adore, 
was then the eternal Son! The Word was God. Jesus was Alpha. 
To fly as far in the other direction — when the little river of time 
shall have been absorbed into the deep ocean of eternity, when 
all the world shall have departed even as the particles which 
dance in the sunbeam are seen no more when the sunbeam is 
gone — still Jesus shall be the Omega! It has been well observed 
by Dr. Gill, that no doubt the words, “Alpha and Omega,” are 
comprehensive — they take in all the letters between. Certainly 
God comprehends all creatures. God is that without whom 
there is nothing, and in whom are all things. Philo, the Jew, 
compares the great God to a tree and all creatures to the leaves 
and fruits which are all in the tree; but the metaphor is not 
complete because you may remove fruit from the tree, but 
there can be no creature out of the power and will of God by 
which alone it can exist at all. If you remove the fruit from the 
tree, the tree has at least lost something, but if all creatures were 
destroyed, yet still the Lord would be as infinitely God as He is 
now! If the creatures were multiplied, God were no more — and 
if diminished, He were no less. The creatures may be likened to 
the waves, and God to the great sea; the waves cannot exist 
apart from the sea, nor the creatures apart from God — but no 
earthly figure of the divine can be complete, for the waves are 
a portion of the sea, but the creatures are not God, nor do they 
contribute to His essence or attributes. The sea would be 
diminished if the waves were gone; but if you could take all 
creatures away, God would be neither less God nor less infinite 
than He is now. In fact, the moment we begin to talk of 


1192 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


infiniteness, we know nothing of diminishing or of increasing! 
O brothers and sisters, we must leave this subject in the silence 
of reverent humility, for my litde boat is already out of sight of 
shore, and I must not venture further on this great and wide 
sea — 

“Great God, how infinite are Thee! 

What worthless worms are we! 

Let the whole race of creatures bow, 

And pay their praise to Thee.” 

A deaf and dumb man in one of the institutions in Paris 
was asked to write upon the slate his idea of God’s eternity, and 
he wrote the following forcible lines — “It is duration without 
beginning or end; existence without bounds or dimensions; 
present without past or future. His eternity is youth without 
infancy or old age, life without birth or death, today without 
yesterday or tomorrow.” “I am Alpha and Omega, the 
beginning and the end, the first and the last.” 

2. Another truth of God is most certainly in the text, 
namely, that Jesus Christ is Alpha and Omega in the alphabet of 
creating operations. Who was it that began to make? Not an angel, 
for the angel must first be made. Did matter create itself? Was 
there an effect without a cause? It is contrary to our experience 
and our reason to believe any such thing. The first cause stands 
first, and the first cause is God in the divine Trinity, the Son 
being one person of that Trinity. He is Alpha because His hand 
first of all winged angelic spirits, and made His ministers a 
flame of fire. He first made all things out of nothing. He 
molded the clay from which man was made; all things were 
made by Him, and without Him was not anything made that is 
made. As He alone began, so His power maintains the fabric of 
creation; all things consist by Him. Christ is the great iron pillar 


1193 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


of the universe, and the creatures twine about Him as the vine 
does about its prop. These things are not, they vanish like a 
dream if Jesus withdraws His power. He upholds all things by 
the word of His power. Brothers and sisters, there may be 
creations going on at the present moment — fresh globes may 
even now be fashioned between the hands of Omnipotence; if 
so, in every one of these Immanuel has a share! At this very 
moment new comets may be launched like thunderbolts upon 
their fiery way, but not without the Son of God! Human souls 
issue from the womb of creation every hour, but in their 
sustenance and sending forth, the mighty God is ever present. 
On, on, on, as the works of God shall be enlarged and extended, 
as the universe shall grow on every side, Christ shall still be 
there — His Father’s delight, with whom He takes counsel — 
His equal, bearing with Him the name of Alpha and Omega! If 
this world shall be rolled up like a worn-out vesture, He shall 
roll it up; if the stars shall wither, it shall be at Jesus’ bidding — 
if the sun shall be quenched, His breath shall blow out its coal; 
and if the moon shall be black as sackcloth of hair, Christ’s 
hand shall extinguish the lamp. He shall do it all, even until the 
end shall come, for He is Omega as well as Alpha. 

3. So again, beyond a doubt, our text intends that Christ is 
Alpha and Omega in all covenant transactions. Beloved, here is a 
theme worthy of many discourses from the most eminent 
divines. The thoughts of God, the eternal decrees, the 
inscrutable purposes of Jehovah — these are deep things — but 
we know this concerning them, that from first to last they all 
have a relation to Christ. Concerning our race and the elect out 
of it, the whole matter is encompassed in the person of the 
Redeemer. Do you speak of election? “Mine elect in whom My 
soul delights,” is Christ’s name! We are chosen in Him from 
before the foundation of the world. Speak of our being 
predestinated to be sons — we are only made so in Him who 


1194 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


stands as the elder brother. Every separate individual of the 
chosen tribe stands only by virtue of a union which was 
established from of old, between his person and the person of 
the Redeemer! Search for the celestial fountain from which 
divine streams of divine grace have flowed to us, and you find 
Jesus Christ as the wellspring of covenant love! If your eyes 
shall ever see the covenant roll, if you shall ever be permitted 
in a future state to see the whole plan of redemption as it was 
mapped out in the chambers of eternity, you shall see the 
blood-red line of atoning sacrifice running along the margin of 
every page, and you shall see that from beginning to end one 
objective was always aimed at — the glory of the Son of God! 
The Father begins with exalting Jesus, and concludes with 
glorifying Him with the glory which He had with Him before 
the world was! 

How I do love the doctrines of grace, when they are taken 
in connection with Christ! Some people preach the Calvinistic 
points without Jesus; but what hard, dry, marrow preaching it 
is. Oh, dear friends, the letter kills; it breeds in men a 
controversial, quarrelsome spirit; but when you preach the 
doctrines of grace as they are in Christ, as Dr. Hawker would 
have preached them, when you talk of them as Rutherford 
would have talked of them — oh, then a holy unction rests upon 
them, and they become inestimably precious! And let every 
believer remember he does not get these doctrines as he should 
get them unless he receives them in Christ. Everywhere the Lord 
Jesus is to be considered! Not as the friend of a day, or our 
Savior only in His life on earth — but as the Lamb slain from 
before the foundation of the world — anointed Mediator set up 
from everlasting days. By faith I see Him as the eternal Son of 
God; I see Him standing in the purpose of the Father as the 
covenant head of the elect; I see Him in due time born of a 
woman, but I do not forget that His goings forth are of old 


1195 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


from everlasting, and that before the daystar knew its place, His 
delights were with the sons of men. I see Him; He cries, “It is 
finished!” He bows His head. I do not, however, forget that He 
is not dead, but that when the world shall die, and time shall 
conclude its reign, then He who is the Ancient of Days shall 
live, and shall flourish in immortal youth. Alpha and Omega is 
Jesus Christ, then, in the eternal purposes, and in the covenant 
transactions of God. 

4 . Jesus Christ is certainly Alpha and Omega in all salvation- 
work as it becomes apparent in act and deed. That this is the meaning 
of the text I am clear, because in the first passage where the 
Alpha and Omega occurs — namely, in the first chapter of the 
Revelation, 8th verse — you will see that all the works of 
salvation are ascribed to our Lord. Read the 5th verse, “Jesus 
Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first-born of the 
dead, and the Prince of the kings of the earth. Unto Him who 
loved us, and washed us from our sins in His own blood, and 
has made us kings and priests unto God and His Father; to Him 
be glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen. Behold, He 
comes with clouds. And every eye shall see Him ... I am Alpha 
and Omega.” Now, we have here a summary of the great 
transactions of saving grace! You have here that He loved us — 
loved us before the world was, with an everlasting love; you 
have next, that He washed us from our sins in His own blood, in 
which you have His redemption, and our consequent pardon, 
justification, and sanctification, all of which come to us through 
Him. As for our glory, it is the result of His second advent, 
therefore, “Behold, He comes,” makes Him the Omega, as the, 
“Unto Him who loved us,” made Him the Alpha! I need not 
repeat to you who know so well that, “There is none other 
name given under heaven whereby we must be saved,” and that 
in no part or portion of that salvation can any other name be 


1196 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


admitted into partnership with His. Jesus must begin. Jesus 
must conclude. 

It is very striking to observe the commencement and the 
perfection of the spiritual life both laid at Jesus’ door in the 6th 
verse of the 21st chapter — “I am Alpha and Omega, the 
beginning and the end. I will give unto him who is thirsty of 
the fountain of the water of life freely.” So then, if you have 
any thirst, you must come to Jesus Christ at the beginning to 
get the water of life. If you have been led to know your own 
emptiness — if you have received from His Spirit a hungering 
and a thirsting after righteousness, go not to the law — look not 
within — but come to the Alpha, drink and be satisfied. If, on 
the other hand, life is near its close — if you have been 
preserved in holiness, if you have been kept in righteousness — 
remember still to trust in the Omega; for these words follow, 
“He that overcomes shall inherit all things; and I will be his 
God, and he shall be My son.” So that the inheriting of all 
things, the final overcoming of all spiritual foes comes through 
Jesus, just as did the first drink of living water! The first breath 
which heaves the spiritual lungs, the first light which greets the 
newly-opened eyes, comes from Jesus who is the beginning; 
and the last shout of faith, the last shout of holy joy which shall 
admit the saints into the paradise of God shall proceed from 
Him who is the end. Beloved, lay back upon Christ with all your 
strength — lean on Him with all your weight! He who began will 
finish — He never was Alpha yet without being Omega, too! 
Nothing shall change His purpose — neither heaven, nor earth, 
nor hell can provide a motive to turn Him from His way of 
love! “He is of one mind, and who can turn Him? What His 
soul desires, even that He does.” 

5. There is one more truth of God which I conceive to be 
in the text. Jesus is Alpha and Omega not only in the individual 
salvation of every saint, but in the whole chain of the Church’s history. 


1197 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


Where shall I say that the Church began? Why, very speedily 
after there was a seed of the serpent, there was also a seed of 
the woman! Surely the line of demarcation began hard by the 
gates of Eden; there we see Abel worshipping God in faith, and 
Cain who was of the wicked one and slew his brother. Do we 
not, thus early see in Abel’s sacrifice, the Lamb of God which 
takes away the sin of the world? Follow the Church through all 
her varied fortunes, and you will find her always bearing the 
banner of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah at her forefront. No 
matter if she wanders about in sheepskins and goatskins, 
destitute, afflicted, tormented, Christ is still the daystar of her 
comfort! In her victories, His name is the loudest note — others 
may have slain their thousands, but the Son of David his ten 
thousands! No name wakes up the songsters of Israel like the 
name of Messiah, the coming one! Nothing can move the feet 
of Zion’s maidens so joyously in the sacred dance, nothing can 
make the daughters of Jerusalem smite their timbrels to a more 
joyful strain than this — “He comes; He comes who shall judge 
the world in righteousness, and His people with truth.” Since 
the first advent of our Lord, has not the Church always carried 
Jesus as her standard? Where will you find the Church without 
Christ? Jesus is yonder, among the snowy mountains of 
Switzerland, and His Church is with Him though her sons bear 
the names of heretics, schismatics, traitors, and worse. The 
Church of Rome has forgotten her first husband, and played 
the harlot, committing fornication with the kings of the earth; 
but there was a faithful bride found for the Son among the 
Albigenses and the Waldenses, in whose homes Jesus dwelt! 
What was their batde cry? What was the note they chanted 
around the family hearth? What was the name they pressed to 
their bosom when they dared not sing for fear the foe should 
fall upon them? Was it not the name of Jesus? And when the 
dark ages passed away, what light do I see gleaming yonder? 


1198 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


What does Luther proclaim? What does Calvin teach? It is the 
great name of Jesus which is their common theme! What do 
you say, brothers and sisters? Do you not join hands in solemn 
covenant, and say today, “His name shall endure forever! His 
name shall be remembered as long as the sun!”? Do you not 
long for the time when, “all nations shall be blessed in Him, all 
people shall call Him blessed”? Surely you yourselves will help 
to fulfill the promise, “one generation shall praise His name to 
another, and shall declare His mighty acts.” 

But the end comes; Jehovah’s banner will soon be furled — 
His sword shall be sheathed forever — the unsuffering kingdom 
shall be proclaimed; swords shall be broken; and spears shall 
be snapped; the sun shall look upon no batdefield, but shall 
greet the reign of universal peace! What then? Jesus’ name shall 
then be known everywhere; men shall talk of Him, and think 
of Him by day and by night. Prayer, also, shall be made for Him 
continually, and daily shall He be praised. They who dwell in 
the wilderness shall bow before Him, and His enemies shall lick 
the dust. Then comes the end. The judgment throne is set. The 
wicked are summoned. The righteous on the right hand have 
received their rewards — from whose hands? From the hands 
of the Omega who closes the chapter with His benediction, 
“Come, you blessed of My Father.” Here are the wicked; hell is 
gaping for them; the tongues of flames lick up the multitudes 
as the lion devours his prey. Who is this that pronounces the 
thundering sentence, “Depart, you cursed”? It is the Omega! 
That same face which once was bedewed with tears, is now 
brighter than the sun with flashes of lightning; the voice which 
said, “Come to Me, you weary,” now says, “Depart, you cursed.” 
He began — He ends — the Alpha is the Omega. But it is an end 
without end. Long, long through the ages of eternity, amid 
heaven’s perfect inhabitants, His name shall be the perpetual 
theme of song. Down there, amidst the howls of the damned, 


1199 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


they shall, against their will, declare His awful justice — they 
shall proclaim, in their eternal moans, the power of the pierced 
feet which shall tread them as clusters in the winepress until 
their blood flows forth to the horses’ bridles in eternity! 
Heaven and earth and hell shall adore Jesus as Alpha and 
Omega. Hallelujah, hallelujah! Jesus Christ reigns still as the 
Lord God omnipotent — Alpha and Omega! 

III. By your patience we will notice A FEW THINGS 
WHICH FLOW OUT OF THE TEXT. 

1. The first is this — Sinner, saint, let Jesus be Alpha and Ottsega 
to you today in your trust. Poor soul, are you willing to be saved? 
But do you say, “I have not this qualification, or that 
recommendation?” Ah, do not begin APs\ yourself 2 & the Alpha! 
Come to Jesus as you are, and let Him be Alpha to you. Are 
you black with sin? Let Him wash you. Is your heart hard? Let 
Him soften it. Are you a dead good-for-nothing soul? Are you 
ragged and wretched? Are you lost, ruined and undone? Do not 
stop to write Alpha first; do not stop to begin your own 
salvation. Sinner, remember there is no preparation needed for 
Christ. Just lean upon Him wholly; take Him to begin with — 
no, let Him take you to begin with! Drop into His arms now, 
repose upon Him now. You will never get true salvation unless 
the first letter in it is Christ, for He is the Alpha! It will all have 
to begin over again if you begin with humblings, with 
repentings, with convictions, or with anything but Christ! It 
must all be done over again, I say, unless you begin with Jesus! 
There He is! His wounds are flowing, His heart is breaking, His 
soul is in anguish — there is the Alpha of your salvation. Look 
and live! “Look unto Me, and be you saved all you ends of the 
earth.” Child of God let Him be the Omega of your salvation. 
If you have begun with Him, do not now confide in yourself. 
Shall I say to you as Paul did to the Galatians, “Having begun 
in the Spirit, are you now made perfect in the flesh?” “As you 


1200 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in Him.” Your 
first hope was through looking to Jesus, will you now look to 
your sanctifications, to your prayers, to your evidences, to your 
humbling, to your communing? Away with all these if they 
pretend to be the ground of your soul’s comfort! Remember, 
child of God, that to the end of the chapter it must be as it was 
in the beginning — 

“None but Jesus, none but Jesus, 

Can do helpless sinners good.” 

Up in that chamber of yours, with strong crying and tears 
you turned to God, and you never had any comfort till you 
looked to Jesus only, and in that other chamber where you shall 
lie dying with the dampness of death heavy on your brow — 
you shall have no comfort but Jesus only! You passed through 
the river of conviction, and Jesus forbade your drowning; you 
shall go through the stream of death, and He shall still keep 
your head above the waves. Alpha and Omega should Christ 
be to every one of us as our trust this morning. 

2. Beloved, if we have trusted Him, let Him be Alpha and 
Omega in our love. Oh, give Him the first place in your love. 
Young woman, may the Holy Spirit win your young heart for 
my Lord and Savior. Let the flower of your heart be offered to 
Him in the bud. O you, young children, who are your mother’s 
delight, and your father’s care — I pray that your first dawning 
days may be consecrated to the Savior! Let him be Alpha with 
you. I trust He is Alpha to some of us and has been so for years. 
We can use the words of the Psalmist, “I was cast upon You 
from the womb. You have been my God from my youth up. 
Truly I am Your servant, and the son of Your handmaid.” You 
who are growing old and gray-headed, let Him have the Omega 
of your love! As you lean upon your staff, bending downward 


1201 



Spurgeon’s Sermons - Vol. IX 


ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


as if to salute your grave, bear loving recollection of all the years 
of His patience, and the days of His faithfulness to you. Breathe 
the prayer, “Now, also, when I am old and gray-headed, O God, 
forsake me not.” See to it that you forsake Him not, but clasp 
Him with an expiring grasp as the Omega of your soul’s delight! 

3. But, surely, brothers and sisters, our Lord should be the 
Alpha and Omega of our life’s end and aim. What is there worth 
living for but Christ? Oh, what is there in the whole earth that 
is worth a thought but Jesus? Well did an old writer say, “If 
God is the only eternal, then all the rest is but a puff of smoke, 
and shall I live to heap up puffs of smoke? And shall I toil and 
slave merely to aggrandize myself with smoky treasures that the 
wind of death shall dissipate forever?” No, beloved let us live 
for eternal things, and what is there of eternal things that can 
be chosen but our Lord? O let us give Him next year the Alpha 
of our labor! Let us begin the year by working in His vineyard! 
Toiling in His harvest field this year is almost over; there is 
another day or two left — let us serve Him till the year is ended, 
going forward with double haste because the days are now so 
few. “Lord teach us to number our days, that we may apply our 
hearts unto wisdom.” Let your time and your talents, your 
substance and your energies all be given to my Master, who is 
worthy to be your soul’s Alpha and Omega! 

4. Lasdy, Jesus crucified should be the Alpha and Omega 
of all our preaching and teaching. Woe to the man who makes 
anything else the main subject of his ministry! “God forbid that 
I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by 
whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.” 
Do not tell me you preach sound doctrine — you preach rotten 
doctrine, if you do not preach Christ — preach nothing up but 
Christ, and nothing down but sin! Preach Christ! Lift Him up 
high on the pole of the gospel, as Moses lifted up the serpent 
in the wilderness, and you will accomplish your life’s end. 


1202 



ClassicChristianLibrary.com 


546 Alpha and Omega - Rev. 22:13 


Preach orthodoxy, or any form of doxy; if you have left out 
Christ, there is no manna from heaven, no water from the rock, 
no refuge from the storm, no healing for the sick, no life for 
the dead! If you leave out Christ, you have left the sun out of 
the day, and the moon out of the night; you have left the waters 
out of the sea, and the floods out of the river; you have left the 
harvest out of the year, the soul out of the body — you have left 
joy out of heaven — yes, you have robbed all of its All! There is 
no gospel worth thinking of, much less worth proclaiming in 
Jehovah’s name, if Jesus is forgotten! We must have Jesus, then, 
as Alpha and Omega in all our ministrations among the sons of 
men! 

And now I am very conscious, this morning, that I have 
only plowed the surface. I wish I could drive into the subsoil 
of such a glorious text as this, but I suppose that the plowman 
who can do this had need to have been caught up to the third 
heaven, and even then would fail. Who shall know anything of 
God but those who have seen Him, and have beheld His glory 
in heaven? As for us, our eyes are lacking. We have Jesus among 
us, but we perceive not His excellent glory. Like Peter, and 
James, and John, we sleep while Jesus is transfigured! The 
theme is far too high for me. Who can know God but God? 
Who can reveal Him but the only-begotten? And who can 
comprehend the fullness of Him who is the beginning and the 
end, the first and the last? It is enough if we have a saving 
acquaintance with the Redeemer, enough for our peace and joy, 
but gracious Lord, by Your grace, teach us more! Amen. 


1203 



