SPllRCEON 

\^  tPlSODES  ^ 


yANECDOTES 

ofKi5 


WITHPtf^50N/\L 


By 


^oma^ 


v/^)3^f^^cl. 


^ 


CHICAGO 
MORRILL.  HIGGJNS  &  CO.,  PUULLSHERS. 


N'^r.  U    Xo.'lO.Jn! 
iitH  in  fhf  pr.ct, 


\iuiiial  Siibscrijitiiiii,  |ai  i« 
i.is^;  matttr,  .        '-  "'  ' 


^P^  --^r.  lior.AHV 


5, 


/^^' 


:^^C^^ 


TT  (X>^  (^v  Vov  •'v 


C.    II.    SFUKGKON 


SPURGEON. 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES 


OF 


HIS    BUSY   LIFE. 


WITH    PERSONAL    REMINISCENCES. 


BY 


THOMAS  W.  HANDFORD. 
\ 


ILLUSTRATED. 


CHICAGO: 

MORRILL,  HIGGINS  &  CO. 

1892. 


>        ) 


828091A 


A.:"'OR.  LENOX  AND 
Tli-DtiN  t.    J.NDAT^ONS 


COPYRIGHT 

MORRILL,  HIGGINS  &  CO. 
1892 

ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED 


PREFATORY  NOTE 

This  volume  is  designed  to  present  to  American 
readers  a  general  impression  of  the  many-sided 
character  and  the  varied  work  of  the  great  Preacher 
whom  Mr.  Gladstone  not  inaptly  described  as  "the 
last  of  the  Puritans."  The  compiler  of  these  pages 
was  for  years  a  near  neighbor  to  Mr.  Spurgeon;  he 
has  preached  in  his  Tabernacle;  lectured  to  the 
Students  of  the  Pastors'  College;  and  talked  to  the 
Boys  in  the  Orphanage  at  Stockwell.  His  opportu- 
nities of  studying  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  his  work  were 
numerous  and  favorable;  his  many  pleasant  mem- 
ories of  the  great  Preacher  afford  him  special  ad- 
vantages for  the  grateful  task  of  telling  America 
what  manner  of  man  the  Pastor  of  the  Tabernacle 
was. 


Maywood,  MATtcH  26,  1892. 


WITHOUT    PERMISSION 

THIS   TRIBUTE    TO   THE    MEMORY 
OF 

CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON 

IS   DEDICATED 

WITH   SINCERE    GRATITUDE 
TO 

ALEXANDER  MACLAREN 

OF 

UNION  CHAPEL,  MANCHESTER,  ENGLAND 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  I 
EARLY  DAYS — STAMBOURNE 

CHAPTER  n 
LIFE    BEGINS    IN    EARNEST 

CHAPTER  in 
CALL  TO    LONDON 

CHAPTER  IV 
FROM    NEW  PARK   STREET    TO    THE    TABERNACI^E 

CHAPTER  V 
THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE 

CHAPTER  VI 
THE   STOCKWELL  ORPHANAGE 

CHAPTER  VII 
FROM   MENTONE    TO   NORWOOD 

CHAPTER  VIII 
MRS.    SPURGEON 

CHAPTER  IX 
EPISODES    AND   ANECDOTES 


CHAPTER  X 
PROVERBIAL  PHILOSOPHY — "tHE  SALT  CELLARS" 

CHAPTER    XI 
JOHN  ploughman's   TALK 

CHAPTER  XII 
THE  EDITOR    AT   HIS  DESK 

CHAPTER    XIII 
THE  NEWSPAPER   A   BIBLE    AND   A  TEXT  BOOK 

CHAPTER  XIV 
PSALMS  AND  HYMNS    AND   SPIRITUAL   SONGS 

CHAPTER  XV 
ECHOES   FROM    THE   TABERNACLE   PULPIT 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Frontispiece,  C.  H.  Spurgeon 

Birthplace  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon      .         .         .  ii 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle          .         .         .         -39 

The  Dead  Pastor  Lying  in  State          .         .  53 

The  Pastors'  College       .         .         .         .         •  59 

The  Stockwell  Orphanage    ....  75 

Mrs.  Spurgeon  .......  89 

Interior  of  the  Tabernacle    .    .    .  151 


SPURGEON; 


CHAPTER  I 

EARLY  DAYS — STAMBOURNE 

"  But  I,  thy  servant,  fear  the  Lord  from'  my  youth." 

— Obadiah. 

"  Sweet  childish  days  that  were  as  long 
As  twenty  days  are  now." 

—  IVilliam  Wordsworth. 

The  three  names  that  have  stood  foremost 
amongst  the  Baptists  of  England  for  a  good  many 
years  past,  are  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  Alex- 
ander Maclaren,  and  John  Clifford.  These  names 
have  come  to  stand  for  so  much,  they  have  been 
crowded  with  such  great  meanings,  through  many 
years  of  consecrated  toil,  that  it  seems  best  to 
record  them  with  unadorned  simplicity.  To  add 
titles  of  any  sort  before  or  after,  is  mere  trifling. 
Such  names  have  earned  the  right  to  live  and  stand 
alone. 

The  first  of  these  names  is  now  added  to  that 
innumerable  company  of  the  "blessed"  who  rest 
from  their  labors.  The  name  of  Charles  Haddon 
Spurgeon  no  longer  finds  a  place  amongst  the 
records  of  the  living;  it  has  become  a  legacy  and 
an  inheritance  to  the  whole  Church  of  Christ  to  the 

9 


lO  SPURGEON 

very  end  of  time.  "The  world  has  seemed  very 
dull  since  Hugo  died,"  said  an  enthusiastic  French- 
man not  long  ago.  There  are  very  many  beside 
those  who  count  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  their 
religious  home,  to  wh'om  the  world  will  never  be 
quite  the  same  since  Mr.  Spurgeon  died. 

One  of  the  happiest  descriptions  of  Mr.  Spur- 
geon's  life  and  work  is  said  to  have  been  given  by 
Mr.  Gladstone,  who  was  an  occasional  worshiper 
at  the  Tabernacle.  The  statesman's  estimate  of 
the  preacher  was  thus  expressed:  "Mr.  Spurgeon 
must  be  regarded  as  the  last  of  the  Puritans."  Mr. 
Spurgeon  was  a  Puritan.  By  descent,  in  spirit 
and  letter,  by  education  and  conviction,  in  speech 
and  life,  in  mind  and  method,  in  his  study  and  in 
his  pulpit,  in  his  home  and  on  the  street,  he  was  a 
Puritan  indeed.  Who  that  remembers  how  the 
young  country  pastor  from  Waterbeach  took  Lon- 
don by  storm  five-and-thirty  years  ago,  but  also 
remembers  how  he  seemed  to  be,  even  then,  the 
very  incarnation  of  the  spirit  and  genius  of  the 
seventeenth  century.  He  came  as  the  great  Fore- 
runner came,  "not  a  reed  to  be  shaken  by  the  wind, 
but  a  wind  to  shake  the  reeds."  He  was  "a  voice 
in  the  wilderness,"  the  mightiest  voice  England 
has  heard  for  a  hundred  years. 

Any  estimate  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  life  and  work 
must  be  taken  from  varied  points  of  view.  Great 
as  a  preacher,  laborious  and  successful  as  an 
author,  sagacious  as  an  organizer,  he  won  for  him- 
self a  world-wide  admiration;    but  as  a  philanthro- 


o 
u 

o 


o 

w 
u 

X 


m 


/  >.  *-^'-t 


'oirr  ■ 


^ 


>-7v; 


EARLY   DAYS  I 3 

pist,  as  the  friend  of  the  needy  student,  of  the  aged 
and  the  poor,  of  fatherless  boys  and  girls,  he  laid 
hold  upon  the  heart  of  the  world;  and  there  are 
thousands  living  in  many  lands  to-day,  who  rise 
up  and  call  him  "blessed!" 

The  best  and  briefest  analysis  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
character  was  given  in  a  single  sentence  by  Mr. 
Maclaren  at  one  of  the  memorial  services  held  in 
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  The  living  preacher, 
speaking  of  his  brother  and  companion,  whose 
coffined  form  lay  at  his  feet,  said:  "It  was  not 
so  much  his  genius,  as  his  earnestness,  his  devotion, 
his  self-oblivion,  that  endeared  him  to  all  hearts; 
and  herein  lay  the  secret  of  his  power."  To  this 
analysis  there  is  nothing  to  be  added. 

One  of  the  texts  that  came  unbidden  to  mourn- 
ful lips  in  these  sad  hours  was  that  familiar  word 
of  Paul's:  "I  have  fought  a  good  fight.  I  have 
finished  my  course.  I  have  kept  the  faith."  Suit- 
able as  these  words  were  they  were  not  all  inclu- 
sive. There  was  more  of  the  herald  than  the 
soldier  in  the  pastor  of  the  Tabernacle.  A  true 
soldier  of  the  Lord,  he  was  ever  ready,  when  oc- 
casion called,  to  draw  "the  sword  of  the  Lord  and 
of  Gideon;"  but  we  much  mistake  him  if  he  did 
not  love  the  work  of  the  herald  more  than  that  of 
the  soldier.  The  gospel  trumpet  was  dearer  to 
him  than  the  sword.   Alas!  that  we  have  to  write: 

'*  The  silver  trumpet  now  is  still.  " 

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  born  at  Kelvedon, 
in    Essex,    on  the  nineteenth    of   June,  1834.      He 


14  SPURGEON 

came  from  a  long  line  of  preachers,  dating  back 
to  the  golden  age  of  Puritanism.  The  Spurgeons 
seem  to  have  been  born  for  the  pulpit.  Grand- 
father, father,  brother,  sons,  all  preachers — but 
Charles  Haddon  the  greatest  preacher  of  them  all. 
His  early  days  were  spent  with  his  grandfather  in 
the  old  parsonage  at  Stambourne.  He  seems  to 
have  lived  in  the  luxury  of  being  grandfather's  pet. 

We  get  from  Mr.  Spurgeon's  pen,  in  the  last 
year  of  his  busy  life,  a  pleasant  memory  of  the  old 
Stambourne  days: 

"When  I  was  a  very  small  boy,"  he  writes,  "I 
was  staying  at  my  grandfather's,  where  I  had  afore- 
time spent  my  earliest  days;  and,  as  the  manner 
was,  I  read  the  Scriptures  at  family  prayer.  Once 
upon  a  time,  when  reading  the  passage  in  the  Book 
of  Revelation  which  mentions  the  bottomless  pit, 
I  paused  and  said:  'Grandpa,  what  can  this  mean.^' 
The  answer  was  kind  but  unsatisfactory:  'Pooh, 
pooh,  child,  go  on.'  The  child  intended,  however, 
to  have  an  explanation,  and  therefore  selected  the 
same  chapter  morning  after  morning,  Sunday  in- 
cluded, and  always  halted  at  the  same  verse  to 
repeat  the  inquiry.  At  length  the  venerable  patri- 
arch capitulated  at  discretion,  by  saying,  'Well, 
dear,  what  is  it  that  puzzles  you  ?'  Now,  the  child 
had  often  seen  baskets  with  very  frail  bottoms, 
which,  in  course  of  wear,  became  bottomless,  and 
allowed  the  fruit  placed  therein  to  fall  upon  the 
ground.  Here,  then,  was  the  puzzle:  If  the  pit 
aforesaid  had  no  bottom,  where  would  all  the  peo- 


EARLY   DAYS  I  5 

pie  fall  who  dropped  out  at  its  lower  end? — a  puz- 
zle which  rather  startled  the  propriety  of  family 
worship,  and  had  to  be  laid  aside  for  explanation 
at  a  more  convenient  season.  Questions  of  the 
like  simple  and  natural  character  would  frequently 
break  up  into  paragraphs  at  the  family  Bible-read- 
ing, and  had  there  not  been  a  world  of  love  and 
license  allowed  to  the  inquisitive  reader,  he  would 
soon  have  been  deposed  from  his  office.  As  it 
was,  the  Scriptures  were  not  very  -badly  rendered, 
and  were  probably  quite  as  interesting  as  if  they 
had  not  been  interspersed  with  original  and  curious 
inquiries." 

In  recording  his  recollections  of  the  old  meeting- 
house at  Stambourne,  Mr.  Spurgeon  says: 

"It  was  a  rare  old  chapel.  I  wish  it  could  have 
remained  forever  as  I  used  to  know  it;  let  me  see 
if  I  can  sketch  it  with  my  pen. 

"The  pulpit  was  glorious  as  'the  tower  of  the 
flock.'  Over  it  hung  a  huge  sounding-board;  I 
used  to  speculate  as  to  what  would  become  of 
grandfather  if  it  ever  dropped  down  upon  him.  I 
thought  of  my  Jack-in-the-box,  and  hoped  that  my 
dear  grandpapa  would  never  be  shut  down  and 
shut  up  in  such  a  fashion.  At  the  back  of  the  pul- 
pit was  a  peg  to  hold  the  minister's  hat;  inside 
there  was  room  for  two,  for  I  have  sat  there  with 
grandfather  when  quite  a  little  boy;  but  I  guess 
that  two  grown-up  people  would  have  found  it 
'quite  too  small  enough,'  as  my  Dutch  friend  puts 
it. 


1 6  SPURGEON 

"Just  below,  and  in  front  of  the  pulpit,  was  the 
table-pew,  wherein  sat  the  elders  of  the  congrega- 
tion, the  men  of  gracious  light  and  leading.  There 
Uncle  Haddon  generally  stood,  and  gave  out  the 
hymns  and  the  notices;  and  from  that  semi-sacred 
region  was  raised  the  block  of  wood  by  which,  to 
the  singers  upstairs,  the  meter  of  the  hymn  was 
made  known — common,  long,  or  short.  There 
were  big  tombstones  forming  the  bottom  of  this 
large  pew,  which  took  its  name  from  containing 
the  table  on  which  were  spread  the  bread  and 
wine  on  days  when  they  had  the  ordinance — I  think 
that  was  the  correct  phrase  when  our  good  folks 
intended  'the  communion.'  I  don't  remember 
hearing  them  style  infant  baptism  'the  ordinance', 
but  I  suppose  they  thought  it  to  be  one.  A  few 
had  qualms  upon  the  question,  and  were  baptized 
quietly  at  some  Baptist  chapel. 

"The  pews  in  the  middle  were  mostly  square  in 
form,  and  roomy.  Those  on  either  side  were  aris- 
tocratic, and  lined  with  green  baize,  for  the  most 
part  very  faded.  In  some  cases,  brass  rods  car- 
ried up  little  curtains,  which  made  the  family  pew 
quite  private,  and  shut  out  all  sights  but  that  of 
the  grave  and  reverend  senior  who  dispensed  to  us 
the  Word  of  life.  There  were  flaps  inside  the  pew 
so  as  not  to  lose  the  space  where  the  door  opened, 
and  flaps  for  the  poor  to  sit  upon  in  the  aisle  out- 
side of  these  pews;  and  when  the  time  came  to  go 
home,  there  was  such  a  lifting  up  and  letting  down 
Dt  flaps,  and  flap-seats,  within  the  pew,  and  with- 


EARLY   DAYS  I 7 

out  the  pew,  as  one  never  does  see  in  these  degen- 
erate days.  A  little  boy  on  a  hassock  on  the  floor 
of  one  of  these  holy  loose-boxes  ought  to  have 
been  good;  and  no  doubt  was  as  good  there  as  any- 
where, especially  if  he  had  a  peppermint  to  suck, 
and  nobody  to  play  v.ith. 

"The  aisles  were  paved  with  bricks,  and  were 
generally  sanded.  Here  and  there  a  portion  of  a 
gravestone  indicated  how  the  floor  of  the  old  build- 
ing was  honeycombed  with  vaults  and  graves. 
There  was  no  need  to  go  to  the  parish  church  to 
encounter  ancient  dust.  Bacillee  and  microbes  were 
not  dreaded  in  those  days.  There  is  no  reason  to 
believe  that  in  later  years  any  body  or  bodies  were 
buried  in  the  meeting-house;  it  sufficed  to  lay  the 
departed  within  the  hallowed  enclosure  of  'the 
meeting-yard. '  It  was  not  absolutely  essential 
that  those  whose  souls  inherited  eternal  life  should 
leave  their  bodies  beneath  the  feet  of  their  descend- 
ants for  the  spread  of   death   on   the    Lord's-day. 

"On  the  right-hand  side  from  the  pulpit,  there 
were  two  large  doors  which  admitted  a  wheeled 
carriage  into  the  chapel.  There  it  stood,  with  its 
shafts  turned  up  out  of  the  way,  and  the  sick  per- 
son comfortably  housed.  I  don't  remember 
another  instance  of  a  person  driving  into  the  house 
of  God,  and  continuing  to  abide  in  her  chariot 
throughout  the  service. 

"The  gallery  went  along  the  whole  inside  front 
of  the  meeting-house,  and  turned  round  a  little 
way  on  each  side.      It  was  to   mc,  as  a  child,    an 

2 


I 8  SPURGEON 

elevated,  obscure,  and  unknown  region.  There 
were  men  with  flutes  who  let  the  water  run  out  at 
the  ends  of  the  tubes  on  the  people  below,  and  the 
clarionet  man,  for  whom  I  had  more  esteem,  be- 
cause I  could  make  some  sort  of  noise  when  I 
blew  through  his  instrument;  but  the  fifes  (why 
not  fives?)  always  baffled  me.  The  bassoon  man 
was  there,  and  the  serpent,  and  the  double-bass, 
and  a  lot  more  of  them.  They  could  play.  There's 
no  mistake  about  it.  At  least,  it  was  almost  as 
certain  as  that  other  undeniable  fact,  that  our 
singers  could  sing.  Well,  it  was  hearty  singing; 
and  say  what  you  like,  it's  the  heart  in  the  singing 
which  is  the  life  of  the  business.  Besides  those 
who  could  sing,  we  had  about  twice  as  many  who 
could  neither  play  nor  sing;  but  excelled  in  sharply 
criticising  what  was  done  by  others." 

The  pilgrim  to  the  early  home  of  Mr.  Spurgeon 
will  find  on  the  wall  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the 
pulpit  in  the  old  meeting-house  of  Stambourne,  a 
marble  slab  bearing  the  following  record  concerning 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  grandfather: 

IN  MEMORY  OF 

The  Rev.  JAMES  SPURGEON, 

Who  for  fifty-four  years  was  the  faithful  and  beloved 
pastor  of  the  church  in  this  place,  and 
for  four  years  previously  of  the  Inde- 
pendent church  at  Clare. 

He  departed  this  life  on  the  twelfth  day  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1864,  in  the  SSth  year  of  his  age. 


CHAPTER   II 

LIFE  BEGINS  IN  EARNEST — WATERBEACH 

"Life's  but  a  means  unto  an  end; 
Beginning,  means,  and  end  of  all  things — God!" 

— Philip  Janu's  Baihy. 

"But  I  certify  you,  brethren,  that  the  Gospel  which  was  preached 
of  me  is  not  after  man.  For  I  neither  received  it  of  man,  neither 
was  I  taught  it;  but  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."     — Paul. 

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  this  young  Puri- 
tan would  journey  far  along  the  path  of  life  with- 
out encountering  marked  religious  experiences. 
There  are  many  lives  after  the  type  of  "Lydia  the 
seller  of  purple  from  Thyatira,"  whose  heart  "the 
Lord  opened,"  gently,  leaf  by  leaf,  as  the  sun 
awakens  a  rose,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  not  of  this 
order.  He  could  mark  the  day  and  the  hour  when 
he  surrendered  to  the  call  of  God.  And  he  did 
mark  it  as  the  great  red-letter  day  of  his  life. 

But  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  shall  tell  the  story  of 
his  conversion.      Addressing  his  students,  he  says: 

"I  will  tell  you  how  I  myself  was  brought  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  It  pleased  God  in  my 
childhood  to  convince  me  of  sin.  I  was  miserable, 
my  heart  was  broken  in  pieces.  I  resolved  that, 
in  the  town  where  I  lived,  I  would  visit  every  place 
of  worship  in  order  to  find  out  the  way  of  salva- 
tion.     I  went  to  all  the  places  of  worship.      But  I 

13 


20  SPURGEON 

did  not  hear  the  gospel.  The  ministers  preached 
truth,  great  truths,  many  good  truths  that  were 
fitting  to  many  of  their  congregation — but  what  I 
wanted  to  know  was — how  can  I  get  my  sins  tor- 
given?   and  they  never  told  me  that. 

"I  went  time  after  time,  and  I  can  honestly  say, 
I  don't  know  that  I  ever  went  without  prayer  to 
God,  and  I  am  sure  there  was  not  a  more  attentive 
hearer  in  all  the  place  than  myself,  for  I  panted 
and  longed  to  understand   how  I   might  be   saved. 

"At  last,  one  snowv  dav — it  snowed  so  much  I 
could  not  go  to  the  place  I  had  determined  to  go 
to,  and  I  was  obliged  to  stop  on  the  road,  and  it 
was  a  blessed  stop  to  me — I  found  rather  an  obscure 
street,  and  turned  down  a  court,  and  there  was  a 
little  chapel.  I  wanted  to  go  somewhere,  but  I 
did  not  know  this  place.  It  was  the  Primitive 
Methodists'  chapel.  I  had  heard  of  these  people 
from  many,  and  how  they  sang  so  loudly  that  they 
made  people's  heads  ache;  but  that  did  not  mat- 
ter. I  wanted  to  know  how  I  might  be  saved,  and 
if  they  made  my  head  ache  ever  so  much  I  did  not 
care.  So,  sitting  down,  the  service  went  on,  but 
no  minister  came.  At  last  a  very  thin-looking 
man  came  into  the  pulpit  and  opened  his  Bible  and 
read  these  words:  'Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye 
saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth.'  Just  setting  his 
eyes  upon  me,  as  if  he  knew  me  all  by  heart,  he 
said:  'Young  man,  you  are  in  trouble.'  Well,  I 
was,  sure  enough.  Says  he,  'You  will  never  get 
out  of  it  unless   you    look  to  Christ. '     And  then, 


LtFE   BEGINS    IN    EARNEST  2f 

lifting  up  his  hands,  he  cried  out,  as  only,  T  think, 
a  Primitive  Methodist  could  do,  'Look,  look,  look! 
It  is  only  look!'  said  he.  I  saw  at  once  the  way 
of  salvation.  Oh,  how  I  did  leap  for  joy  at  that 
moment  I  1  know  not  wh;it  else  he  said;  i  did  not 
take  much  noijre  of  it  —  1  was  so  possessed  with 
that  one  thought.  Like  as  when  the  brr);^en  s-'^r- 
pent  was  lifted  up,  thfj\'  on]\'  looked  aii'l  were 
healed.  I  h;ul  been  \v;i.itin;,^  to  do  fifty  thin;(S,  hut 
when  I  heard  thi:^  v.or'l  'Loo!;  I' ■  what  a  charnein;^ 
word  it  seemed  to  me.  Ofi,  I  looke-d  tiil  J  eonld 
almost  have  looked  my  eyes  away  I  An'l  in  hea\en 
I  will  look  on  still  with  joy    unutterable." 

Work  followed  conversion,  'ko  what  end  had 
he  been  converted  if  not  for  work  ?  Praying,  exhort- 
ing, was  soon  followed  by  preaching.  His  first 
message  was  delivered  in  a  cottage.  He  shrank 
from  the  task  at  first.  But  courage  came  at  last. 
He  says: 

"I  felt  that  I  was  fairly  committed  to  do  my 
best.  I  walked  along  quietly,  lifting  up  my  soul 
to  God,  and  it  seemed  to  rne  that  I  could  surely 
tell  a  few  poor  cottagers  of  the  sweetness  and  love 
of  Jesus,  for  I  felt  them  in  my  own  soul.  Praying 
for  divine  help,  I  resolved  to  make  an  attempt, 
?»Iy  text  should  be,  'Unto  you,  therefore,  which 
believe.  He  is  precious,'  and  I  would  trust  the 
Lord  to  open  my  mouth  in  honor  of  His  dear  Son. 
It  seemed  a  g^eat  risk  and  a  serious  trial;  but, 
depending  upon  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  I 
would  at  least  tell  out  the  story  of  the  cross,  and 


22  SPURGEON 

not  allow  the  people  to  go  home  without  a  word. 
We  entered  the  low-pitched  room  of  the   thatched 
cottage,  where  a  few  simple-minded  farm-laborers 
and  their  wives   were   gathered  together;   we  sang 
and  prayed  and  read  the  Scriptures,  and  then  came 
our  first  sermon.      How  long  or  how  short  it  was 
we  cannot  now  remember.      It  was  not  half  such  a 
task  as  we  had   feared  it   would   be,  but   we   were 
glad  to  see  our  way  to  a  fair  conclusion,  and  to  the 
giving  out  of  the  last  hymn.      To  our  own    delight 
we  had  not  broken  down,  nor  stopped  short  in  the 
middle,  nor  been  destitute  of  ideas,  and  the  desired 
haven  was  in  view.      We  made  a   finish,  and    took 
up  the  book;  but  to  our  astonishment,  an  aged  voice 
cried  out:  'Bless  your  dear  heart,  how  old  are  you.''' 
Our  very  solemn  reply  was,   'You  must  wait  till  the 
service  is  over  before   making   any   such   inquiries. 
Let  us  now  sing.'      We  did   sing,    and  the  young 
preacher    pronounced    the   benediction,    and   then 
began    a   dialogue    which    enlarged   into   a   warm, 
friendly  talk,  in  which  everybody  appeared  to  take 
part.      'How  old  are  you.?'   was  the    leading   ques- 
tion.     'I  am  under   sixty, '  was   the   reply.      'Yes, 
and  under  sixteen, '  was  the  old   lady's    rejoinder. 
'Never  mind  my  age,  think  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and 
His  preciousness, '  was   all   that  I  could  say,  after 
promising  t(j  come  again  if  the  gentlemen  at   Cam- 
bridge  thought  me  fit  to  do   so.      Very  great   and 
profound  was  our  awe  of  those  'gentlemen  at  Cam- 
bridge' in  those  days." 

His  first  pastorate  was  at  Waterbeach  near  Cam- 


LIFE    BEGINS    IN    EARNEST  2$ 

bridge.  The  church  was  small,  composed  for  the 
most  part  of  aged  members.  But  the  history  of 
that  brief  pastorate  has  always  been  regarded  by 
Mr.  Spurgeon  as  one  of  the  greenest  spots  in  all 
his  busy  life. 

A  great  deal  of  interest  has  been  taken  in  the 
fact  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  never  went  to  college.  But 
he  very  narrowly  escaped.  In  referring  to  this 
half-amusing  episode  in  his  early  history,  he  says: 

"Soon  after  I  had  begun,  in  1S52,  to  preach  the 
Word  in  Waterbeach,  I  was  strongly  advised  by 
my  father  and  others  to  enter  Stepney,  now 
Regent's  Park  College,  to  prepare  more  fully  for 
the  ministry.  Dr.  Angus,  the  tutor  of  the  college, 
visited  Cambridge,  where  I  then  resided,  and  it 
was  arranged  that  we  should  meet  at  the  house  of 
Mr.  Macmillan,  the  publisher.  Thinking  and  pray- 
ing over  the  matter,  I  entered  the  house  at  exactl}' 
the  time  appointed,  and  was  shown  into  a  room 
where  I  waited  patiently  for  a  couple  of  hours, 
feeling  too  much  impressed  with  my  own  insignifi- 
cance, and  the  greatness  of  the  London  tutor,  to 
venture  to  ring  the  bell  and  inquire  the  cause  of 
the  unreasonably  long  delay. 

"At  last,  patience  having  had  her  perfect  work, 
the  bell  was  set  in  motion,  and  on  the  arrival  of 
the  servant,  the  waiting  young  man  of  eighteen 
was  informed  that  the  doctor  had  tarried  in  another 
room,  and  could  stay  no  longer,  so  had  gone  off 
by  train  to  London.  The  stupid  girl  had  given  no 
information  to  the  family  that    anyone  called  and 


24  SPURGEON 

had  been  shown  into  the  drawing-room,  conse- 
quently the  meeting  never  came  about,  although 
designed  by  both  parties.  I  was  not  a  little  disap- 
pointed at  the  moment,  but  have  a  thousand  times 
since  then  thanked  the  Lord  very  heartily  for  the 
strange  providence  which  forced  my  steps  into 
another  and  far  better  path." 


CHAPTER  III 

CALL  TO  LONDON 

"If  Thy  presence  go  not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  hence." 

— JMoses. 

♦'Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God!  Behold,  I  cannot  speak,  for  I  am 
but  a  child.  But  the  Lord  said  unto  me:  Say«  not,  I  am  a  child,  for 
thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  I  shall  send  thee,  and  whatsoever  I  shall 
command  thee  thou  shalt  speak."  — Jerejiiiah. 

"All  things  come  to  those  who  wait."  But  the 
young  pastor  of  Waterbeach  was  happy  in  his 
work,  happy  with  his  little  flock,  and  there  are  no 
indications  that  he  was  waiting  for  a  call,  or  ambi- 
tious for  a  larger  sphere.  He  kept  the  little  vine- 
yard amid  the  hills  faithfully.  He  tended  the 
vines,  and  guarded  them  night  and  day.  He  ruled 
the  little  kingdom  wisely  and  well,  and  without 
seeking  or  desire  he  was  called  to  the  great  Baby- 
lon on  the  banks  of  the  Thames. 

The  Baptist  church  worshiping  in  New  Park 
Street  Chapel,  dated  back  to  the  days  of  Cromwell 
and  the  Commonwealth.  During  its  history  it  had 
rejoiced  in  learned  and  distinguished  men  for  pas- 
tors. Dr.  Gill,  of  Commentary  fame;  Dr.  Keach, 
of  the  Metaphors;  Dr.  Rippon,  the  young  poet  of 
the  church;  Dr.  Angus,  James  Smith,  and  William 
Walters,  had  in  succession  presided  over  the  church. 
The  church  was  nearly  dead.      A  chapel  that  would 

25 


26  SPURGEON 

hold  twelve  hundred  people,  if  they  would  but 
come,  witnessed  a  congregation  of  perhaps  two 
hundred,  with  room  for  a  thousand  more.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  was  invited,  in  the  winter  of  1853,  to  sup- 
ply the  pulpit  "with  a  view."  He  came  with  much 
fear  and  trembling,  and  twenty-five  years  after- 
ward, he  tells  the  story  of  that  visit: 

"Twenty-five  years  ago — and  yet  it  seems  but 
yesterday — we  lodged  for  the  night  at  a  boarding- 
house  in  Queen  Square,  Bloomsbury,  to  which  the 
worthy  deacon  directed  us.  As  we  wore  a  huge 
black  satin  stock,  and  used  a  blue  handkerchief 
with  white  spots,  the  young  gentlemen  of  that 
boarding-house  marveled  greatly  at  the  youth 
from  the  country  who  had  come  up  to  preach  in 
London,  but  who  was  evidently  in  the  condition 
known  as  verdant  green.  They  were  mainly  of  the 
evangelical  church  persuasion,  and  seemed  greatly 
tickled  that  the  country  lad  should  be  a  preacher. 
They  did  not  propose  to  go  and  hear  the  youth, 
but  they  seemed  to  tacitly  agree  to  encourage  him 
after  their  own  fashion,  and  we  were  encouraged 
accordingly.  What  tales  were  narrated  of  the 
great  divines  of  the  metropolis  and  their  congrega- 
tions! One,  we  remember,  had  a  thousand  city 
men  to  hear  him,  another  had  his  church  filled 
with  thoughtful  people,  such  as  could  hardly  be 
matched  all  over  England,  while  a  third  had  an 
immense  audience,  almost  entirely  composed  of 
the  young  men  of  London,  who  were  spell-bound 
by  his   eloquence.      The    study   which   these    men 


CALL    TO    LONDON  2/ 

underwent  in  composing  their  sermons,  their  her- 
culean toils  in  keeping  up  their  congregations,  and 
the  matchless  oratory  which  they  exhibited  on  all 
occasions,  were  duly  rehearsed  in  our  hearing;  and 
when  we  were  shown  to  bed  in  a  cupboard  over 
the  front  door,  we  were  not  in  an  advantageous 
condition  for  pleasant  dreams.  Park  Street  hos- 
pitality never  sent  the  young  minister  to  that  far- 
away hired  room  again;  but  assuredly  the  Satur- 
day evening  in  a  London  boarding-house  was  about 
the  most  depressing  agency  which  could  have  been 
brought  to  bear  upon  our  spirit.  On  the  narrow 
bed  we  tossed  in  solitary  misery,. and  found  no  pity. 
Pitiless  was  the  grind  of  the  cabs  in  the  street; 
pitiless  the  recollection  of  the  young  city  clerks 
whose  grim  propriety  had  gazed  upon  our  rusticity 
with  such  amusement ;  pitiless  the  spare  room, 
which  scarce  afforded  space  to  kneel;  pitiless  even 
the  gas-lamps  which  seemed  to  wink  at  us  as  they 
flickered  amid  the  December  darkness.  We  had 
no  friend  in  all  that  city  full  of  human  beings,  but 
we  felt  among  strangers  and  foreigners,  hoped  to 
be  helped  through  the  scrape  into  which  we  had 
been  brought,  and  to  escape  safely  to  the  serene 
abodes  of  Cambridge  and  Waterbeach,  v/hich  then 
seemed  to  be  Eden  itself. 

"Twenty-five  years  ago  it  was  a  clear,  cold 
morning,  and  we  wended  our  way  along  Holborn 
Hill  toward  Blackfriars  and  certain  tortuous  lanes 
and  alleys  at  the  foot  of  Southwark  Bridge.  Won- 
dering, praying,  fearing,  hoping,  believing — we  felt 


28  SPURGEON 

all  alone  and  3'et  not  alone.  Expectant  of  divine 
help,  and  inwardly  borne  down  by  our  sense  of  the 
need  of  it,  we  traversed  a  dreary  wilderness  of 
brick  to  find  the  spot  v/here  our  message  must 
needs  be  delivered.  One  word  rose  to  our  lip 
many  times,  we  scarce  know  why —  'He  must  needs 
go  through  Samaria.'  The  necessity  of  our  Lord's 
journeying  in  a  certain  direction  is  no  doubt  re- 
peated in  His  servants,  and  as  our  present  journey 
was  not  of  our  seeking,  and  had  been  by  no  means 
pleasing  so  far  as  it  had  gone — the  one  thought  of 
a  'needs  be'  for  it  seemed  to  overtop  every  other. 
At  sight  of  Park  Street  Chapel  we  felt  for  a  moment 
amazed  at  our  own  temerity,  for  it  seemed  to  our 
eyes  to  be  a  large,  ornate  and  imposing  structure, 
suggesting  an  audience  wealthy  and  critical,  and 
far  removed  from  the  humble  folk  to  whom  our 
ministr}'  had  been  sweetness  and  light.  It  was 
early,  so  there  were  no  persons  entering,  and  when 
the  set  time  was  fully  come,  there  were  no  signs  to 
support  the  suggestion  raised  by  the  exterior  of  the 
building,  and  we  felt  that  by  God's  help  we  were 
not  yet  out  of  our  depth,  and  were  not  likely  to  be 
with  so  small  an  audience.  The  Lord  helped  us 
very  graciously;  we  had  a  happy  Sabbath  in  the 
pulpit,  and  spent  the  intervals  with  warm-hearted 
friends;  and  when  at  night  we  trudged  back  to  the 
Queen  Square  narrow  lodging  we  were  not  alone, 
and  we  no  longer  looked  on  Londoners  as  flinty- 
hearted  barbarians.  Our  tone  was  altered;  we 
wanted   no   pity    of    anyone;   we   diil    not   care    a 


CALL    TO    LONDON  29 

penny  for  the  young  gentlemen  lodgers  and  their 
miraculous  ministers,  nor  for  the  grind  of  the  cabs, 
nor  for  anything  else  under  the  sun.  The  lion  had 
been  looked  at  all  round,  and  his  majesty  did  not 
appear  to  be  a  tenth  as  majestic  as  when  we  had 
only  heard  his  roar  miles  away." 

After  much  care  and  prayer,  a  call  was  present- 
ed. Mr.  Spurgeon  was  in  no  haste  to  accept.  But 
the  early  spring  of  1854  saw  him  settled  in  London. 
At  this  point,  we  present  our  readers  with  a  copy 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  letter  of  acceptance  of  the  call 
to  the  church  at  New  Park  Street.  When  we 
remember  that  the  young  pastor  was  not  more 
than  twenty  years  of  age  when  he  wrote  this  letter, 
who  can  help  saying:  "How  much  older  art  thou 
than  thy  years!"  The  modesty  and  the  courage  of 
the  letter  are  alike  charming.  The  letter  runs 
thus: 

"75,  Dover  Road,  Borough; 
"April  28,  1854. 
"To  the  Baptist  church  of   Christ,  worshiping  in 

New  Park  Street  Chapel,  Southwark. 
"Dearly  Beloved  in  Christ  Jesus:  — 

"I  have  received  your  unanimous  invitation,  as 
contained  in  a  resolution  passed  by  you  on  the  nine- 
teenth instant,  desiring  me  to  accept  the  pastor- 
ate among  you.  No  lengthened  reply  is  required; 
there  is  but  one  answer  to  so  loving  and  cordial  an 
invitation.  I  accept  it.  I  have  not  been  perplexed 
as  to  what  my  reply  shall  be,  for  many  things  con- 
strain me  thus  to  answer. 


30  • SPURGEON 

"I  sought  not  to  come  to  you,  for  I  was  the  min- 
ister of  an  obscure  but  affectionate  people;  I  never 
solicited  advancement.  The  first  note  of  invita- 
tion from  your  deacons  came  to  me  quite  unlooked 
for,  and  !  trembled  at  the  idea  of  preaching  in 
London.  I  could  not  understand  how  it  came 
about,  and  even  now  I  am  filled  v/ith  astonish- 
ment at  the  wondrous  providence.  I  would  wish 
to  give  myself  into  the  hands  of  our  covenant  God, 
whose  wisdom  directs  all  things.  He  shall  choose 
for  me;   and  so  far  as  I  can  judge  this  is  His  choice. 

"I  feel  it  to  be  a  high  honor  to  be  the  pastor  of 
a  people  who  can  mention  glorious  names  as  my 
predecessors;  and  I  entreat  of  you  to  remember 
me  in  prayer,  that  I  may  realize  the  solemn  respon- 
sibility of  my  trust.  Remember  my  youth  and 
inexperience;  pray  that  these  may  not  hinder  my 
usefulness.  I  trust,  also,  that  the  remembrance 
of  these  may  lead  you  to  forgive  the  mistakes  I 
may  make,  or  unguarded  words  I   ma}'  utter. 

"Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Most  High!  If  He 
has  called  me  to  this  office  He  will  support  me  in 
it;  otherwise,  how  should  a  child,  a  youth,  have 
the  presumption  thus  to  attempt  a  work  which 
filled  the  heart  and  hands  of  Jesus?  Your  kind- 
ness to  mc  has  been  very  great,  ami  my  heart  is 
knit  unto  you.  I  fear  not  your  steadfastness;  1 
fear  my  own.  The  gospel,  I  believe,  enables  me 
to  venture  great  thins^s,  .iiid  by  f;iilli  I  venture 
this.  I  ask  your  co-operation  in  every  good  work 
— in  visiting  the  sick,  in  bringing  in  inquirers,  and 
in  mutual  edification. 


CALL    TO    LONDON  3 1 

"Oh,  that  I  may  be  no  injury  to  you,  but  a 
lasting  benefit!  I  have  no  more  to  say,  only  this: 
that  if  I  have  expressed  mj'self  in  these  few  words 
in  a  manner  unbecoming  my  youth  and  inexperi- 
ence, you  will  not  impute  it  to  arrogance,  but  for- 
give my  mistake. 

"And  now,  commending  you  to  our  covenant- 
keeping  God,  the  triune  Jehovah,  I  am  yours  to 
serve  in  the  gospel, 

"C.  H.  Spurgeon." 


CHAPTER  IV 

FROM  NEW  PARK  STREET  TO  THE  TABERNACLE 

"And  he  led  them  forth  by  the  right  way,  that  they  might  go  to 
a  city  of  habitation."  — David. 

"We  live  in  deeds,  not  years;  in  thoughts,  not  breaths; 
In  feelings,  not  in  figures  on  a  dial. 

He  lives  most 
Who  thinks  most,  feels  the  noblest,  acts  the  best." 

— Philip  Janus  Bailey. 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  first  sermon  in  London  was 
from  the  text,  "Every  good  and  perfect  gift  cometh 
from  above,  from  the  Father  of  hghts,  with  whom 
there  is  no  variableness  nor  the  least  shadow  of 
a  turning."  The  very  text  seemed  to  be  a  good 
omen  in  itself,  at  least  so  thought  the  deacons  of 
New  Park  Street.  The  old  chapel  was  soon 
crowded.  Scores,  then  hundreds,  had  to  be  turned 
away  from  every  service.  The  young  preacher 
became  the  sensation  of  the  hour,  but  he  soon 
ceased  to  be  a  sensation,  and  grew  to  be  a  power 
amongst  men.  New  Park  Street  was  closed  for 
repairs  and  enlargement;  and  the  daring  young 
preacher  took  Exeter  Hall,  which  was  then  to  Lon- 
don what  the  Auditorium  is  to  Chicago,  and  would 
hold  nearly  as  many.  The  deacons  were  amazed 
at  his  daring,  but  they  did  not  yet  understand  to 
what  an  extent  his  courage  was  fed  on  faith. 

Exeter  Hall  was  soon  as  crowded  as  New  Park 

32 


TO    THE    TABERNACLE  33 

Street  had  been.  The  Strand  was  thronged;  its  old 
order  of  Sunday  quiet  was  invaded.  The  tide  had 
set  in,  and  with  its  flow  there  came  the  wildest 
storm  of  abuse  and  persecution  that  ever  assailed 
an  unoffending  youth.  The  press,  and,  to  its  shame 
be  it  said,  the  so-called  "religious  press,"  bitterly 
denounced  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  seemed  bent  on  crush- 
ing him.  The  hardest  names  were  hurled  at  him. 
"Mountebank,"  "charlatan,"  "fanatic,"  "blas- 
phemer," "ignorant,"  "Punch  in  the  pulpit,"  these 
and  similar  epithets  were  freely  bestowed  upon 
him,  The  prophets  who  prophesied  without  the 
gift  of  prophecy,  knew,  of  course,  that  this  thing 
could  not  last.  He  was  a  "wili-o'-the-wisp,"  "a 
flash  in  the  pan,"  it  would  all  end  soon!  But  Mr 
Spurgeon  had  come  to  stay.  And  to  hear  him  talk 
of  those  times,  to  see  the  smile  on  his  face  as  he 
assured  you  that  God  was  overruling  these  darts 
of  the  Evil  One  for  his  own  glory,  was  most  enjoy- 
able. He  could  laugh  at  it  all,  looking  back,  but 
it  was  no  laughing  matter  then.  It  would  have 
upset  a  weak  man.  It  would  have  broken  the 
heart  of  a  coward.  Back  to  New  Park  Street  and 
then  back  again  to  Exeter  Hall,  and  all  the  while 
the  tide  kept  rolling  in.  The  press  carried  the 
message  of  this  strange  young  preacher  all  over  the 
land.  On  the  seventh  of  October,  1857,  the  Indian 
mutiny  startled  the  British  nation,  the  horrors  of 
Cawnpore  shocked  and  humiliated  England.  A 
fast-day  was  appointed,  and  on  that  day  Mr.  Spur- 
geon preached  in  the  Crystal  Palace  at  Sydenham 
3 


34  SPURGEON 

to  24,000  people.  The  rich,  full,  mellow  voice  of 
the  young  preacher  was  heard  to  the  utmost  verge 
of  the  crowd.  His  text  was,  "Hear  ye  rod,  and  who 
hath  appointed  it."  There  were  no  words  of  com- 
fort for  the  Government  in  that  sermon.  He  im- 
peached their  treatment  of  India,  and  reminded 
them  that  only  righteousness  could  exalt  a  nation. 

In  the  following  year  Mr.  Spurgeon  took  the 
great  Surrey  Music  Hall,  a  place  capable  of  hold- 
ing 10,000  persons.  Here  occurred  on  the  nine- 
teenth of  October,  1858,  the  fatal  disaster  of  death 
to  eight  persons  and  severe  wounding  to  sixteen 
others,  as  the  result  of  a  false  alarm  of  fire.  For 
years  Mr.  Spurgeon  felt  the  shock  of  that  terrible 
disaster.  He  never  forgot  it;  it  was  to  the  very 
last  a  most  painful  memory. 

The  project  of  building  the  Metropolitan  Taber- 
nacle was  now  launched.  Mr.  Spurgeon  deter- 
mined on  a  large,  simple  building,  that  should  be 
opened  free  of  debt.  He  went  all  over  England 
preaching,  receiving  half  of  such  collections  as  were 
made  for  his  Tabernacle;  by  this  means  he  was  a 
blessing  to  hundreds  of  struggling  churches,  and 
his  preaching  was  attended  with  the  surest  tokens 
of  the  divine  favor.  Men  were  redeemed  from  sin, 
and  sluggards  in  the  churches  were  awakened  as 
men  awakened  from  the  dead.  So  the  tide  rolled 
in!  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached,  on  an  average,  twelve 
times  a  week.  What  shall  we  say  of  that  preach- 
ing.'' To  those  who  ever  heard  him,  description 
is  needless;  to  those  who  never  heard  him,  descrip- 


TO    THE    TABERNACLE  35 

tion  is  useless.  One  wonderful  sermon  looms  up 
from  the  past.  It  was  preached  in  the  pulpit  of 
the  late  Hugh  Stowell  Brown,  of  Myrtle  Street, 
Liverpool.  The  occasion  was  one  of  the  annual 
gatherings  of  the  Baptist  Union.  The  text  was 
from  one  of  John's  brief  epistles,  written  to  a 
friend  who  was  evidently  poor  in  purse,  and  feeble 
in  health.  It  runs  thus:  "Beloved,  I  wish  that 
thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in  health,  even  as  thy 
soul  prospereth."  The  point  of  the  sermon  was 
"spiritual  health."  In  his  own  inimitable  way 
the  preacher  ran  the  analogy  of  the  spiritual  and 
physical  to  a  marvelous  conclusion.  "What  John 
meant,"  he  said,  "what  he  earnestly  prayed  for, 
was  that  his  friend  might  be  as  rich  in  material 
things,  and  as  healthy  in  body,  as  he  was  rich  in 
spiritual  things."  Then,  with  a  sudden  turn,  he 
appealed  to  his  audience  and  asked  them  what 
their  condition  w^ould  be  if  their  physical  condition 
was  the  exact  counterpart  of  their  spiritual  state; 
and,  turning  first  to  one  point  of  the  assembly  and 
then  to  another,  he  said:  "You  would  be  blind, 
for  the  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  your  spirit- 
ual vision;  and  you  would  be  deaf,  for  God  calls 
and  you  will  not  hear;  mafty  of  you  would  be 
paralytics,  some  would  have  withered  arms,  some 
would  have  palsy" — and  then,  pausing  a  moment,  he 
lifted  his  hands  and,  in  a  very  agony  of  spirit,  he 
cried  aloud — "And  many  of  you,  God  only  knows 
how  many,  but,  alas!  many  of  you  would  fall 
down  dead  in  your  pews,  for  you  are   dead  in  trcs- 


36  SPURGEON 

passes  and  sin!"  The  silence  that  followed  was 
painful;  it  seemed  as  if  the  church  was  instantly 
changed  into  a  charnel-house.  The  congregation 
seemed  horror-struck.  It  was  some  time  before 
Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  was  able  to  overmaster  the 
deep  emotion  that  possessed  him.  At  last  he 
rallied,  and  then,  with  a  glad  voice,  he  cried  out: 
"But  it  is  not  too  late!  There  is  life!  Life!  Life!! 
Life ! !  ! 

"  'Life  for  a  look  at  the  crucified  One.'  " 

The  sermon  ended.  Scarcely  anyone  joined  in 
the  singing.  The  impression  was  simply  awful. 
This  was  an  exception.  Eight  out  of  ten  of  all 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons  were  as  bright  as  a  morn- 
ing in  June,  and  as  hopeful  as  the  budding  spring- 
time: Twelve  hundred  and  fifty  of  his  sermons 
have  been  published.  They  have  been  translated 
into  all  civilized  languages.  Millions  of  copies 
have  been  sold  and  given  away.  In  Australia  an 
admirer  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  paid  for  the  publication 
of  a  sermon  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  in  the  weekly  paper. 
The  sermon  was  published  and  paid  for  as  an 
advertisement. 

The  building  of  the  Tabernacle  was  a  colossal 
undertaking.  Any  man  less  bold  and  confident 
would  have  utterly  failed  in  such  an  enterprise. 
But  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  no  doubt  nor  misgiving. 
It  was  the  Lord's  work,  he  said,  and  he  would 
carry  it  through.  Money  came  in  marvelous  ways, 
and  from  all  sorts  of  strange  sources.  Mr.  Spur- 
geon relates  an  incident  of  this  period  that  is  per- 
fectly romantic.      He  says: 


TO   THE   TABERNACLE  37 

"When  we  came  to  the  undertaking  of  respon- 
sibilities, there  was  a  natural  shrinking  on  the  part 
of  the  committee  with  which  we  started.  No  one 
could  be  blamed;  it  was  a  great  risk,  and,  person- 
ally, I  did  not  wish  anyone  to  undertake  it.  I  was 
quite  prepared  for  any  risk,  but  then  I  had  no 
money  of  my  own,  and  so  was  a  man  of  straw.  I 
say  there  was  a  measure  of  fear  and  trembling, 
but  I  had  none.  I  was  as  sure  of  the  matter  as 
possible,  and  reckoned  on  paying  all  the  cost. 
This  quiet  assurance,  however,  had  a  foundation 
which  reflects  credit  on  one  who  has  for  some 
years  gone  to  his  reward.  When  I  was  riding 
with  a  friend  to  preach  in  the  country,  a  gentle- 
man overtook  us  and  asked  me  if  I  would  get  out 
of  the  trap  and  ride  with  him  in  the  gig,  as  ht 
wanted  to  speak  to  me.  I  did  so.  He  said,  'You 
have  got  to  build  that  big  place.'  I  said,  'Yes.' 
He  said,  'You  will  find  that  many  friends  will  fee'i 
nervous  over  it.  Now  as  a  business  man  I  am  sure 
you  will  succeed,  and  besides  that,  God  is  with  the 
work  and  it  cannot  fail.  I  want  you  never  to  feel 
nervous  or  downcast  about  it.'  I  told  him  that  it 
was  a  great  work,  and  that  I  hoped  the  Lord  would 
enable  me  to  carry  it  through. 

"  'What  do  you  think, '  said  he,   'will  be  required, 
at  the  outside,  to  carry  it  through.^' 

"I  said,  ';^20,ooo  must  do  it  in  addition  to  what 
we  have. ' 

'"Then, '  he  said,  'I  will  let  you  have  the  ;^20,ooo 
on  the  condition  that   you   shall  only   keep  what 


38  .  SPURGEON 

you  need  of  it  to  finish  the  building.  Mark,'  said 
he,  'I  do  not  expect  to  give  more  than  ^^50,  but 
you  shall  have  bonds  and  leases  to  the  full  value 
of  ;!^20,ooo  to  fall  back  upon.'  This  was  royal. 
I  told  no  one,  but  the  ease  of  mind  this  act  gave 
me  was  of  the  utmost  value.  I  had  quite  as  much 
need  of  faith,  for  I  resolved  that  none  of  my 
friend's  money  should  be  touched;  but  I  had  no 
excuse  for  fear.  God  was  very  good  to  me,  but 
by  this  act  I  was  recalled  from  all  personal  boast- 
ing. My  friend  gave  his  ^^50  and  no  more,  and  I 
felt  deeply  thankful  to  him  for  the  help  which  he 
would  have  rendered  had  it  been  required." 

At  last,  amid  boundless  rejoicing,  the  great  Taber- 
nacle, capable  of  holding  from  6,000  to  7,000  peo- 
ple, was  opened  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  March,  1861. 
It  cost  $137,078.55,  and  every  cent  was  paid  before 
the  first  hallelujah  was  sung.  For  thirty  years  Mr. 
Spurgeon  preached  in  that  Tabernacle  twice  a  Sab- 
bath; a  record  almost  unequaled  in  the  history  of 
the  modern  ministry,  if  any  estimate  is  taken  of  the 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  men  and  women  to  whom 
he  must  have  preached.  And  yet  the  people  never 
tired  of  "the  old,  old  story;"  nor  did  the  preacher 
grow  weary  of  the  telling. 

At  the  opening  of  the  Tabernacle  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
father  made  the  following  remarks: 

"I  always  thought  my  son  did  wrong  in  coming 
to  London;  now  you  see  that  I  was  wrong.  I 
always  thought  he  was  wrong  in  not  going  to  col- 
lege.    I  tried  three   or   four  times   with   him,  one 


< 
z 

W 


"i^C  LW 


^"-t^i^'*;^,*-'"'* 


^iVo 


TO   THE    TABERNACLE  4 I 

night  with  a  dear  friend  that  loved  him,  but  it  was 
no  use;  he  said,  'No,  I  will  never  go  to  college, 
only  in  strict  obedience  to  you  as  a  father. '  There 
I  left  the  matter;  and  I  see  that  God  has  been 
with  him,  though  I  thought  it  was  a  wrong  step  in 
him  to  go  to  London.  And  I  thought  it  was  a 
wrong  step  for  me  to  come  here  to-night;  but  per- 
haps I  may  be  mistaken  again.  I  can  tell  you  it 
is  one  of  the  happiest  days  of  my  life.  I  feel 
beyond  myself  when  I  think  of  the  kindness  which 
has  been  shown  to  him  when  but  a  youth.  I  ascribe 
it  all  to  God's  goodness  and  the  earnest  prayers  of 
his  people.  He  has  been  exposed  to  temptation 
from  every  source,  and  even  now,  my  friends,  he 
is  not  free  from  it.  You  have  prayed  for  him,  and 
God  has  sustained  him.  Oh!  let  me  entreat  you 
to  continue  your  prayers.  Everyone  here  to-night, 
go  home  and  pray  for  your  pastor.  A  meeting  likfc 
this  is  enough  to  carry  a  man  beyond  himself  and 
fill  his  heart  with  pride;  but  the  grace  of  God  is 
all-sufficient." 

On  the  fifth  of  May,  1879,  Mr.  Spurgeon  cele- 
brated his  silver  wedding.  His  friends,  who  had 
again  and  again  endeavored  in  vain  to  press  upon 
him  some  substantial  token  of  their  regard,  insisted 
that  this  happy  occasion  was  just  the  time  when 
they  might  most  appropriately  express  their  love 
for  their  pastor  and  his  wife.  Accordingly,  on  the 
bright  May-day  of  1879,  they  presented  him  with 
the  magnificent  sum  of  $31,244.42.  Every  penny 
of  this  money  was  devoted  to   benevolent  objects 


42  SPURGEON 

in  connection  with  his  Tabernacle  work.  Twenty- 
five  thousand  dollars  were  devoted  to  the  endow- 
ment of  the  Tabernacle  almshouses. 

The  generosity  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  proverbial. 
If  he  had  chosen,  he  might  have  been  a  millionaire; 
but  a  millionaire  preacher  seemed  to  him  to  be  a 
strange  anomaly.  He  was  able  to  live  with  great 
comfort  on  the  profits  of  his  books ;  and  it  is  stated, 
on  good  authority,  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  man\' 
years  gave  away  every  penny  he  received  from  the 
Tabernacle  to  benevolent  purposes. 

The  very  last  message  he  sent  from  his  death- 
bed at  Mentone  inclosed  $500  as  a  contribution  to 
the  general  funds  of  the  Tabernacle. 

A  pleasant  memory  of  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
red-letter  days  demands  a  moment's  thought.  It 
was  the  nineteenth  of  June,  1884.  If  one  had 
been  crossing  London  bridge  early  on  that  bright 
summer  morning,  he  would  have  fancied  that 
that  ancient  thoroughfare  was  more  than  usually 
crowded.  The  tide  of  traffic  was  bent  southward, 
and  if  one  had  followed  the  crowds  he  would  soon 
have  found  himself  at  "the  Elephant  and  Castle," 
and  a  little  further  on  would  have  noticed  the 
streams  of  people  from  Old  Kent  road  and  West- 
minister and  from  every  quarter  pressing  their  way 
to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Tabernacle.  The  occasion  was 
the  celebration  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  jubilee  birthday. 

It  was  a  grand  occasion,  an  occasion  of  which 
any  man  might  be  proud.  There,  in  tlie  fullness 
of  his  prime,  stood  a  man,  who,  by  a  life  of  simple 


TO   THE   TABERNACLE  43 

devotion  to  the  cause  of  God  and  to  the  good  of 
his  fellowmen,  had  won  for  himself  such  a  place  in 
the  hearts  of  all  who  knew  him  as  to  make  one 
feel  that  the  platform  of  the  Tabernacle  that  sum- 
mer day  was  more  to  be  envied  than  the  throne 
of  a  king. 

Seven  thousand  people  crowded  into  the  spacious 
house  of  prayer  to  offer  the  pastor  their  congratu- 
lations, and  they  were  but  representative  of  seventy 
times  7,000  more  all  over  the  Christian  world,  who 
could  not  be  present  in  person,  though  they  were 
there  in  heart  and  sympathy. 

Members  of  all  religious  comrnunities  were  there; 
Jews  and  Greeks,  dwellers  from  all  nations  under 
heaven,  not  forgetting  America.  The  whole  world 
came  together  to  say  "God  bless  you"  to  this 
simple-minded  man,  who  made  no  other  claim  to 
this  kindly  greeting  than  that  he  had  spent  his 
days  in  "preaching  Christ  and  Him  crucified." 

All  this  time  he  was  busy  with  his  pen  prepar- 
ing and  compiling  books  that  will  live  for  genera- 
tions. Including  the  weekly  sermon,  and  his  many 
articles  in  "The  Sword  and  Trowel,"  Mr.  Spur- 
geon's  printed  works  have  probably  been  more 
voluminous  than  the  productions  of  any  modern 
author.  The  weekly  sermon,  beginning  with  the 
first  week  of  1855,  has  completed  thirty-six  yearly 
volumes.  The  average  circulation  has  been  main- 
tained at  25,000  weekly.  The  monthly  magazine 
has  also  completed  twenty-six  yearly  volvmes.  Of 
the  "Treasury  of  David,"  in   seven   8vo.    volumes, 


44  SPURGEON 

something  like  130,000  volumes  have  been  sold. 
Of  "Lectures  to  my  Students"  and  "Commenting 
and  Commentaries,"  between  60,000  and  70,000 
volumes  have  been  disposed  of.  Then  "John 
Ploughman's  Talk  and  Pictures"  together  show  a 
circulation  of  half  a  million  volumes.  The  other 
works  are  very  numerous,  all  being  more  or  less 
popular. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  greatly  annoyed  some  years 
ago  by  hints  that  were  made  pretty  freely  to  the 
effect  that  he  was  intent  on  establishing  a  new 
denomination  bearing  his  own  name.  How  he 
viewed  this  matter  the  following  words  will  show: 

"There  is  no  word  in  the  world  so  hateful  to 
our  heart  as  that  word  Spurgeonism,  and  no 
thought  further  from  our  soul  than  that  of  form- 
ing a  new  sect.  Our  course  has  been,  and  we 
hope  ever  will  be,  an  independent  one;  but  to 
charge  us  with  separating  from  the  general  organ- 
ization of  the  religious  world,  and  even  of  the 
Baptist  denomination,  is  to  perpetrate  an  un- 
founded libel.  We  preach  no  new  gospel,  we  de- 
sire no  new  objects,  and  follow  them  in  no  novel 
spirit.  We  love  Christ  better  than  a  sect,  and 
truth  better  than  a  party,  and  so  far  are  not  denom- 
inational; but  we  are  in  open  union  with  the  Bap- 
tists for  the  very  reason  that  we  cannot  endure 
isolation.  He  who  searches  all  hearts  knows  that 
our  aim  and  object  is  not  to  gather  a  band  around 
self,  but  to  unite  a  company  around  the  Savior. 
'Let  my  name  perish,  but  let  Christ's  name  last  for- 


TO    THE    TABERMACLE  45 

ever,'  said  George  Whitefield;  and  so  has  Charles 
Spurgeon  said  a  hundred  times.  We  aid  and  assist 
the  Baptist  churches  to  the  full  extent  of  our  pow- 
er, although  we  do  not  restrict  our  energies  to  them 
alone,  and  in  this  those  churches  are  far  enough 
from  blaming  us.  Our  joy  and  rejoicing  is  great 
in  the  fellowship  of  all  believers,  and  the  forming 
of  a  fresh  sect  is  work  which  we  leave  to  the  devil, 
whom  it  befits  far  more  than  ourselves.  It  is  true 
that  it  has  long  been  in  our  power  to  commence  a 
new  denomination,  but  it  is  not  true  that  it  has 
ever  been  contemplated  by  us  or  our  friends.  We 
desire  as  much  as  possible  to  work  with  the  exist- 
ing agencies,  and  when  we  commence  new  ones 
our  friends  must  believe  that  it  is  with  no  idea  of 
organizing  a  fresh  community." 

Whether  a  member  of  the  Peace  Society  or  not 
Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  strong  advocate  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  peace.  The  following  vigorous  passage 
is  found  in  an  address  he  issued  to  the  electors  of 
Southwark  in  the  midst  of  a  general  election  con- 
test. He  said:  "Great  questions  are  involved  in 
the  struggle;  never  were  weightier  matters  before 
the  nation.  *  *  *  Are  we  to  go  on  invading  and 
slaughtering  in  order  to  obtain  a  scientific  frontier 
and  feeble  neighbors.-'  How  many  wars  may  we 
reckon  on  between  now  and  1886.-'  What  quan- 
tity of  killing  will  be  done  in  that  time,  and  how 
many  of  our  weaker  neighbors  will  have  their 
houses  burned  and  their  fields  ravaged  by  this 
Christian  nation?" 


46  SPURGEON 

Paxton  Hood,    who  is   no  mean    authority  upon 
pulpit    eloquence,  thus    speaks    of    what  we  have 
always  regarded  as  one  of  the  wonderful  gifts  of  the 
orator — his  voice: — "Once  heard    it   can  never  be 
forgotten;  its  sweetness,  its   perfect   submission  to 
the  will  of  the  speaker,  its  range,  and  a  somewhat 
that  is  peculiar  to  loving  and  gracious  souls,  linger 
in  the   heart   with   an   undying    charm   and   force. 
.   .   ,   There   can   be   no   doubt   that  perhaps  first, 
and  before  all  things,  the  voice  counts  for  much — 
a  voice  of  astonishing  compass — a  voice  the  waves 
from  which  roll  with  astonishing  ease  over  the  im- 
mense company,  full,  sweet,  and   clear — clear  and 
ringing  as  a  bell;    a  voice  like  the  man  and  the  mat- 
ter— independent  of  most  nervous  impressions  and 
all  nervous  agitations.      It    is   a  clarion  of  a  voice. 
Other  voices   of   orators   have   pierced   us  more — 
have  possessed   more   accent — -have    been  able  to 
whisper  better;  but  we  never    knew  nor  conceived 
a  voice  with  such  thunderous  faculty.    I  have  called 
it  a  trumpet,  and,  better    still,  a  bell:    it    is   not  a 
perfect  peal,  but  its  tones  roll  on — there  is  no  ex- 
haustion;  the    tones  are   not    many,  but   they  are 
full  and  sweeping,  and  they  give  the  idea  of  a  great, 
fully-informed,  and  immensely    capacious  will  and 
nature.     Mr.  Spurgeon  might   possess  many   of  his 
mental  attributes,  but  manifestly  this  power  of  be- 
ing easily  heard,  of  always  striking  the  right  pitch, 
so  that  he  compasses   immense   assemblies,  is  one 
great  element  of    success   in   holding  the  attention 
of  masses  of  people.     It  is  an  old   idea,  and  a  very 


TO    THE    TABERNACLE  47 

true  one,  we  believe,  that  the  voice  is  the  man;  as 
the  voice  is,  so  the  soul;  a  full  voice  is  a  full  nat- 
ure. The  last  achievement  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  (in 
1867)  will  be  regarded  by  many  as  the  most  won- 
derful of  all  in  his  early  but  extraordinary  career. 
■Whatever  the  capacities  of  the  Agricultural  Hall 
of  Islington  may  be,  and  its  minimum  of  12,000, 
or  its  maximum  of  20,000  auditors,  unquestionably 
the  Church  notes  in  its  history  very  few  instances 
of  preachers  able  to  attract  and  to  hold  in  atten- 
tion so  mighty  a  mass.  True,  audiences  grow  like 
avalanches,  and,  as  force  grows,  the  means  of  sus- 
taining force  also  grow.  But  the  greatest  of  the 
preachers  the  Church  has  known,  "  such  as  Chry- 
sostom,  Augustine,  Hall,  Chalmers,  or  Irving,  how- 
ever the  passion  of  their  accents  might  have  been 
desired,  and  the  majesty  or  music  of  their  elo- 
quence, would  have  foQnd  themselves  as  foiled  by 
their  own  voice  as  a  silver  bell  on  the  mast  of  a 
vessel  in  the  roar  of  a  storm,  in  immense  masses." 
The  reader  will  not  be  surprised  to  learn  that 
Mr.  Spurgeon 's  study  Bible  was  completely  worn 
out.  All  those  who  have  made  good  use  of  their 
Bibles  know  that  the  more  a  Bible  is  used  the 
more  valuable  it  becomes.  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  the 
old  study  Bible,  that  was  interlined  and  thumb- 
marked  and  filled  with  marginal  notes,  re-bound. 
On  the  fly-leaf  of  the  Bible  are  these  significant 
lines: 


48  SPURGEON 

"C.  H.  Spurgeon,   1856." 
"The  lamp  of  my  study." 
"The  light  is  bright  as  ever!      1861." 
"Oh,  that  mine  eyes  were  more  opened !     1864." 
"Being  worn  to  pieces,  re-bound    1870.      The  lan- 
tern mended,  and  the  light  as  joyous 
to  mine  eyes  as  ever!" 


CHAPTER   V 

FROM  MENTONE    TO    NORWOOD:     THE  LAST  OF  EARTH 

"The  Master's  approval  is  the  servant's  best  wages." 

— Alexander  Alaclaren . 

"Servant  of  God,  well  done! 
Rest  from  thy  loved  employ; 
The  battle's  fought,  the  victory's  won — 
Enter  thy  Master's  joy." 

— James  Montgomery. 

The  death  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  which 
occurred  at  Mentone  on  Sunday  evening,  January 
31,  1892,  occasioned  unfeigned  regret  throughout 
the  whole  Christian  world.  He  had  been  a  sufferer 
for  many  years,  and  the  fact  that  he  wrought  so 
bravely,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  in  suffering 
and  weakness  and  exceeding  pain,  is  to  his  lasting 
renown.  All  through  the  summer  of  1891  the  sad- 
dest fears  were  entertained,  but  with  the  Christ- 
mas season  and  the  dawn  of  the  new  year  there 
came  hope  that  was  destined  to  be  suddenly  and 
rudely  blighted. 

The  funeral  of  ]Mr.  Spurgeon  began  at  Mentone, 
in  the  south  of  France — whither  he  had  gone,  year 
after  year,  in  search  of  rest  and  health — it  ended  at 
Norwood;  and  not  often  in  the  history  of  the  world 
have  so  many  followed  a  devout  man  to  his  burial, 
"making  lamentation  over  him." 

The  week-long  program  of  the  arrangements  for 

40 


50  SPURGEON 

the  burial  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  began  at  Mentone,  at 
noon,  Thursday,  February  4th.  A  very  simple 
service  was  held  in  the  Scotch  Presbyterian  Church, 
which,  a  year  ago,  was  opened  with  a  sermon 
preached  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself.  The  coffin  was 
placed  in  front  of  the  rostrum.  Round  it  were 
grouped  a  few  wreaths,  and  at  the  head  were  two  tall 
palm  branches  crossed,  symbolic  of  the  faithful  war- 
rior's victory.  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  still  too  prostrate 
from  the  sense  of  her  loss  and  the  exhaustion  of 
her  long  season  of  trial  to  be  present  at  the  service, 
but  she  sent  the  message,  "He  hath  done  all  things 
well."  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sister,  Mrs.  Jackson,  and 
her  husband,  represented  the  family,  and  other 
mourners  were  Mr.  Harrald,  the  deceased's  secre- 
tary, and  Mr.  Allison,  one  of  the  deacons,  repre- 
senting the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  and  Rev.  B. 
Samuel,  representing  the  Pastors'  College. 

Rev.  R.  Somerville,  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian 
church,  conducted  the  service.  He  said  Mr.  Spur- 
geon belonged  not  alone  to  the  Tabernacle  and  to 
England,  but  to  every  Christian  country. 

Rev.  M.  Delapierre,  on  behalf  of  the  Protestant 
churches  of  France,  spoke  of  the  late  pastor's 
interest  in  those  churches.  P'rom  the  first  his  ser- 
mons had  been  regularly  translated,  and  in  their 
French  form  had  made  a  lasting  impression  in  that 
country. 

They  stood,  said  Mr.  Harrald,  in  the  presence 
of  what  men  called  death,  but  Mr.  Spurgeon  would 
continue  to  live  in  the  gospel  he   had    preached. 


FROM    MENTONE    TO    NORWOOD  5 1 

He  had  fallen  on  the  battle-field,  fighting  for  truth 
to  the  last,  and  was  still  grasping  the  sword  in  his 
moment  of  victor}'.  The  first  letter  opened  after 
his  death  contained  a  check  for  ;i^500  for  the 
Stockwell  Orphanage. 

The   remains    were    conveyed   to    London  and 
placed  on  the  rostrum  of  the  Tabernacle. 

The  hold  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  on  the  minds  and  the 
hearts  of  the  people  was  strikingl}'  shown  on  Tues- 
day, February  9th,  when  from  seven  in  the  morn- 
ing till  seven  at  night  the  Tabernacle  was  open, 
and  an  incessant  stream  of  people  passed  through 
to  view  the  cofiin.  The  arrangements  were  perfect. 
During  the  greater  part  of  the  day  there  were  hun- 
dreds waiting  outside  for  their  turn  to  enter. 
These  were  marshaled  in  queue  by  the  police,  and 
were  admitted  inside  the  iron  gates  in  batches. 
Thence  they  were  drafted  as  rapidly  as  possible 
into  the  Tabernacle  by  each  of  the  great  doors, 
two  by  two.  Inside  each  door  a  deacon  stood, 
counting  the  never-ceasing  files,  and  other  deacons 
and  elders  along  the  aisles  urged  the  people  to 
pass  on.  Early  in  the  morning  many  working- 
men,  some  carrying  their  tools,  went  to  see  the 
coffin  of  the  people's  pastor.  Later  in  the  day 
'came  visitors  from  every  part  of  London.  The 
South  London  lines  and  the  omnibus  and  train 
companies  strengthened  their  services  to  accom- 
modate the  traffic.  In  the  afternoon,  women  of 
the  working-class  made  up  a  great  part  of  the 
stream.  Many  carried  babies.  They  were  poorly 
4 


52  SPURGEON 

dressed,  but  their   faces   and   their  subdued  voices 
showed  how  they  felt  the  loss. 

It  was  a  dull,  dark  day,  with  a  drizzling  rain, 
and  the  great  Tabernacle,  with  its  vast  area  and 
galleries  of  empty  pews,  looked  very  gloomy,  not- 
withstanding that  all  the  lights  were  lit.  One 
seemed  to  realize  here  more  than  anywhere  else 
the  extent  of  the  loss.  The  Metropolitan  Taber- 
nacle without  Mr.  Spurgeon!  It  is  difficult  to  im- 
agine it,  but  the  sorrowful  fact  has  to  be  mastered. 
As  we  advance  slowly  up  the  aisle,  we  cannot 
at  first  see  the  coffin  for  the  wreaths  in  front  of 
it.  The  rule  against  flowers  has  not  been  inexor- 
ably enforced.  One  very  beautiful  wreath,  sent 
by  the  Baptist  churches  of  Belfast,  was  given  the 
place  of  honor.  It  was  of  white  flowers,  and  was 
in  the  shape  of  a  harp  with  broken  strings,  sur- 
mounted by  a  sword  and  trowel.  On  either  side 
of  the  coffin  were  placed  a  number  of  the  tall  palm 
branches  from  Mentone,  and  on  the  rostrum  were 
other  palms.  The  rostrum,  the  pulpit,  and  the 
front  of  the  gallery  were  draped  with  black,  having 
a  white  border,  and  in  white  letters,  on  the  black 
bordering  of  the  rostrum  rails,  were  the  words: 
"I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my 
course,  I  have  kept  the  faith."  Around  the  front 
of  the  upper  platform  was  the  inscription:  "Re- 
member the  words  I  said  unto  you,  being  yet  pres- 
ent with  you."  A  marble  statuette  of  Mr.  Spur- 
gecjn,  from  the  Pastors'  College,  was  placed  amid 
a  group  of  palms  on  the  lower  platform,  overlook- 


THE   DEAD  PASTOR    LYING   IN  STATE 


THE 


^£W  YORK 


^^'^^IC  LIBRARY- 


f 


-:j 


THE    LAST    OF    EARTH  55 

ing  the  coffin.  It  is  an  excellent  likeness  of  the 
pastor  as  he  appeared  ten  years  ago.  Wistfully 
the  visitors  looked  at  the  coffin  as   they  passed   it. 

A  deacon  presented  to  each  a  cop}-  of  Mr.  Spur- 
geon's  sermon,  "S.  S. ;  or,  the  Sinner  Saved,"  and 
as  they  passed  out  they  were  invited  to  give  a 
farewell  contribution  to  the  Orphanage  and  Pas- 
tors' College,  and  very  generously  they  responded. 
As  they  left  the  Tabernacle  at  the  rear,  they  saw 
the  scaffolding  used  in  the  construction  of  the 
hydraulic  lift  that  was  to  have  helped  the  preacher 
to  ascend  his  pulpit.  In  the  street,  to  which  they 
emerged,  was  a  long  line  of  men  selling  photographs 
and  biographies  of  Mr.  Spurgeo'n.  The  enumera- 
tors counted,  during  the  day,  more  than  55,000 
people  who  passed  through  the  Tabernacle. 

A  continued  series  of  services  were  held  by  the 
members  of  the  Tabernacle,  the  students  of  the 
Pastors'  College,  and  the  representatives  of  various 
Christian  denominations  took  part.  The  last  lov- 
ing service  took  place  at  Norwood  cemetery.  The 
bishop  of  Rochester  uttered  the  final  benediction. 
And  now  after  a  life  of  suffering  and  toil,  he  rests 
in  the  peaceful  city  of  the  dead. 


CHAPTER  VI 


THE    PASTORS     COLLEGE 


'•How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that 
bringeth  good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace;  that  bringeth  good  tid- 
ings of  good,  that  publisheth  salvation;  that  saith  unto  Zion,  Thy 
God  reigneth."  — Isaiah. 

The  Pastors'  College  was  one  of  the  first  results 
of  that  great  faculty  for  organization  which  was 
so  strong  in  the  pastor  of  the  Tabernacle.  It  was 
established  in  1856,  and  from  that  day  to  this  it 
has  rendered  special  and  invaluable  service.  It 
was  designed  especially  to  help  preachers  to  preach, 
not  to  make  scholars  and  theologians. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  had  not  been  long  settled  at  the 
Tabernacle  before  he  found  himself  surrounded  by 
a  number  of  earnest  young  men  who  seemed  to 
have  caught  his  spirit,  and  who,  without  special 
invitation,  to  say  nothing  of  ordination,  drifted 
into  the  work  of  preaching.  The  fire  burned  and 
they  spoke.  They  said  with  the  Apostles:  "We 
cannot  but  speak  the  things  we  have  seen  and 
heard." 

These  free  lances  of  the  pulpit  found  large   and 

eager  audiences  among  the   common   people,  and 

they  were  eminently  successful  in  leading  men  and 

women  to  a  better  life.      They  were   soon   known 

as  "Spurgeon's  men,"  or  "Tabernacle  evangelists." 

56 


THE    PASTORS'    COLLEGE  57 

What  was  to  be  done  ?  They  were,  for  the  most 
part,  rough  and  uncultivated.  Many  of  them  made 
the  grave  mistake  of  trying  to  imitate  Mr.  Spur- 
geon,  and  crude  as  these  imitations  were,  they 
resulted   in  a  certain    kind  of  popularity. 

It  was  this  kind  of  material,  just  budding 
into  usefulness,  that  forced  upon  Mr.  Spurgeon 
the  difficult  question — what  is  to  be  done.^  The 
establishment  of  the  Pastors'  College  was  the 
practical  answer  to  the  question.  These  men  were 
not  fitted  for  the  scholarly  exposition  of  the  word 
of  God,  and  never  would  be.  Moreover,  there 
were  colleges  all  over  the  country  especially  adapted 
for  the  higher  kind  of  education.  What  was  wanted 
was  an  institution  where  these  rough-and-ready 
men  could  be  drilled  in  the  simple  rudiments  of 
education,  and  so  fitted  for  the  work  of  preaching 
and  the  discharge  of  plain  pastoral  duties.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  laid  his  plans.  No  candidate  could  enter 
his  college  without  the  hearty  and  enthusiastic 
recommendation  of  the  church  of  which  he  was  a 
member;  and  further,  he  must  give  satisfactory 
proof  of  his  ability  to  preach. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  thus  explains  the  purpose  he  had 
in  view  in  the  establishment  of  the  Pastors'  Col- 
lege: 

"From  the  commencement  our  main  object  was 
to  help  men  who,  from  lack  of  funds,  could  not 
obtain  an  education  for  themselves.  These  have 
been  supplied  not  only  with  tuition  and  books, 
gratis,  but  with   board   and   lodging,  and   in   some 


58  SPURGEON 

cases  with  clothes  and  pocket-money.  Some  very 
successful  brethren  needed  everything,  and  if  they 
had  been  required  to  pay,  they  must  have  remained 
ilhterate  preachers  to  this  day.  Still,  year  by 
year,  the  number  of  men  who  are  ready  to  support 
themselves,  in  whole  or  in  part,  has  increased;  and 
I  believe  that  it  is  increasing,  and  will  increase. 
As  a  college,  we  have  had  to  struggle  with  a  repute 
based  upon  falsehood  and  created  by  jealousy;  but 
this  has  not  injured  us  to  any  great  extent,  for 
men  come  to  us  from  America,  Australia,  and  the 
Cape,  and  applications  have  frequently  been  made 
from  foreign  countries.  German  students  have 
attended  our  classes  during  their  own  vacations,  and 
members  of  other  colleges  are  usually  to  be  seen 
at  our  lectures.  The  institution  never  deserved  to 
be  charged  with  giving  a  mere  apology  for  an 
education;  and  if  ever  that  reproach  could  have 
been  justly  cast  upon  us,  it  is  utterly  undeserved 
now  that  the  time  of  study  has  become  more  ex- 
tended, and  a  fuller  course  of  training  has  thus 
become  possible.  Scholarship  for  its  own  sake 
was  never  sought,  and  never  will  be  within  the 
Pastors'  College;  but  to  help  men  to  become  effi- 
cient preachers  has  been,  and  ever  will  be,  the  sole 
aim  of  all  those  concerned  in  its  management.  I 
shall  not,  in  order  to  increase  our  prestige,  refuse 
poor  men,  or  zealous  young  Christians  whose  early 
education  has  been  neglected.  Pride  would  sug- 
gest that  we  take  'a  better  class  of  men;'  but 
experience   shows   that   they   are  not    better;  that 


■^ 


u 
t/) 


THE    pastors'    college  6 1 

eminentl}'  useful  men  spring  from  all  ranks,  that 
diamonds  may  be  found  in  the  rough,  and  that 
some  who  need  most  pains  in  the  poHshing,  reward 
our  labor  a  thousandfold.  My  friends  will  still 
stand  by  me  in  my  desire  to  aid  the  needy  but 
pious  brother,  and  we  shall  rejoice  together  as  we 
continually  see  the  plowman,  the  fisherman,  and 
the  mechanic  taught  the  way  of  God  more  per- 
fectly." 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  this  institution  has 
been  eminently  successful.  The  erection  of  col- 
lege buildings  came  to  be  a  necessity.  They  were 
erected  at  a  cost  of  $75,000,  every  cent  of  which 
was  provided.  Fifteen  thousand  dollars  of  this 
sum  was  presented  by  awidow  lady  as  a  tribute 
to  her  dead  husband^  and  $10,000  were  given  as  a 
thank-offering  by  one  who  had  profited  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  sermons. 

Hundreds  of  churches, have  been  established  by 
the  students  of  the  Pastors'  College;  many  thou- 
sands of  members  have  been  brought  in  church  fel- 
lowship, and  the  exact  work  Mr.  Spurgeon  set  to 
do,  has  been  accomplished  to  an  extent  beyond 
all  anticipation. 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  addresses  to  his  students  contain 
some  of  the  wisest  things  he  ever  said.  We  pre- 
sent a  few  selections: 

"I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  am  made  of  such  ill 
stuff  that  my  Lord  has  to  chasten  me  often  and 
sorely.      I  am  like  a  pen  that  will  not  write  unless 


62  SPURGEON 

it  be  often  nibbed,  and  so  I  have  felt  the  sharp 
knife  many  times;  and  yet  I  shall  not  regret  my 
pains  and  crosses  so  long  as  my  Lord  will  write 
with  me  on  men's  hearts.  That  is  the  cause  of 
many  ministers'  afflictions;  they  are  necessary  to 
our  work.  You  have  heard  the  fable  of  the  raven 
that  wished  to  drink;  but  the  pitcher  had  so  little 
water  in  it  that  he  could  not  reach  it,  and  therefore 
he  took  stone  after  stone  and  dropped  it  into  the 
vessel  until  the  water  rose  to  the  brim  and  he  could 
drink.  So  little  grace  is  in  some  men  that  they 
need  many  sicknesses,  bereavements,  and  other 
afflictions  to  make  their  graces  available  for  useful- 
ness. If,  however,  we  receive  grace  enough  to 
bear  fruit  without  continual  pruning,  so  much  the 
better. 

"It  is  expected  of  us,  brethren,  that  from  this 
time  we  rise  to  a  higher  point.  It  is  the  Lord's 
due,  if  we  think  of  what  He  has  done  for  us. 
Some  of  my  comrades  in  arms  now  before  me  have 
gone  through  battles  as  hard  as  any  man  may  wish 
to  fight,  and  after  such  success  they  must  never 
say  die.  After  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  us  we 
must  never  strike  our  flag,  nor  turn  our  backs  in 
the  day  of  battle.  Sir  Francis  Drake,  when  it  was 
feared  that  he  would  be  wrecked  in  the  Thames, 
said:  'What!  Have  I  been  round  the  world, and  am 
I  now  to  be  drowned  in  a  ditch  ?  Not  I. '  So  say  I 
to  you, brethren;  you  have  done  business  in  stormy 
v/aters,  and  will  you  sink  in  a  village  pond.' 
We  shall  not  be  worse  treated  than  we  have  been. 


THE    pastors'    college  63 

We  are  now  in  fine  fighting  trim,  for  we  are  hard- 
ened by  former  blows.  A  great  pugiHst  at  Rome 
was  so  battered,  his  nose,  eyes,  face  were  so  dis- 
figured, that  he  was  always  ready  to  fight,  because 
he  said:  'I  cannot  look  worse  than  I  do.'  Per- 
sonally, I  am  much  in  the  same  plight.  Men  can- 
not say  anything  worse  of  me  than  they  have  said, 
I  have  been  belied  from  head  to  foot,  and  misrepre- 
sented to  the  last  degree.  My  good  looks  are  gone, 
and  none  can  much  damage  me  now.  Some  of  you 
have  had  more  to  batter  you  than  you  are  likely  to 
endure  again;  you  have  had  trial  and  tribulation, 
and  affliction  as  heavy  as  you  can  l.iave  them;  and 
after  having  stood  in  the  lists  so  long,  surely  you 
are  not  going  to  yield  ahd  slink  away  like  cowards.? 
God  forbid  it!  God  forbid  it!  God  grant,  on  the 
contrary,  that  the  elder  ones  among  you  may  have 
the  pleasure,  not  only  of  winning  battles  for  Christ, 
but  of  seeing  others,  who  have  been  saved  under 
your  instrumentality,  trained  to  fight  better  than 
yourselves  for  Jesus !  I  read  the  other  day  a  story, 
and  with  that  I  will  conclude,  desiring  that  I  may 
in  spiritual  things  have  the  same  joy  myself,  and 
that  it  may  be  the  lot  of  you  all.  Diagoras,  the 
Rhodian,  had  in  his  time  won  many  wreaths  at  the 
Olympian  games.  He  had  two  boys,  and  ne 
brought  them  up  to  the  same  profession.  The  day 
came  when  his  own  force  abated,  and  he  was  no 
longer  able  to  strive  for  masteries  in  his  own  per- 
son;  but  he  went  up  to  the  Olym.pian  games  with 
his  two  sons.      He  saw  the  blows  they  gave    and 


64  SPURGEON 

received,  and  rejoiced  when  he  discovered  that 
they  were  both  victorious.  A  Lacedaemonian  said 
to  him:  *You  may  die  now,  Diagoras;'  meaning 
that  the  old  man  might  die  content,  because  he 
had  in  his  own  person,  and  in  that  of  his  sons, 
obtained  the  highest  honors.  The  old  man  seemed 
to  feel  that  it  was  even  so;  for  when  his  two  sons 
came  and  shouldered  their  father,  and  carried  him 
through  the  camp  amid  the  ringing  cheers  of  the 
great  assembly,  the  old  man,  flushed  with  excite- 
ment, died  under  the  eyes  of  the  assembled  Greeks. 
It  would  have  been  a  wiser  thing  to  have  lived,  for 
he  had  a  third  son  who  became  more  renowned 
than  the  other  two;  but  he  passed  away  on  a  wave 
of  victory.  Oh,  brethren,  rtay  you  have  spiritual 
children  who  shall  win  battles  for  the  Lord,  and 
may  you  live  to  see  them  doing  it;  then  may  you 
say  with  Simeon:  'Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy 
servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  Thy  word.'" 
*  -=f  *  ^f  * 

"The  Berkshire  proverb  sa3's,  'There  be  more 
ways  of  killing  a  cat  than  by  choking  of  him  with 
cream,'  and  surely  some  preachers  appear  to  know 
that  there  are  more  ways  of  wearying  a  hearer  tlian 
by  surfeiting  him  with  good,  sound,  creamy  doc- 
trine. Oh,  for  a  sermon  with  something  in  it! 
Never  mind  the  finicking  with  the  cooking  and  the 
carving;  do  give  us  a  cut  of  gospel  truth!  Alas! 
we  too  often  get  'Grantham  gruel — nine  grits  and 
a  gallon  of  water,'  and  we  are  expected  to  praise 
the  stuff  because  the  basin  is  of  rare  china.      There 


THE    pastors'    college  65 

is  not  enough  in  it  to  make  soup  for  a  grasshopper, 
and  3'et  we  are  called  upon  to  go  into  raptures 
because  what  there  is  of  it  is   soundly   evangelical. 

"At  other  times  the  teaching  is  rather  queer  and 
very  muddy,  and  then  they  tell  us  that  the  par- 
son gives  us  little  doctrine  because  he  is  thinking 
it  out  and  has  not  yet  made  up  his  mind.  Verily, 
'while  the  grass  grows  the  steed  starves, '  and  we 
should  be  far  better  off  if  the  Lord  would  send  us 
some  of  the  old  sort  of  experienced  men  of  God, 
who  knew  what  they  did  know,  and  fed  our  fathers 
with  knowledge  and  understanding.  Our  modern 
collegians  boast  of  being  independent  thinkers,  and 
if  that  means  that  they  are  not  to  be  depended  on, 
they  are  pretty  near  the  mark.  They  pare  down 
the  gospel  till,  as  the  Yankees  say,  it  is  shaved 
off  finer  than  the  'small  end  of  nothing. '  It  is  time 
this  nonsense  was  exploded.  Lord  Byron  said, 
'A  book's  a  book,  although  there's  nothing  in't!' 
but  country  people  do  not  say  so  of  a  sermon,  and 
if  they  did,  we  are  not  all  bumpkins,  and  cannot 
be  quite  so  easily  satisfied." 

■X-  *  *  * 

"Beloved  brethren,  if  you  are  filled  with  love  to 
your  work,  and  love  to  souls,  and  love  to  God,  you 
will  gladly  endure  many  self-denials  which  else 
would  be  unbearable.  The  poverty  of  our  country, 
brethren,  is  very  trying,  and  ought  by  all  means  to 
be  relieved;  but  we  may  well  feel  proud  that  so 
many  men  are  forthcoming  who,  for  the  sake  of 
preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ,  are  willing  to  leave 


66  SPURGEON 


remunerative  callings  and  endure  hardness.  Other 
denominations  might  pay  them  better,  but  they 
spurn  the  golden  bribe,  and  remain  faithful  to 
Christ  and  to  the  ordinances  as  they  were  delivered. 
All  honor  to  rhose  life-long  martyrs  who  put  up 
with  sore  privations  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and  His 
Church.  The  devil  once  met  a  Christian  man,  so 
I  have  heard,  and  said  to  him:  'You  call  yourself 
a  servant  of  God.  What  do  you  do  more  than  I 
do.-"  You  boast  that  you  fast;  so  do  I ;  for  I  neither 
eat  nor  drink.  You  do  not  commit  adultery; 
neither  do  I.'  The  fiend  mentioned  a  long  list  of 
sins  of  which  he  is  incapable,  from  which  he  could 
therefore  claim  exemption.  The  saint  at  last  said 
to  him:  T  do  one  thing  which  thou  never  didst; 
I  deny  myself. '  That  is  the  point  in  which  the 
Christian  comes  out;  he  denies  himself  for  Christ's 
sake;  believing  in  Jesus,  he  counts  all  things  but 
loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  his  Lord.  Brethren,  do  not  leave  your 
charges  because  the  stipend  is  small.  Your  poor 
people  must  be  looked  after  by  somebody.  Do 
not  despair  when  times  are  hard,  for  they  will  be 
better  by  and  by;  and  meanwhile  your  heavenly 
Father  knows  your  needs.  We  have  heard  of  men 
who  have  remained  in  plague-stricken  cities  when 
others  fled,  because  they  could  be  of  service  to  the 
sick.  Abide,  then,  v/ith  your  people  when  work 
fails  them;  be  as  faithful  to  your  God  as  many  a 
man  has  been  faithful  to  his  philanthropy.  If  you 
can  anyhow  manage  to  tide  over   the    present  dis- 


THE    pastors'    college  6"] 

tress,  stick  to  the  people.  God  will  help  you  and 
reward  you  if  you  have  faith  in  Him.  May  the 
Lord  confirm  your  confidence,  and  comfort  you  in 
#your  tribulation! 

"Go  on,  brethren,  go  on  preaching  the  same 
gospel;  but  preach  it  with  more  faith,  and  preach 
it  better  every  day.  Do  not  draw  back;  your 
place  is  at  the  front.  Qualify  yourselves  for  larger 
spheres,  you  that  are  in  little  places;  but  do  not 
neglect  your  studies  to  look  after  better  positions. 
Be  prepared  for  an  opening  when  it  comes,  and 
rest  assured  that  the  ofBce  will  come  to  the  man 
who  is  fit  for  the  office.  We  are  not  so  cheap  that 
we  need  go  hawking  ourselves  in  every  market; 
the  churches  are  always  on  the  look-out  for  really 
efficient  preachers.  Men  whose  fitness  for  the 
ministry  is  doubtful  are  at  a  great  discount  now- 
adays; but  for  men  of  ability  and  usefulness  there 
is  great  demand. 

"You  cannot  hide  a  candle  under  a  bushel,  and 
you  cannot  keep  a  really  able  man  in  an  insignifi- 
cant position.  Patronage  is  of  the  smallest  impor- 
tance; fitness  for  the  work,  grace,  ability,  earnest- 
ness, and  a  loving  disposition,  soon  push  the  man 
into  his  place.  God  will  bring  His  servant  into 
his  true  position,  if  he  has  but  faith  to  trust  in 
Him.  I  put  this  word  at  the  tail-end  of  my 
address,  because  I  know  the  discouragements  under 
which  you  labor.  Do  not  be  afraid  of  hard  work 
for  Christ;  a  terrible  reckoning  awaits  those  who 
have   an   easy  time  in   the   ministry,  but   a  great 


68  SPURGEON 

reward  is  in  reserve  for  those  who  endure  all  things 
for  the  elect's  sake.  You  will  not  regret  your 
poverty  when  Christ  cometh  and  calleth  His  own 
servants  to  Him."  t 

■;:-**** 
"Petrarch's  works  are  said  to  have  lain  so  long 
in  the  roof  of  St.  Mark's  at  Venice,  that  they 
became  turned  into  stone;  by  what  process  depo- 
nent sayeth  not.  To  many  men  it  might  well 
seem  that  the  Word  of  God  had  become  petrified, 
for  they  receive  it  as  a  hard,  lifeless  creed,  a  stone 
upon  which  to  sharpen  the  daggers  of  controversy, 
a  stumbling-block  for  young  beginners,  a  millstone 
with  which  to  break  opponents'  heads,  after  the 
manner  experienced  by  Abimelech  at  Thebez.  A 
man  must  have  a  stout  digestion  to  feed  upon  some 
men's  theology — no  sap,  no  sweetness,  no  life,  but 
all  stern  accuracy  and  fleshless  definition.  Pro- 
claimed without  tenderness  and  argued  without 
affection,  the  gospel  from  such  men  rather  resem- 
bles a  missile  from  a  catapult  than  bread  from  a 
Father's  table.  Teeth  are  needlessly  broken  over 
the  grit  of  systematic  theology,  while  souls  are 
faiiiioliing.  To  turji  stones  into  bread  was  a  temp- 
tation of  our  Master;  but  how  many  of  His  servants 
yield  readily  to  the  far  worse  temptation  to  turn 
bread  into  stone!  Go  thy  way,  metaphysical 
divine,  to  the  stone-yard,  and  break  granite  for 
McAd.im,  but  stand  iKjt  in  the  way  of  loving 
spirit.^  who  Vv^ould  feed  the  f;imi]y  of  God  with  liv- 
ing bread.      The  inspired  Word  is  to  us  spirit  and 


THE    pastors'    college  69 

life,  and  we  cannot  afford  to  have  it  hardened  into 
a  huge  inonoHth  or  a  spiritual  Stonehenge — 
sublime  but  cold,  majestic  but  lifeless;  far  rather 
would  we  have  it  as  our  own  household  book,  our 
bosom  companion,  the  poor  man's  counselor  and 
friend." 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  STOCKWELL  ORPHANAGE 

"T  was  a  father  to  the  poor,  I  caused  the  widow's  heart  to 
sing  for  ioy."  — Job. 

"The  God  that  answereth  by  Orphanages  let  him  be  God." 

— C.  //.  Spurgeon. 

"  I  love  to  have  the  children  feel  that  there  is  nothing  in  this 
world  more  attractive,  more  earnestly  to  be  desired,  than  manhood 
in  Jesus  Christ.  "  — Henry  Ward  Beaher. 

The  most  popular  of  all  the  institutions  with 
which  Mr.  Spurgeon's  name  is  associated  is  the 
Stockwell  Orphanage,  an  institution  whose  origin 
was  somewhat  romantic. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  accustomed  to  the  strangest 
kind  of  correspondence  and  one  morning  in  Sep- 
tember, 1866,  he  received  a  letter  that,  as  he  said, 
took  away  his  appetite  for  breakfast.  A  lady, 
signing  herself  Mrs.  Hillyard,  and  indicating  that 
she  was  the  widow  of  a  clergyman  of  the  Church 
of  Enlgand,  possessed  of  considerable  wealth, 
wrote  that  after  much  thought  and  prayer  she  had 
resolved  to  i)lacc  at  his  disposal,  to  be  used  as  he 
thought  best  for  the  glory  of  God,  the  sum  of 
;^20,ooo;    in  round  numbers  $100,000. 

Was  this  another  hoax.''  It  was  interesting 
beyond  measure  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon  tell  this 
story.      Was  some  poor  demented  creature  gratify- 

70 


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE  /I 

ing  herself  by  proposing  what  in  her  poor  sad  heart 
she  desired,  and  would  do  if  she  could?,  Perhaps 
Mrs.  Hillyard,  not  accustomed  to  finance,  had  mis- 
taken the  figures,  and  meant  to  give  ^2,000.  Even 
that  was  a  magnanimous  gift!  The  letter  begged 
Mr.  Spurgeon  to  call  at  his  convenience  at  a  given 
address.  Mr.  Spurgeon  went,  with  little  faith  in 
the  outcome  of  his  visit.  But  he  found  that  this 
time  there  was  no  hoax,  but  a  golden  door  was 
thrown  wide  open  for  boundless  and  undreamed- 
of usefulness. 

After  much  prayer  and  consultation  it  was  finally 
resolved  that  this  magnificent  gift  should  be  devoted 
to  the  education  of  fatherless  boys.  It  would  be 
impossible  to  go  into  all  the  details  of  the  scheme. 
Whatever  gifts  of  pulpit  eloquence  Mr.  Spurgeon 
possessed,  they  were  poor  compared  with  his  sagac- 
ity in  all  matters  of  organization.  Great  in  the 
pulpit,  he  was  also  great  in  counsel,  and  the  result 
is  that  he  never  put  his  hand  to  anything  that  did 
not  prove  a  grand  success.  Failure  was  a  word 
never  heard  at  the  Tabernacle. 

When  it  was  decided  that  Mrs.  Hillyard's  be- 
quest should  be  devoted  to  an  orphanage.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  was  determined  on  a  home-life  for  these 
fatherless  boys.  If  there  was  to  be  an  orphanage, 
that  orphanage  should  have  all  the  elements  of 
home;  and  so  there  were  to  be  separate  houses  and 
these  boys,  grouped  together  in  little  families,  were 
to  be  under  the  watchful  care  of  some  Christian 
matron.  There  was  to  be  no  promiscuous  herd- 
5 


72  SPURGEON 

ings  together;  but  a  system  of  careful  selection  was 
introduced,  by  which,  as  far  as  possible,  the  boys 
most  suited  to  be  companions  were  grouped  into 
little  families,  and  were  "at  home"  to  a  degree  that 
proved  perfectly  delightful. 

It  was  not  designed  to  give  these  orphans  a 
luxurious,  easy  life,  or  an  elaborate  education,  but 
to  give  them  the  comforts  of  a  Christian  home  and 
plain  education  in  matters  that  would  fit  them  for 
the  common  every-day  duties  of  life.  They  were 
not  to  be  made  scholars  or  gentlemen,  in  the  tech- 
nical sense  of  those  terms.  Mr.  Spurgeon  said 
what  the  world  wanted  was  men,  and  the  work  of 
the  Stockwell  Orphanage  was  to  take  these  boys 
who  had  lost  their  fathers  and  make  manly  fellows 
of  them.  There  was  nothing  over-sentimental  or 
ostentatiously  rehgious  in  the  atmosphere  of  Stock- 
well.  It  was  a  religious  home,  but  there  was  as 
little  cant  in  its  management  as  Sanscrit  in  its 
schools.  Nor  were  there  any  denominational  pref- 
erences in  the  election  of  those  who  were  to  share 
its  favors.  Nothing  would  have  been  easier  than 
for  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  have  made  a  denominational 
institution  of  the  orphanage.  But  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
heart  was  greater  than  any  creed;  in  all  such  mat- 
ters as  this  his  sympathies  were  as  universal  as  the 
sorrows  of  the  great  family  of  suffering  humanity. 
And  the  fact  that  of  the  first  646  boys  admitted  to 
Stockwell,  230  were  the  sons  of  members  of  the 
Church  of  England,  is  a  fact  that  proves  better 
than  all  words  what  a  generous,  catholic  heart 
this  man  possessed. 


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE  73 

The  sum  presented  by  Mrs.  Hillyard  formed 
only  the  nucleus  of  a  grand  endowment.  Land 
was  bought  in  Stockwell  and  put  in  trust.  Gen- 
erous souls  all  over  England  vied  with  each  other 
in  contributing  to  this  laudable  enterprise.  The 
happy  home  idea  made  the  building  of  separate 
houses  desirable,  and  this  afforded  the  opportunity 
for  churches  and  communities  to  combine,  and 
one  after  another  the  houses  went  up,  and  the 
whole  institution  soon  presented  a  beautiful  and 
picturesque  appearance.  There  is  "A  Silver  Wed- 
ding House,"  "The  Merchant's  House,"  "Testimo- 
nial Houses"  from  the  Baptist  Union,  and  the 
"Workman's  House." 

Stockwell  Orphanage  js  now  one  of  the  lions  of 
religious  London,  Philanthropists  visiting  the 
great  city  mark  it  down  side  by  side  with  the 
famous  Foundlings'  Home,  as  a  place  not  to  be 
missed.  But  Stockwell,  to  be  seen  in  all  its  glory, 
must  be  seen  on  Anniversary  Day,  or  at  Christ- 
mas, with  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  the  chair,  and  the 
genial  Vernon  Charlesworth  at  his  right  hand. 
There  is  a  brief  meeting,  three  or  four  very  short 
talks,  aimed  specially  at  the  boys,  and  then  the 
day  is  given  up  to  merriment.  Games  of  all  sorts 
are  enjoyed  by  the  boys,  and  some  of  the  elder 
boys  who  have  come  to  visit,  and  even  reverend 
boys,  with  gray  hair  and  venerable  looks,  forget 
their  years  and  dignity  and  join  the  frolic.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  is  everywhere,  beaming  kindness  with 
every  look,  and  inspiring  affection  with  every  word. 


74  SPURGEON 

You  will  be  sure  to  find  him  a  dozen  times  in  the 
day  by  the  big  swimming  bath,  with  a  handful  of 
coppers,  pitching  them  in  for  the  boys  to  dive  for, 
and  laughing  at  their  frantic  efforts  till  tears  roll 
down  his  cheeks  for  very  gladness.  A  great  crowd 
of  visitors,  with  their  bright,  gay  summer  attire, 
makes  the  scene  a  sort  of  midsummer  day-dream 
on  the  southern  border  of  smoky  London.  But 
even  such  days  come  to  an  end.  The  boys  are 
gathered  together,  a  few  kindly  words  are  spoken 
by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  a  great  cheer  for  Mr.  Charles- 
worth,  a  hymn,  a  short  prayer,  and  the  benedic- 
tion, and  then  silence  reigns  over  Stockwell. 

But  Christmas  is  also  a  great  day  at  the  orphan- 
age. What  a  dinner  for  500  hungry  boys!  Plum 
puddings,  such  a  size!  And  smoking  hot!  Roast 
beef  and  mince  pies!  And  then — for  every  boy 
a  Christmas  gift.  A  gentleman  in  the  city  pro- 
vides for  every  boy  a  small  box  of  figs,  another 
generous  soul  puts  a  beautiful  orange  on  every  box 
of  figs,  and  another  gentleman,  who  has  something 
to  do  with  "The  old  lady  in  Thread-needle  Street," 
as  the  Bank  of  England  is  sometimes  called,  puts 
on  the  fig-box  a  bright  new  shilling,  straight  from 
the  mint,  that  has  never  been  in  circulation.  It 
is  a  sight  never  to  be  forgotten  to  stand  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  side  in  the  dining-room  of  Stockwell 
Orphanage,  on  Christmas  day.  The  dinner  is 
served,  every  boy  stands  in  his  place,  before  him 
on  his  plate  is  his  box  of  figs,  his  orange,  and  his 
"bright,  new  bob,"  a  blessing  is  asked,  and  then, 


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE 


r^BLIC  LIBRARY 

AHlOtn,  LfcNOX  Ai^D 

Ui-OEN  Fi2)UNDATI0NS 

«  L 


,  THE    STOCKWELL   ORPHANAGE  TJ 

as  quick  as  a  shot  from  a  gun,  every  boy  sits  down 
and  begins  to  do  his  duty  as  a  gallant  young  En- 
glishman. For  nearly  twenty-five  years  this  pro- 
cession of  fatherless  boys,  now  numbering  many 
thousands,  has  gone  on,  enjoying  these  advantages 
of  home-life,  these  scenes  of  gladness,  and  so  have 
been  fitted  for  the  duties  of  life. 

The  unspeakable  blessing  this  institution  has 
been  can  never  be  told.  The  number  of  boys  who 
have  passed  through  can  be  told,  and  other  mat- 
ters can  be  tabulated,  but  the  grand  results  elude 
all  figures.  One  of  the  purposes  of  the  manage- 
ment is  to  find  positions  in  stores  and  factories, 
in  mills  and  railroads,  for  these  boys  as  soon  as 
they  are  ready  for  work.  And  it  is  not  too  much 
to  say  that  there  are  thousands  of  young  business 
men  in  London  to-day,  and,  indeed,  all  over  the 
country,  and  in  other  lands,  who.  are  doing  well, 
who  are  proud  to  own  their  indebtedness  to  "Spur- 
geon's  Orphanage" — as  they  will  persist  in  calling 
Stockwell — for  the  good  start  in  life  they  received. 
Some  hundreds  of  these  graduates  from  the  orphan- 
age are  engaged  in  the  work  of  the  Christian  minis- 
try, others  are  lawyers,  some  doctors,  and  a  few 
have  risen  to  prominent  positions  of  public  trust. 
All  the  Stockwell  boys  have  not  turned  out  as  well 
as  could  be  desired.  In  such  large  numbers  it 
could  only  be  that  here  and  there  sad  cases  would 
arise.  But  the  fewness  of  these  has  been  quite 
surprising.  We  cast  our  seed  into  the  fruitful 
soil,    but   every   seed   does   not   grow.      The   seed 


78  SPURGEON 

sown  by  generous  hands  at  Stockwell  Orphanage 
through  a  whole  generation  has  brought  forth  a 
glorious  harvest,  a  harvest  that  will  enrich  the 
world  for  generations  to  come. 

The  unstinted  liberality  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
friends  in  the  matter  of  the  orphanage  is  really  won- 
derful. But  the  truth  is  Mr.  S,purgeon  never  asked 
unwisely  for  money,  and  the  public  soon  had  such 
confidence  in  his  judgment  in  all  financial  matters 
that  he  always  got  what  he  asked  for.  And  it 
should  be  said  that  he  never  once  took  advantage 
of  that  confidence.  It  cost  about  $50  a  day  to 
provide  for  the  orphanage.  Mr.  Spurgeon  would 
not  go  in  debt ;  but  sometimes  he  came  very  near  it. 
It  was  not  a  very  uncommon  thing  to  hear  him  say 
on  Sunday  at  the  Tabernacle:  "Beloved!  There 
are  only  three  shots  left  in  the  Orphanage  locker. 
It  takes  £\o  a  day  to  keep  those  hungry  boys. 
This  is  the  Lord's  work — and  yours."  Nothing 
more  was  needed.  The  money  always  came.  The 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  and  all  its  associate 
organizations,  was  quite  as  grand  a  financial  as  a 
religious  success. 

John  B.  Gough,  the  great  Apostle  of  Temper- 
ance, paid  a  visit  to  the  orphanage,  which  he  thus 
describes: 

"I  would  like  to  give  you  one  incident  to  illus- 
trate the  man  in  his  greatness  and  simplicity.  He 
wished  me  to  visit  his  Boys'  Orphanage  at  Stock- 
well.  I  could  go  only  on  Saturday,  and  his  note 
to  me  was  characteristic: 


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE  79 

"'Beloved  friend: — Although  I  never  go  out  on 
Saturda)'S — my  horses,  being  under  the  law  and 
not  under  grace,  keep  the  seventh-day  Sabbath — 
yet  we  will  arrange  to  visit,'  etc, 

"A  beautiful  day  it  was,  for  Loijdon,  as  we  rode 
together,  chatting  all  the  way.  The  history  of  the 
orphanage  is  intensely  interesting.  The  com- 
mencement was  a  sum  of  $100,000  to  Mr.  Spur- 
geon,  from  a  lady,  to  commence  an  orphanage  for 
fatherless  boys.  All  the  money  that  has  been 
expended  has  been  raised  by  voluntary  contribu- 
tions, and  the  $100,000  is  invested  as  an  endow- 
ment. 

"When  we  entered  the  grounds,  the  boys  set 
up  a  shout  of  joy  at  the  sight  of  their  benefactor. 

"I  asked,  'What  are  the  requirements  for  admis- 
sion?' 

"He  said,  'Utter  destitution.  Nothing  denomi- 
national. We  have  more  of  the  Church  of  England 
than  of  the  Baptists.  We  have  Roman  Catholics, 
Presbyterians,  Methodists — all  sorts. ' 

"After  the  boys  had  gone  through  their  gym- 
nastic exercises  and  mihtary  drill,  I  spoke  a  few 
words  to  them.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  like  a  great 
boy  among  boys. 

"He  said,  'There  are  240  boys — only  think! 
How  many  pence  are  there  in  a  shilling.?' 

"  'Twelve. ' 

"'Right.      How    many    shillings   in   a   pound?' 

"  'Twenty. ' 

"'Right.     Twelve  times    twenty,    how    many?' 

"  'Two  hundred  and  forty. ' 


80  SPURGEON 

"•That's  a  penny  apiece  each  boy.' 

"'Here,  Mr.  Charlesworth, '  handing  him  a  sov- 
ereign, 'give  these  boys  a  penny  apiece;'  when  a 
shrill,  hearty  hurrah  was  given,  as  Mr.  Spurgeon 
turned  away  with  a  laugh  of  keen  enjoyment, 

"  'Will  you  go  to  the  infirmary.''  We  have  an 
infirmary  and  quarantine;  for  sometimes  the  poor 
creatures  we  take  in  need  a  good  deal  of  purifying. 
We  have  one  boy  very  ill  with  consumption;  he 
cannot  live,  and  I  wish  to  see  him,  for  he  would 
be  disappointed  if  he  knew  I  had  been  here  and 
had  not  seen  him.' 

'''We  went  into  the  cool  and  sweet  chamber, 
and  there  lay  the  boy.  He  was  very  much  excited 
when  he  saw  Mr.  Spurgeon.  The  great  preacher 
sat  by  his  side,  and  I  cannot  describe  the  scene. 
Holding  the  boy's  hand  in  his,  he  said: 

"  'Well,  my  dear,  you  have  some  precious 
promises  in  sight  all  round  the  room.  Now,  dear, 
you  are  going  to  die,  and  you  are  very  tired  lying 
here,  and  soon  will  be  free  from  all  pain,  and  you 
will  rest.      Nurse,  did  he  rest  last  night  .<•' 

"'He  coughed  very  much.' 

"  'Ah,  my  dear  boy,  it  seems  very  hard  for  you 
to  lie  here  all  day  in  pain,  and  cough  at  night. 
Do  you  love  Jesus. ^' 

"  'Yes. ' 

"  'Jesus  loves  you.  He  bought  you  with  His 
precious  blood,  and  He  knows  what  is  best  for 
you.  It  seems  hard  for  you  to  lie  here  and  listen 
to  the  shouts  of  the  healthy  boys  outside   at   play. 


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE  8 1 

But  soon  Jesus  will  take  you  home,  and  then   He 
will  tell  you  the  reason,  and  you   will  be  so  glad.' 

"Then,  laying  his  hand  on  the  boy,  without  the 
formality  of  kneeling,  he  said:  'O  Jesus,  Master, 
this  dear  child  is  reaching  out  his  thin  hand  to  find 
Thine.  Touch  him,  dear  Savior,  with  Thy  loving, 
warm  clasp.  Lift  him  as  he  passes  the  cold  river, 
that  his  feet  be  not  chilled  by  the  water  of  death; 
take  him  home  in  Thine  own  good  time.  Comfort 
and  cherish  him  till  that  good  time  comes.  Show 
him  Thyself  as  he  lies  here,  and  let  him  see  Thee, 
and  know  Thee  more  and  more  as  his  loving 
Savior. ' 

''After  a  moment's  pause,  he  said,  'Now,  dear, 
is  there  anything  you  would  like?  Would  you 
like  a  little  canary  in  a  cage,  to  hear  him  sing  in 
the  morning.?  Nurse,  see  that  he  has  a  canary 
to-morrow  morning.  Good-bye,  my  dear;  you 
will  see  the  Savior,  perhaps,  before  I  shall. ' 

"I  have  seen  Mr.  Spurgeon  hold  by  his  power 
6,  soo  persons  in  a  breathless  interest;  I  knew  him 
as  a  great  man  universally  esteemed  and  beloved; 
but  as  he  sat  by  the  bedside  of  a  dying  pauper 
child,  whom  his  beneficence  had  rescued,  he  was 
to  me  a  greater  and  grander  man  than  when  sway- 
ing the  mighty  multitude  at  his  will." 

The  last  page  in  the  history  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
love  for  his  "dear  Stockwell  boys"  is  exceedingly 
pathetic.  Christmas,  as  has  been  said,  was  always 
a  great  time  at  the  orphanage.  But  the  Christ- 
mas of  1 89 1   was  clouded  with  sad  apprehensions 


82  SPURGEON 

in  which  even  the  youne^est  boys  seemed  to  share. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  had  gone  to  Mentone,  in  the  south 
of  France,  hoping  that  the  milder  cHmate  might 
bring  back  his  strength,  but  the  hope  was  feeble, 
and  every  day  prayers  were  offered  in  the  orphan- 
age for  his  recovery  The  fact  that  they  were 
permitted  to  send  a  Christmas  letter  to  their 
absent  pastor  and  friend — for  Mr.  Spurgeon  was 
regarded  as  pastor  of  the  orphanage  as  well  as  the 
Tabernacle — was  a  great  joy  to  the  boys  and  girls 
at  Stockwell,  and  along  with  their  letter  they  sent 
a  little  flower,  which  they  asked  him  to  be  sure 
and  wear  on  Christmas  day,  that  he  might  be 
reminded  all  day  long  how  dearly  they  loved  him. 
All  their  kindness  had  been  anticipated.  Mr. 
Charlesworth,  the  master  of  the  orphanage,  re- 
ceived a  letter  from  Mr,  Spurgeon  to  be  read  to  the 
boys  on  Christmas  day.  It  was  the  last  message 
of  love  they  were  ever  to  receive  from  him.  And, 
though  a  little  lengthy,  we  venture  to  give  it  here, 
for  it  shows  the  inner  heart  of  this  friend  of  the 
fatherless.  It  is  worthy  in  all  respects  to  be  placed 
side  by  side  with  Martin  Luther's  celebrated  letter 
to  his  son  Hans.  It  breathes  the  same  spirit, 
it  comes  from  as  great  a  heart. 

The  Christmas  dinner  was  over,  and,  in  a  still- 
ness that  seemed  strangely  sad  in  such  an  hour  and 
with  such  an  audience,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  last  letter 
was  read.      It  ran  thus: 


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE  83 

"Mentone.  December  21,  1891. 
"Dear  Boys  and  Girls:  — 

"I  send  you  all  my  love  as  far  as  the  post 
can   carry   love    at   two-pence   half-penny    for   an 
ounce.      I  wish  you  a  glorious  Christmas.     I  might 
have  said  'A  jolly  Christmas!'   if  we  had  all  been 
boys;  but,  as  some  of  us  are  girls,  I  will  be  proper 
and  say  'A  merry  Christmas!'      Enjoy  yourselves, 
and  feel  grateful  to  the  kind  friends  who  find  money 
to  iceep  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  supplied.      Bless 
their  loving  hearts,  they   never   let   you  want  for 
anything.     May  they  have  pleasure   in  seeing  you 
all  grow  up  to  be  good  men   and   women.      Feel 
very  grateful  also  to  the  trustees.      These  gentle- 
men are  always  at  work  arranging  for  your  good. 
Give  them  three  times  three.      Then  there  are  Mr. 
Charlesworth.'Mr.  Ladds,  and  all  the  masters  and 
the  matrons.    Each  one  of  them  deserves  your  love 
and  gratitude  and  obedience.      They  try  to  do  you 
good;   try  to   cheer  them   all   you    can.      I  should 
like  you  to  have  a  fine  d^iy,  such  a  day  as  we  have 
here;   but,  if  not,  you  will  be  bright  and   warm  in- 
doors.     Three  cheers   for   those   who   give   us  the 
good   things   for   this  festival !      I  want   you   for   a 
moment  in  the  day  to  be  all   still   and   spend    the 
time   in   thanking   our   heavenly   Father   and    the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  the  great  goodness  shown  to 
you  and  to  me,  and  then  pray  for  me,  that  I  may 
get  quite  well  again.      Mrs.    Spurgeon   and    I  both 
send  our  love  to  all  the  Stockwell  family. 
"Yours  very  heartily, 

"C.  H.  Spurgeon." 


84  SPURGEON 

Once  a  year,  on  Mr.  Spurgeon's  birthday,  a  fes- 
tival is  held  in  the  Orphanage  grounds,  at  which 
large  offerings  are  brought  by  many  friends.  It 
has  been  our  privilege  to  attend  many  of  these 
gatherings,  and  in  one  house  at  least  this /r/^  is 
always  a  day  of  joy,  anticipated  with  pleasure,  and 
enjoyed  most  thoroughly. 

Before  leaving  this  subject,  we  may  mention  the 
fact  that  recently  Mr.  Charlesworth  and  a  band  of 
the  orphans  have  visited  most  of  the  chief  towns 
in  the  United  Kingdom.  They  give  a  hand-bell 
entertainment,  which  is  interspersed  with  recita- 
tions. The  author  ventures  to  suggest  that  Chris- 
tian churches  might  materially  assist  this  most 
beneficent  design  by  inviting  Mr.  Charlesworth  and 
his  band  to  plead  the  cause  of  this  institution. 
From  the  experience  of  more  than  one  visit,  the 
writer  can  testify  to  the  delight  with  which  the  pub- 
lic appreciate  the  efforts  of  the  boys. 

The  unsectarian  character  of  this  institution 
will  be  seen  when  the  following  table  is  ex- 
amined. It  will  be  especially  noticed,  that  stanch 
as  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  in  his  own  beliefs — and  he  is 
most  intensely  a  Baptist — the  Stockwell  Orphanage 
is  not  a  sectarian  institution. 

THE  RELIGIOUS  PROFESSION  OF  THE  PARENTS  OF  THE 

ORPHANS 

Church  of  England        .....    585 

Baptist 387 

Congregational       .  .  .  .  .  .160 


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE  85 

Wesleyan  .  .  .  .  .  .140 

Presbyterian  ......      28 

Brethren   .......  9 

Roman  Catholic    ......        3 

Moravian  .......  2 

Bible  Christian      .  .  .  ,  .  .2 

Society  of  Friends      .....  2 

Salvation  Army     .  .  .  .  .  .1 

Not  specified      .  .  .  .  .  .194 

In  later  years  girls  have  been  admitted  to  this  in- 
stitution. Mr.  Spiirgeon  exercised  a  great  deal  of 
careful  thought  on  this  subject.  In  this  matter, 
as  all  others  that  he  deemed  important,  he  was 
never  impulsive.  And  to  some  ardent  spirits,  who 
thought  him  now  and  again  a  little  tard}^  he  had 
one  reply  that  admitted  of  no  argument:  "Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  the  righteous  shall  not  make  haste." 

Of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  more  than  of  most  men,  it 
may  be  said:  "He  made  haste  slowly,  and  there- 
fore surely."  For  some  years  the  girls  have  shared 
with  the  boys  the  advantages  of  Stockwell.  The 
experiment  was  tried  as  an  experiment  -and  has 
proved  a  success. 


S6  SPURGEON 


MR.  SPURGEON  S  PARABLE  OF  HIS  WIFE 

I  saw  in  my  dream  a  man  worn  and  weary  with 
working  the  handle  of  a  pump,  from  which  no 
water  came.  Hard  by  was  his  garden,  and  iill 
the  flowers  and  plants  were  pining  for  water,  but 
he  had  none  to  give  them.  Then  I  saw  a  woman 
coming  toward  him,  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water. 
She  stopped  and  spoke  cheerily  to  the  weary  one; 
and  anon  she  smilingly  poured  the  contents  of  her 
pitcher  down  the  pump,  and  immediately  it  began 
to  work,  and  pour  forth  waters  of  its  own.  How 
the  husbandman  blessed  her! 


CHAPTER  VIII 


MRS.    SPURGEON 


"  A  woman  that  feareth  the  Lord,  she  shall  be  praised." 

— Solomon. 

"The  fountain  of  joy  is  fed  by  tears, 

And  love  is  lit  l)y  the  breath  of  sighs; 

The  deepest  griefs  and  the  saddest  tears 
Have  holiest  ministries." 

— Josiah  G.  Holland. 

Under  ordinary  circumstances  this' tribute  to  the 
memory  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  have  been  com- 
pleted without  any  reference  to  those  sacred  rela- 
tions which  constitute  a  sanctuary  into  which  no 
stranger  should  intrude.  But  the  circumstances 
are  special,  and  demand  a  reference,  however  brief . 
Mrs.  Spurgeon  has  been  for  a  quarter  of  a  century 
a  greater  sufferer  than  her  late  husband.  Through 
all  those  years  of  pain  and  seclusion,  she  was  able 
to  minister  greatly  by  her  sympathy  to  the  fullness 
and  gentleness  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  character  and 
work.'  She  was  "the  still,  small  voice"  ever  at  his 
side,  so  strong  to  soothe,  to  comfort  and  encour- 
age, when  "the  heart  failed  and  the  hands  of  his 
arms  grew  feeble."  None  will  ever  know  how 
much  the  strong  man  owed,  even  in  his  strongest 
hours,  to  the  tender  ministries  of  the  quiet  sufferer. 

In  later  years,  a  door  of  practical  usefulness 
opened,    and   from    her  sick  chamber   Mrs.    Spur- 

87 


88  SPURGEON 

geon  was  enabled  to  take  charge  of  a  Book  Fund, 
by  which  the  sparse  hbraries  of  hundreds  of  poor 
ministers  and  students  were  increased.  This  work 
was  touched  with  the  spirit  of  romantic  success 
that  seemed  to  mark  all  the  work  connected,  nearly 
or  remotely,  with  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle. 
What  manner  of  woman  Mrs.  Spurgeon  is,  may  be 
gathered  from  a  single  incident,  which  she  describes 
with  tender  pathos; 

"A  curious  little  incident  happened  lately  during 
a  time  of  prolonged  sickness.  At  the  close  of  a 
very  dark  and  gloomy  day,  I  lay  resting  on  my 
couch  as  the  deeper  night  drew  on,  and  though  all 
was  bright  within  my  cozy  little  room,  some  of  the 
external  darkness  seemed  to  have  entered  into  my 
soul  and  obscured  its  spiritual  vision.  Vainly  I 
tried  to  see  the  Hand  which  I  knew  held  .mine,  and 
guided  my  fog-enveloped  feet  along  a  steep  and 
slippery  path  of  suffering.  In  sorrow  of  heart  I 
asked,  'Why  does  my  Lord  thus  deal  with  His 
child  .^  Why  does  He  so  often  send  sharp  and 
bitter  pain  to  visit  me.^  Why  does  He  permit 
lingering  weakness  to  hinder  the  sweet  service  I 
long  to  render  to  His  poor  servants.?'  These  fret- 
ful questions  were  quickly  answered,  and,  though 
in^a  strange  language,  no  interpreter  was  needed 
save  the  conscious  whisper  of  my  own  heart.  For 
a  while  silence  reigned  in  the  little  room,  broken 
only  by  the  crackling  of  the  oak  log  burning  on 
the  hearth.  Suddenly  I  heard  a  sweet,  soft  sound, 
a  uttle,  clear,  musical  note,  like  the  tender  trill  of 


MKS.    SPL'KGEON 


MRS.    SPURGEON  9I 

a  robin  beneath  my  window.  'What  can  that  be?' 
I  said  to  my  companion,  who  was  dozing  m  the 
firelight;  'surely  no  bird  can  be  singing  out  there 
at  this  time  of  the  year  and  night. '  We  listened, 
and  again  heard  the  faint,  plaintive  notes,  so  sweet, 
so  melodious,  yet  m3-sterious  enough  to  provoke 
for  a  moment  our  undisguised  wonder.  Presently 
my  friend  exclaimed,  'It  comes  from  the  log  on 
the  fire!'  and  we  soon  ascertained  that  her  sur- 
prised assertion  was  correct.  The  fire  was  letting 
loose  the  imprisoned  music  from  the  old  oak's 
inmost  heart !  Perchance  he  had  garnered  up  this 
song  in  the  days  when  all  went  well  with  him, 
when  birds  twittered  merrily  on  his  branches,  and 
the  soft  sunlight  flecked  his  tender  leaves  with 
gold.  But  he  had  grown  old  since  then,  and  hard- 
ened; ring  after  ring  of  knotty  growth  had  sealed 
up  the  long-forgotten  melody,  until  the  fierce 
tongues  of  the  flames  came  to  consume  his  callous- 
ness, and  the  vehement  heat  of  the  fire  wrung 
from  him  at  once  a  song  and  a  sacrifice.  Ah, 
thought  I,  when  the  fire  of  affliction  draws  songs 
of  praise  from  us,  then  indeed  are  we  purified,  and 
our  God  is  glorified!  Perhaps  some  of  us  are  like 
this  old  oak  log,  cold,  hard  and  insensible;  we 
should  give  forth  no  melodious  sounds,  were  it  not 
for  the  fire  which  kindles  round  us,  and  releases 
tender  notes  of  trust  in  Him,  and  cheerful  com- 
pliance with  His  will.  'As  I  mused  the  fire  burned, ' 
and  my  soul  found  sweet  comfort  in  the  parable 
so  strangely  set  forth  before  me.      Singing  in  the 


92  SPURGEON 

fire.  Yes.  God  helping  us,  if  that  is  the  onl}^ 
way  to  get  harmony  out  of  these  hard,  apathetic 
hearts,  let  the  furnace  be  heated  seven  times  hot- 
ter than  before."  ^ 

To  the  early  home  where  the  boys  were  born 
and  reared  Mrs.  Spurgeon  became  greatly  attached. 
And  when  the  time  came  to  leave  Nightingale 
Lane  for  Westwood,  she  wrote  in  the  following 
strain  of  the  dear  old  home: 

*'The  heart  yearns  over  a  place  endeared  by  an 
intimate  acquaintance  of  twenty-three  years,  and 
full  of  happy  or  solemn  associations.  Every  nook 
and  corner,  both  of  house  and  garden,  abounds 
with  sweet  or  sorrowful  m.emories,  and  the  remem- 
brance of  manifold  mercies  clings  like  a  rich 
tapestry  to  the  walls  of  the  desolate  rooms.  On 
this  spot  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century  of  blissful 
wedded  life  has  been  passed,  and,  though  both 
husband  and  wife  have  been  called  to  suffer  severe 
physical  pain  and  months  of  weakness  within  its 
boundary,  our  home  has  been  far  oftener  a  'Bethel' 
to  us*  than  a  'Boachim. '  The  very  walls  might  cry 
out  against  us  as  ungrateful,  did  we  not  silence 
them  by  our  ceaseless  thanksgiving;  for  the  Lord 
has  here  loaded  us  with  benefits,  and  consecrated 
every  inch  of  space  with  tokens  of  His  great  lov- 
ing-kindness. The  sun  of  His  goodness  has  photo- 
graphed every  portion  of  our  dear  home  upon  our 
hearts,  and  though  other  lights  and  shadows  must 
be  reflected  there  in  coming  days,  they  can  never 
obliterate  the  sweet  images  which  grateful  memory 


MRS.   SPURGEON  93 

will  jealously  preserve.  Tender  remembrances  will 
render  indelible  rhe  pictures  of  the  sick-chamber, 
which  so  many  times  had  almost  been  the  gate  of 
heaven  to  our  spirit;  the  little  room  tenderly  fitted 
up  by  a  husband's  careful  love,  and  so  often  the 
scene  of  a  scarcely  hoped-for  convalescence;  the 
study,  sacred  to  the  pastor's  earnest  work,  and 
silent  witness  of  wrestlings  and  communings  knovv-n 
only  to  God  and  his  own  soul.  In  this  room," 
adds  ^Irs.  Spurgeon,  "by  desire  of  the  incoming 
tenants,  has  been  placed  the  following  inscription, 
written  by  Mr.    Spurgeon: 

"  '  Farewell,  fair  room!    I  leave  thee  to  a  friend! 
Peace  dwell  with  him,  and  all  his  kin. 
May  angels  evermore  the  house  defend. 
Their  Lord  haih  often  been  within.'" 

The  following  lines  from  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  pen 
admit  us  into  the  inner  sanctuary  of  the  home: 

"For  some  time  past  it  has  been  the  dear  pas- 
tor's custom,  as  soon  as  the  texts  for  the  Lord's- 
day's  services  have  been  given  by  the  'blaster,'  to 
call  me  into  the  study,  and  permit  me  to  read  the 
various  commentaries  on  the  subject-matter  in 
hand.  Never  was  occupation  more  delightful, 
instructive  and  spiritually  helpful.  My  heart  has 
often  burned  within  me  as  the  meaning  of  some 
passage  of  God's  Word  has  been  opened  up,  and 
the  hidden  stores  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  have 
been  revealed;  or  when  the  marrow  and  fatness  of 
a  |)iecious  promise  or  doctrine  has  been  spread  like 
a  daiiiiy  banquet  before  my  admiring  eyes.  Shall 
I  ever   forget   those   solemn    evenings,    when    the 


94  SPURGEON 

sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  were  the  theme  of  tear- 
ful meditation  ?  When,  with  love  and  grief  our  heart 
dividing,  we  followed  Him  through  the  night  on 
which  He  was  betrayed,  weeping  like  the  daughters 
of  Jerusalem,  and  saying,  'There  never  was  sorrow 
like  unto  this  sorrow;'  or  the  more  rapturous  time 
when  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace  was  to  be 
the  topic  for  the  morrow,  and  we  were  fairly  bewil- 
dered by  the  inexhaustible  treasures  of  love  and 
grace  to  be  found  in  that  fair  'land  of  Havilah, 
where  there  is  gold!' 

"Then  come  delightful  pauses  in  my  reading, 
when  the  book  is  laid  down,  and  I  listen  to  the 
dear  voice  of  my  beloved  as  he  explains  what  I 
cannot  understand,  or  unfolds  meanings  which  I 
should  fail  to  see,  often  condensing  into  a  few 
clear,  choice  sentences  whole  pages  of  those  dis- 
cursive old  divines  in  whom  he  delights,  and  press- 
ing from  the  gathered  thoughts  all  the  richest  nec- 
tar of  their  hidden  sweetness.  Thus  a  poor  pris- 
oner has  the  first  si[)  of  the  wines  on  the  lees,  well 
refined,  the  first  morsel  from  the  loaves  with  which 
the  thousands  are  to  be  fed  and  refreshed  on  the 
morrow.  How  can  I  sufficiently  thank  God  for 
this  drink  of  the  brook  by  the  way,  this  holy  place 
within  my  home,  where  I  find  the  Lord  deigns  to 
meet  with  me,  and  draw  out  my  heart  in  adora- 
tion and  worship.^  Lord,  I  bless  and  praise  Thee, 
that  thus  Thou  hast  most  blessedly  fulfilled  Thine 
own  words,  T  will  not  leave  you  comfortless.  I 
will  come  unto  you.'" 


CHAPTER  IX 

EPISODES  AND  ANECDOTES 

♦*  Variety  is  the  very  spice  of  life 
That  gives  it  all  its  flavor." 

—  William  Cowper. 

"  Life  is  arched  with  changing  skies', 
Rarely  are  they  what  they  seem; 
Children  we,  of  smiles  and  sighs  — 
Much  we  know,  but  more  we  dream." 

—  William  Winter. 

Every  history  has  its  romance,  every  Hfe  its 
laughter  and  its  tears.  There  are  episodes  in 
every  human  story  full  of  interest,  and  anecdotes 
full  of  charm.  In  Mr.  Spurgeon's  life  these 
abounded.  Many  thousands  who  love  the  very 
name  of  the  great  preacher  will  be  glad  to  read 
every  anecdote,  and  learn  every  detail  of  his  busy 
life ;  not  because  they  are  curious,  but  because 
every  memory  of  him  is  a  priceless  treasure. 

MR.    KNILL's  prophecy    CONCERNING    MR.    SPURGEON 

The  story  of  Mr.  Knill  prophesying  when  Mr. 
Spurgeon  was  only  a  boy  that  he  would  live  to  be 
a  great  preacher,  has  been  often  referrad  to 
somewhat  critically.  In  the  last  book  Mr.  Spur- 
geon wrote  he  gives  the  following  detailed  account 
of   the  matter: 

"The   story   of    Mr.    Knill's   prophesying  that  I 

95 


gS  '  SPURGEON 

should  preach  the  gospel  in  Rowland  Hill's 
Chapel,  and  to  the  largest  congregations  in  the 
world,  has  been  regarded  by  many  as  a  legend, 
but  it  was  strictly  true.  Mr.  Knill  took  the  county 
of-  Essex  in  the  year  1844,  ^^d  traversed  the 
region  from  town  to  town,  as  a  deputation  for  the 
London  Missionary  Society.  In  the  course  of  that 
journey  he  spent  a  little  time  at  Stambourne  par- 
sonage. In  his  heart  burned  the  true  missionary 
spirit,  for  he  sought  the  souls  of  young  and  old, 
whenever  they  came  in  his  way.  He  was  a  great 
soul  winner,  and  he  soon  spied  out  the  boy.  He 
said  to  me,  'Where  do  you  sleep?  For  I  want  to 
call  you  up  in  the  morning.'  I  showed  him  my 
little  room,  and  he  took  good  note  of  it.  At  si.x 
o'clock  he  called  me  up.  There  stood  in  m}-  grand- 
father's garden  two  arbors  made  of  yew  trees, 
cut  into  sugar-loaf  fashion.  Though  the  old  manse 
has  given  way  to  a  new  one,  and  the  old  chapel 
has  gone  also,  yet  the  yew  trees  flourish  as  afore- 
time. We  went  into  the  right-hand  arbor,  and 
there,  in  the  sweetest  way,  he  toltl  me  of  the  love 
of  Jesus,  and  of  the  blessedness  of  trusting  in  him 
and  loving  him  in  our  childhood.  With  many  a 
story  he  preached  Christ  to  mc,  and  told  me  how 
good  God  had  been  to  him,  and  then  Ik^  pra3-ed 
that  I  might  know  the  Lord  and  serve  him.  He 
knelt  down  in  that  arbor  and  prayed  for  me  with 
his  arms  about  my  neck.  He  did  not  seem  con- 
tent unless  I  kept  with  him  in  the  interval  be- 
tween   the    services.      He   heard   my  childish  talk 


EPISODES  'AND    ANECDOTES  97 

with  patient  love,  and  repaid  it  with  gracious  in- 
struction. On  three  successive  days  he  taught  me 
and  prayed  with  me,  and  before  he  had  to  leave, 
my  grandfather  had  come  back  from  the  place 
where  he  had  gone  to  preach,  and  all  the  family 
were  gathered  to  morning  prayer.  Then,  in  the 
presence  of  them  all,  Mr.  Knill  took  me  on  his 
knee,  and  said,  'This  child  will  one  day  preach  the 
gospel,  and  he  will  preach  it  to  great  multitudes. 
I  am  persuaded  that  he  will  preach  in  the  chapel  of 
Rowland  Hill,  where  (I  think  he  said)  I  am  now 
the  minister. '  He  spoke  very  solemnly,  and  called 
upon  all  present  to  witness  what-  he  said.  Then 
he  gave  me  sixpence  as  a  reward  if  I  would  learn 
the  hymn 

"  '  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way 
His  wonders  to  perform.'  " 

"I  was  made  to  promise  that  when  I  preached  in 
Rowland  Hill's  Chapel  chat  hymm  should  be  sung. 
Think  of  that  as  a  promise  from  a  child!  Would  it 
ever  be  other  than  an  idle  dream  .^  Years  flew  by. 
After  I  had  begun  for  some  little  time  to  preach  in 
London,  Dr.  Alexander  Fletcher  was  engaged  to 
deliver  the  annual  sermon  to  children  in  Surrey 
Chapel;  but,  as  he  was  taken  ill,  I  was  asked  in  a 
hurry  to  preach  to  the  children  in  his  stead.  'Yes, ' 
I  replied,  'I  will,  if  you  will  allov/  the  children  to 
sing,  "God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way."  I  have 
made  a  promise  long  ago  that  that  hymn  should  be 
sung. '  And  so  it  was.  I  preached  in  Rowland 
Hill's  Chapel,  and  the  hymn  was  sung.     My  emo- 


98  SPURGEdN 

tions  on  that  occasion  I  cannot  describe,  for  the 
word  of  the  Lord's  servant  was  fulfilled.  Still  I 
fancy  that  Surrey  was  not  the  chapel  which  Mr. 
Knill  intended.  How  was  I  to  go  to  the  country 
chapel.''  All  unsought  by  me,  the  minister  at  Wot- 
ton-under-Edge,  which  was  Mr.  Hill's  summer 
residence,  invited  me  to  preach  there.  I  went  on 
the  condition  that  the  congregation  should  sing, 
'God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way' — which  was  also 
done.  To  me  it  was  a  very  wonderful  thing,  and 
I  no  more  understood  at  that  time  how  it  came  to 
pass  than  I  understand  to-day  why  the  Lord  should 
be  so  gracious  to  me." 

MR.    SPURGEON  AND    HIS    GRANDFATHER  TAKE    TURNS 
AT  PREACHING  A  SERMON 

Mr.  Spurgeon  always  rejoiced  that  he  and  all  his 
house  were  faithful  to  the  doctrines  of  grace.  One 
of  his  favorite  texts  was  from  Paul's  epistle  to  the 
Ephesians:  "For  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through 
faith;  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of 
God."  Not  once  or  twice  or  thrice,  but  a  thou- 
sand times  and  more,  has  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached 
from  this  text.  One  of  these  occasions  is  marked 
by  a  unique  order  that  must  have  been  highly  in- 
teresting to  those  present.  But  Mr.  Spurgeon 
shall  tell  the  story  in  his  own  words:  "Within 
the  circle  of  these  words  'By  grace  are  ye  saved,' 
my  theology  is  contained,  so  far  as  it  refers  to  the 
salvation  of  men.  I  rejoice  also  to  remember  that 
those  of  my  family  who    were    ministers   of  Christ 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  99 

before  me  preached  this  doctrine,  and  none  other. 
My  father,  who  is  still  able  to  bear  his  personal 
testimony  for  his  Lord,  knows  no  other  doctrine, 
neither  did  his  father  before  him. 

"I  am  led  to  remember  this  by  the  fact  that  a 
somewhat  singular  circumstance,  recorded  in  my 
memory,  connects  this  text  with  myself  and  my 
grandfather.  It  is  now  long  years  ago.  I  was 
announced  to  preach  in  a  growing  country  town 
in  the  eastern  counties.  It  does  not  often  hap- 
pen to  me  to  be  behind  time,  for  I  feel  that  punct- 
uality is  one  of  those  little  virtues  which  may  pre- 
vent great  sins.  But  we  have  no  control  over 
railways  and  break-downs;  and  so  it  happened 
that  I  reached  the  appointed  place  at  Haverhill 
considerably  behind  time.  Like  sensible  people, 
they  had  begun  their  worship,  and  had  proceeded 
as  far  as  the  sermon.  As  I  neared  the  chapel,  I  per- 
ceived that  someone  was  in  the  pulpit  preaching, 
and  who  should  the  preacher  be  but  my  dear  and 
venerable  grandfather!  He  saw  me  as  I  came  in 
at  the  front  door  and  made  my  way  up  the  aisle, 
and  at  once  he  said,  'Here  comes  my  grandson! 
He  may  preach  the  gospel  better  than  I  can,  but 
he  cannot  preach  a  better  gospel ;  can  you,  Charles  ? ' 
As  I  made  my  way  through  the  throng,  I  answered, 
'You  can  preach  better  than  I  can.  Pray  go  on.' 
But  he  would  not  agree  to  t/iat.  I  must  take  the 
sermon,  and  so  I  did,  going  on  with  the  subject 
there  and  then,  just  where  he  left  off.  'There,' 
said  he,  'I  was  preaching  on  "For  by  grace  are  ye 


828091A 


iOO  SPURGEON 

saved."  I  have  been  setting  forth  the  source  and 
fountain-head  of  salvation;  and  lam  now  showing 
them  the  channel  of  it,  "through  faith."  Now,  you 
take  it  up.  and  go  on.'  I  am  so  much  at  home 
with  these  glorious  truths,  that  I  could  not  feel 
any  difficulty  in  taking  from  my  grandfather  the 
thread  of  his  discourse,  and  joining  my  thread  to 
it,  so  as  to  continue  without  a  break.  Our  agree- 
ment in  the  things  of  God  made  it  easy,  for  us  to 
be  joint-preachers  of  the  same  discourse.  I  went 
on  with 'through  faith, '  and  then  I  proceeded  to 
the  next  point,  'and  that  not  of  yourselves. '  Upon 
this  I  was  explaining  the  weakness  and  inability  of 
human  nature,  and  the  certainty  that  salvation 
could  not  be  of  ourselves,  when  I  had  my  coat- 
tail  pulled,  and  my  well-beloved  grandsire  took 
his  turn  again.  When  I  spoke  of  our  depraved 
human  nature,  the  good  old  man  said,  'I  know 
most  about  that,  dear  friends;'  and  so  he  took  up 
the  parable,  and  for  the  next  five  minutes  set  forth 
a  solemn  and  humbling  description  of  our  lost 
estate,  tlie  depravity  of  our  nature,  and  the  spirit- 
ual death  under  which  we  were  found.  When  he 
had  said  his  say  in  a  very  gracious  manner,  his 
grandson  was  allowed  to  go  on  again,  to  the  dear 
old  man's  great  delight;  for  now  and  then  he  would 
say,  in  a  gentle  tone,  'Good!  Good!'  Once  he  said, 
'Tell  them  that  again,  Charles,'  and  of  course  I 
did  tell  them  tJiat  again.  It  was  a  happy  exercise 
to  me  to  take  my  share  in  bearing  witness  to  truths 
of  such  vital  importance,  which  are  so   deeply   im- 


Episodes  and  anecdotes  ioi 

pressed  upon  my  lieait.  While  announcing  this 
text  I  seem  to  hear  that  dear  voice,  which  has 
been  so  long  lost  to  earth,  saying  to  me,  'Tell 
THEM  THAT  AGAIN.'  I  am  not  contradictiiig  the 
testimony  of  forefathers  who  are  now  with  God. 
If  my  grandfather  could  return  to  earth,  he  would 
find  me  where  he  left  me,  steadfast  in  the  faith, 
and  true  to  that  form  of  doctrine  which  was  once 
for  all  delivered  to  the  saints. 

"I  preach  the  doctrines  of  grace  because  I  believe 
them  to  be  true;  because  I  see  them  in  the  Script- 
ures; because  my  experience  endears  them  to  me; 
and  because  I  see  the  hoi}-  result' of  them  in  the 
lives  of  believers.  T  confess  they  are  none  the  less 
dear  to  me  because  the  advanced  school  despises 
them;  their  censures  are  to  me  a  commendation. 
I  confess  also  that  1  should  never  think  the  better 
of  a  doctrine  because  it  was  said  to  be  'new.' 
Those  truths  which  have  enlightened  so  many  ages 
appear  to  me  to  be  ordained  to  remain  throughout 
eternity.  The  doctrine  which  I  preach  to  you  is 
that  of  the  Puritans;  it  is  the  doctrine  of  Calvin, 
the  doctrine  of  Augustine,  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  the 
doctrine  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Author  and 
Finisher  of  our  faith  himself  taught  most  blessed 
truth  which  well  agreed  with  our  text.  The  doc- 
trine of  grace  is  the  substance  of  the  testimony  of 
Jesus." 

THE  MESSAGE  ON  MIDSUMMER  COMMON 

The  pastor  of  the  Tabernacle  was  a  Puritan   in 


I02  SPURGEOM 

heart,  in  method,  and  often  in  experience.  It  was 
no  uncommon  thing  for  Cromwell  and  Bun}'an  and 
George  Fox  to  hear,  or  seem  to  hear,  voices  in  the 
important  periods  of  their  history,  urging  them  along 
the  path  the}'  ought  to  tread.  Such  an  experience 
Mr.  Spurgeon  describes  as  occurring  in  connection 
with  the  important  question  of  a  collegiate  educa- 
tion. He  too,  heard,  or  seemed  to  hear,  a  voice. 
He  says:  — 

"Still  holding  to  the  idea  of  entering  the  colle- 
giate institution,  I  thought  of  writing  and  making 
an  immediate  application;  but  this  was  not  to  be. 
That  afternoon,  having  to  preach  at  a  village 
station,  I  walked  slowly,  in  a  meditating  frame  of 
mind,  over  Midsummer  Common  to  the  little 
wooden  bridge  which  leads  to  Chesterton,  and  in 
the  midst  of  the  common  I  was  startled  by  what 
seemed  to  me  to  be  a  loud  voice,  but  which  may 
have  been  a  singular  illusion:  whichever  it  was, 
the  impression  it  made  on  mj^  mind  was  most  vivid. 
I  seemed  very  distinctly  to  hear  the  words,  'Seek- 
est  thou  great  things  for  thyself?  Seek  them  not!' 
This  led  me  to  look  at  my  position  from  a  different 
point  of  view,  and  to  challenge  my  motives  and 
intentions.  I  remembered  my  poor  but  loving 
people  to  whom  I  ministered,  and  the  souls  which 
had  been  given  me  in  my  humble  charge;  and 
although  at  that  time  I  anticipated  obscurity  and 
poverty  as  the  result  of  the  resolve,  yet  I  did  there 
and  then  renounce  the  offer  of  collegiate  instruc- 
tion, determining  to  abide  for  a   season,  at   least, 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  IO3 

With  my  people,  and  to  remain  preaching  the  Word 
so  long  as  I  had  strength  to  do  it.  Had  it  not 
been  for  those  words,  I  had  not  been  where  I  am 
now.  Although  the  ephod  is  no  longer  worn  by  a 
ministering  priest,  the  Lord  guides  His  people  b}' 
His  wisdom,  and  orders  all  their  paths  in  love; 
and  in  times  of  perplexity,  by  ways  mysterious 
and  remarkable.  He  says  to  them:  'This  is  the 
way;  walk  ye  in  it. 


MJ 


MR.  SPURGEON  IN  THE    COLISEUM 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  quite  a  favorite  speaker  on 
the  platform  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Soci- 
ety. In  this  great  work  he  was  heart  and  soul  with 
the  Church  of  England.  On  one  of  these  occasions 
he  prefaced  his  address  by  relating  an  incident 
which  occurred  to  him  three  years  previously,  which 
is  as  follows.  Sitting  in  the  Coliseum  at  Rome 
with  two  or  three  friends,  he  said: 

"Is  it  not  glorious  to  look  at  this  old  ruin  and 
see  how  Christ  has  conquered  here;  how  all  these 
ruins  tell  what  desolations  He  hath  made  in  the 
earth;  how  He  breaketh  the  bow  and  scattereth 
the  spear  in  sunder?  So  I  said,  'Let  us  have  a 
tune,'  and  we  sang  the  verse, — 

•'  'Jesus'  tremendous  name 

Has  put  our  foes  to  flight; 
Jesus,  the  meek,  the  humble  lamb, 
A  lion  is  in  fight.' 

Up  came  two  strangers,  and  said,  'What  is  that 
you  are  singing?  Let  us  join  you.'  One  was  an 
American  and  the  other  an  English  clergyman,  and 
we  sang  together  the  next  verse, — 


I04  SPURGEON 

"  'By  all  hell's  host  withstood, 

We  all  hell's  host  o'erthrovv; 
And  conquering  them  through  Jesus'  blood, 
We  still  to  conquer  go.' 

And  so  we  shall  mark  our  track  by  the  ruin  of 
our  adversaries;  they  shall  only  be  remembered 
by  the  place  which  they  once  inhabited,  which  shall 
be  a  desolation  and  the  habitation  of  the  bittern 
for  ever  and  ever." 

THE    CABMAN  AND  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

"I  have  very  seldom  found  it  to  be  a  lost  thinj::: 
to  give  a  present  of  a  Testament.  I  was  greatly 
astonished  about  a  month  ago.  A  cabman  drove 
me  home,  and  when  I  paid  him  his  fare,  he  said: 
'A  long  time  since  I  drove  you  last,  sir!'  'But,' 
said  I,  'I  do  not  recollect  you!'  'Well,'  he  said, 
'I  think  it  is  fourteen  years  ago;  but,'  he  said, 
'perhaps  you  will  know  this  Testament!'  pulling 
one  out  of  his  pocket.  'What,'  I  said,  'did  I  give 
you  that.^'  'Oh,  yes,'  he  said,  'and  you  spoke  to 
me  about  my  soul,  and  nobody  had  done  that 
before,  and  I  have  never  forgotten  it.'  'What,' 
said  I,  'haven't  you  worn  it  out.'''  'No,'  he  said,  'I 
would  not  wear  it  out;  I  have  had  it  bound!' — and 
he  had  kept  it  very  carefully  indeed." 

HOW  THE  APPLE  GOT  INTO  THE  BOTTLE 

We  remember  well,  in  our  early  days,  seeing 
upon  our  grandmother's  mantel-shelf  an  aj^i^le  con- 
tained in  :i  j")hial.  Tliis  u-.is  a  great  \\oii(lrr  to  iis, 
and  we  tried  to  investigate  it.  Our  cincstion  \\;is, 
'How  came  (lie  ajtple  to  get  in.^ide  so  small   a  bot- 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  IO5 

tie?'  The  apple  was  quite  as  big  round  as  the 
phial:  by  what  means  was  it  placed  within  it? 
Though  it  was  treason  to  touch  the  treasures  on 
the  mantel-piece,  we  took  down  the  bottle,  and 
convinced  our  youthful  mind  that  the  apple  never 
passed  through  its  neck;  and,  by  means  of  an 
attempt  to  unscrew  the  bottom,  we  became  equally 
certain  that  the  apple  did  not  enter  from  below. 
We  held  to  the  notion  that  by  some  occult  means 
the  bottle  had  been  made  in  two  pieces,  and  after- 
ward united  in  so  careful  a  manner  that  no  trace 
of  the  join  remained.  We  were  hardly  satisfied 
with  the  theory,  but,  as  no  philosopher  was  at  hand 
to  suggest  any  other  hypothesis,  we  let  the  matter 
rest.  One  day  the  next  summer  we  chanced  to 
see  upon  a  bough  another  phial,  the  first  cousin  of 
our  old  friend,  within  which  was  growing  a  little 
apple  which  had  been  passed  through  the  neck  of 
the  bottle  while  it  was  extremely  small.  'Nature 
well  known,  no  prodigies  remain;'  the  grand  secret 
was  out.  Vve  did  not  cry,  '■Eureka!  Eureka!'  but 
we  might  have  done  so  if  we  had  then  been  versed 
in  the  Greek  tongue. 

"This  discovery  of  our  juvenile  days  shall  serve 
for  an  illustration  at  the  present  moment.  Let  us 
get  the  apples  into  the  bottle  while  they  are  little: 
which,  being  translated,  signifies,  let  us  bring  the 
young  ones  into  the  house  of  God,  by  means  of 
the  Sabbath  school,  in  the  hope  that  in  after  days 
they  will  love  the  place  where  His  honor  dwelloth, 
and  there  seek  and  find  eternal  life.    By  our  mak- 


I06  SPURGEON 

ing  the  Sabbath  dreary,  many  young  minds  may 
be  prejudiced  against  religion.  We  would  do  the 
reverse.  Sermons  should  not  be  so  long  and  dull 
as  to  weary  the  young  folk  or  mischief  will  come 
of  them;  but  with  interesting  preaching  to  secure 
attention,  and  loving  teachers  to  press  home  the 
truth  upon  the  youthful  heart,  we  shall  not  have 
to  complain  of  the  next  generation." 

THE  EVANGELICAL  MAGAZINE 

"In  this  best  parlor  grandfather  would  usually 
sit  on  Sunday  mornings,  and  prepare  himself  for 
preaching.  I  was  put  into  the  room  with  him  that 
I  might  be  quiet,  and,  as  a  rule,  'The  Evangelical 
Magazine'  was  given  me.  This  contained  a  por- 
trait of  a  reverend  divine,  and  one  picture  of  a 
mission-station.  Grandfather  often  requested  me 
to  be  quiet,  and  always  gave  as  a  reason  that  I 
*had  the  magazine.'  I  did  not  at  the  time  per- 
ceive the  full  force  of  the  argument  to  be  derived 
from  that  fact ;  but  no  doubt  my  venerable  relative 
knew  more  about  the  sedative  effect  of  the  maga- 
zine than  I  did.  I  cannot  support  his  opinion 
from  personal  experience.  Another  means  of  still- 
ing 'the  child'  was  much  more  effectual.  I  was 
warned  that  perhaps  grandpa  would  not  be  able 
to  preach  if  I  distracted  him,  and  then — ah,  then 
what  would  happen,  if  poor  people  did  not  learn 
tlu;  way  to  heaven.?  This  made  me  look  at  the 
portrait  and  the  missionary-station  once  mure. 
Little  did  i  dream   that   some  other  child    would 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  lO/ 

one  day  see  my  face  in  that  wonderful  Evangelical 
portrait-gallery." 

HOW  MR.    SPURGEON    FIRED  ALL    HIS    GUNS  AT  SEVEN 

PEOPLE 

"I  was  invited  a  good  many  years  ago  to  preach 
at  Isleham  in  Cambridgeshire.  My  brother  Aldis, 
I  think  it  was,  preached  in  the  afternoon,  and  I 
was  to  preach  in  the  evening.  The  people  at  Isle- 
ham  had  such  a  belief  that  I  should  draw  a  congre- 
gation that  they  went  and  borrowed  the  biggest 
chapel  in  the  place.  I  shall  never  forget  it,  because 
I  preached  that  morning  at  eleven  o'clock  to  seven 
persons.  That  was  all  I  had,  and  I  remember 
that  I  told  them  it  reminded  me  of  the  ducks. 
Did  you  ever  see  ducks  go  through  a  door.'  You 
never  did  see  a  duck  go  through  a  door  without 
ducking  his  head.  They  will  do  it  even  when  they 
go  through  a  barn  door.  The  door  may  be  twenty 
feet  high,  but  a  duck  never  goes  through  without 
putting  his  head  down,  for  fear  he  might  possibly 
hit  the  top  of  the  door.  So  I  said,  'You  were  so 
afraid  of  your  place  being  overcrowded  that  you 
borrowed  that  big  place  for  seven  people.'  I 
preached  that  morning,  and  the  brother  who 
preached  in  the  afternoon  said  to  me,  T  can't  think 
how  you  did  it.  You  were  as  earnest  and  preached 
as  well  as  if  you  had  had  the  place  full.'  Yes,  I 
thought  that  it  was  the  only  chance  of  getting  it 
full  in  the  evening  when  I  had  to  preach  again.  So 
I  thought  I  would  just  lay  all  my  guns  out  and  fire 

7 


I08  SPURGEON 

away  with  these  few  people.  In  the  afternoon  we 
had  a  very  decent  audience  of  perhaps  a  hundred 
or  a  hundred  and  fifty,  but  when  I  preached  at 
night  there  was  not  standing  room  in  the  place." 

"your  money  or  your  life" 

On  the  3rd,  4th,  and  5th  of  January,  1 882,  a  great 
bazaar  was  held  in  the  lecture  hall  of  the  Taber- 
nacle, which  in  three  days  realized  the  sum  of 
i^2,ooo  for  the  Girls'  Orphanage.  At  the  opening 
of  this  bazaar,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  the  course  of  his 
speech,  said,  "When  I  was  in  Paris  a  short  time 
since,  I  saw  no  end  of  things — a  whole  Palais 
Royale  full  of  gewgaws  and  decorations.  The 
only  article  I  bought  was  a  rat-trap.  I  happen  to 
have  some  rats,  and  I  saw  quite  a  new  sort  of  trap 
there,  which  the  English  rats  don't  know.  I  bought 
it  out  of  love  for  them,  and  I  hope  they  will  find 
it  useful.  Doubtless  you  may  all  manage  to  buy 
here  something  that  may  be  useful  to  you,  and  if 
you  buy  an  article  that  is  not  useful,  put  it  out  of 
sight.  We  don't  want  to  sell  anything  that  is  not 
worth  the  money  paid  for  it ;  for  we  think  that 
such  should  not  be  the  case  when  the  object  is  to 
benefit  orphan  children.  When  you  leave  here, 
you  need  not  be  in  the  plight  of  the  gentleman  who 
was  met  by  footpads  on  his  way  home.  'Your 
money  or  your  life, '  demanded  one  of  them.  'My 
dear  fellow,  I  have  not  a  farthing  about  me.  Do 
you  know  where  I  have  been.''  asked  the  gentle- 
man.     'I  have  been  to  a  bazaar.'      'Oh,  if  you've 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  lOQ 

been  to  a  bazaar,  we  should  not  think  of  taking 
any  money  from  you.  We'll  make  a  subscription 
all  round,  and  give  you  something  to  help  you 
home.'     That  is  a  bazaar  as  it  ought   not   to   be." 

MR.    SPURGEON  AND  THE  SAILORS 

"I  venture  to  think,"  says  Mr.  Mathews  of  the 
Sailors'  Home,  "the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  had 
more  sailors  and  sailor  workers  to  this  service  than 
ever  before.  The  good  manager  of  the  Sailors'  Home 
sent  up  two  wagon-loads,  while  Miss  Macpherson's 
lady  friends  marched  at  the  head  of  a  splendid  col- 
umn of  hardy,  well-dressed  sailors.  Very  few  ports 
of  the  world  were  unrepresented,  while  captains, 
officers,  and  missionaries  helped  to  fill  the  first  gal- 
lery. Much  prayer  had  been  offered  and  enthusi- 
asm awakened  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  having  promised 
to  preach  a  sailors'  sermon.  At  seven  he  came 
down  to  his  quarter-deck  looking  careworn  and 
overworked,  as  though  he  had  been  watching  a 
week  in  the  Channel.  But  as  he  looked  at  his  crew 
on  the  starboard  and  .  port  sides  inspiration  came, 
and  the  buoyancy  of  his  spirit  returned. 

"The  intercessory  prayer  for  those  at  sea  and 
those  on  shore  waiting  for  missing  ships,  led  many 
hearts  to  the  throne  of  grace.  As  to  the  sermon, 
•having  graduated  in  God's  university,  the  sea,  with 
wind  and  wave,  rock  and  sand,  sun  and  star,  for 
my  professors,  I  would,  as  a  qualified  judge,  pro- 
nounce it  A  I  at  Lloyd's.  It  was  simply  fiist- 
rate,  and  worthy  of  the  great  preacher  and  his 
glorious  theme,  'The  sea  is  His,  and  He  made  it.'" 


no  SPURGEON 

THE  COMFORTABLY    MISERABLE 

"I  once  had  a  letter  from  one  who  told  me  that 
he  came  to  the  Tabernacle,  but  as  soon  as  he 
entered  he  felt  it  could  not  be  the  house  of  God 
because  there  were  so  many  present,  and  'strait 
is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way  that  leadeth  unto 
life,  and  few  there  be  that  find  it. '  When  he 
looked  at  me  he  felt  sure  that  I  was  unsound,  for 
I  should  not  look  so  cheerful  in  the  face,  neither 
should  I  be  so  bulky  in  person,  if  I  belonged  to  the 
tried  people  of  God.  Worst  of  all,  when  he  looked 
round  upon  the  congregation  and  saw  their  happy 
countenances,  he  said  to  himself:  'These  people 
know  nothing  about  the  depravity  of  their  hearts 
or  the  inward  struggles  of  believers,'  Then  he  in- 
formed me  that  he  wended  his  way  to  a  very  small 
chapel,  where  he  saw  a  minister  who  looked  as  if 
he  had  been  in  the  furnace,  and  though  there  were 
but  eight  persons  present,  they  all  looked  so  de- 
pressed that  he  felt  quite  at  home.  I  suppose  he 
sat  down  and  sang:  — 

"  '  My  willing  soul  would  stay 
In  such  a  frame  as  this, 
And  sit  and  sint;  herself  away 
From  everything  like  bliss.'  " 

"I  felt  glad  that  the  good  man  was  enabled  to 
enjoy  a  little  comfortable  misery  with  his  brethren. 
I  did  not  feel  at  all  envious;  nor  do  I  think  that 
fluch  a  ministry  of  misery  will  ever  draw  to  itself  a 
number  that  no  man  can  number.  The  children 
of  light  prefer  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  for  they  find  it 
to  be  their  strength," 


EPISODES   A^^D   ANECDOTES  I  I  t 

HOW  THREE  SINNERS  KEPT  THE    GARDEN 

Mr.  Spurgeon  loved  his  garden.  His  fancies 
were  as  charming  as  the  exotics  themselves.  His 
sallies  in  the  garden  were  sometimes  inimitable. 
"Are  you  ever  troubled  by  these  sinless  people.^" 
he  said  to  me  one  day.  "We  have  a  nest  of  them 
here,  and  the  craze  had  got  in  among  the  gar- 
deners. I  called  up  my  three  gardeners  on  Satur- 
day week,  and  said  to  them,  'I  have  been  observ- 
ing you  for  some  time.  You  come  late  and  go 
early,  and,  in  the  interval,  you  spoil  my  shrubs. 
I  don't  want  your  services  any  more.  I  will  have 
my  garden  attended  to  by  sinners  for  the  future.'" 
And  he  added  quietly,  "I  have  now  three  sinners, 
and  they  are  doing  my  garden  beautifully." 

"i'M    glad    you     did    not  try    it    ON  ANY     OF     THE 

deacons" 

"I  was  a  member  of  the  church  at  Newmarket 
when  I  first  joined  the  church,  and  was  afterward 
transferred  to  the  church  at  Cambridge,  one  of  the 
best  in  England.  I  attended  for  three  Lord's  days 
at  the  communion,  and  nobody  spoke  to  me.  I 
sat  in  a  pew  with  a  gentleman,  and  when  I  got 
outside  I  said,  'My  dear  friend,  how  are  you.!*' 

"He  said,  'You  have  the  advantage  of  me;  I 
don't  know  you.' 

"I  said,  'I  don't  think  I  have,  for  T  don't  know 
you.  But  when  I  came  to  the  Lord's  table  and 
partook  of  the  memorials  of  His  death,  I  thought 
you  were  my  brother,  and  I  thought  I  would  speak 
to  you.' 


I  I  2  SPURGEON 

"I  was  only  sixteen  years  of  age,  and  he  said, 
'Sweet  simplicity!' 

"'Oh,  is  it  true,  sir?'    I  said;   'is  it  true?' 

"He  said,  'It  is;  but  I  am  glad  you  did  not  try 
it  on  any  of  the  deacons. '  He  asked  me  home  to 
tea. 

"I  said  I  could  not  come  that  day;  and  he  said, 
'Come  next  Sunday,  if  you  like.'  I  agreed,  and 
for  three  years  I  was  often  in  his  house. 

THE  TEXT  IN  THE  SHOEMAKER'S  WINDOW 

"In  the  year  1854,  when  I  had  scarcely  been  in 
London  twelve  months,"  says  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "the 
neighborhood  was  visited  by  Asiatic  cholera,  and 
my  congregation  suffered  from  its  inroads.  Family 
after  famil}'  summoned  me  to  the  bedside  of  the 
smitten,  and  almost  every  day  I  was  called  to  visit 
the  grave.  I  gave  myself  up  with  youthful  ardor 
to  the  visitation  of  the  sick,  and  was  sent  for  from 
all  corners  of  the  district  by  persons  of  all  ranks 
and  religions.  I  became  weary  in  body  and  sick  at 
heart.  My  friends  seemed  falling  one  by  one,  and 
I  felt  or  faniced  that  I  was  sickening  like  those 
around  me.  A  little  more  work  and  weeping  would 
have  laid  me  low  among  the  rest.  I  felt  that  my 
burden  was  heavier  than  I  could  bear,  and  I  was 
ready  to  sink  under  it.  As  God  would  have  it, 
I  was  returning  mournfully  home  from  a  funeral, 
when  my  curiosity  led  me  to  read  a  paper  which 
was  wafered  up  in  a  shoemaker's  window  in  the 
Dover    Road.      It  did  not  look  like   a  trade   an- 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  113 

nouncement,  nor  was  it;  for  it  bore  in  a  good  bold 
handwriting  these  words:  'Because  thou  hast 
made  the  Lord,  which  is  my  refuge,  even  the  Most 
Pligh,  thy  habitation,  there  shall  no  evil  befall 
thee,  neither  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy 
dwelling. '  The  effect  upon  my  heart  was  immedi- 
ate. Faith  appropriated  the  passage  as  her  own. 
I  felt  secure,  refreshed,  girt  with  immortality.  I 
went  on  with  my  visitation  of  the  dying  in  a  calm 
and  peaceful  spirit;  I  felt  no  fear  of  evil,  and  I 
suffered  no  harm.  The  Providence  which  moved 
the  tradesman  to  place  those  verses  in  his  window 
I  gratefully  acknowledge,  and  in  the  remembrance 
of  its  marvelous  power  I  adore  the  Lord  my  God." 

"what  a  coster  he'd  a  made" 

Mr.  Spurgeon  took  a  great  fancy  to  those  peri- 
patetic venders  of  vegetables  with  which  London 
and  its  suburbs  abound,  known  as  "costermon- 
gers."  They  are  a  merry,  witty  race  of  hearty 
good  fellows,  very  sensitive  to  any  sign  of  kind- 
ness. Mr.  Spurgeon  invited  the  costermongers  of 
South  London  to  a  supper  in  the  school-room  of 
the  Tabernacle,  after  which  he  gave  them  one  of 
his  characteristic  addresses,  finding  in  their  peculiar 
calling  ample  illustrations  of  the  truths  he  tried  to 
enforce.  One  of  this  fraternity,  talking  of  the 
meeting  afterward,  seemed  to  think  that  in  Mr. 
Spurgeon  their  particular  profession  had-  lost  a 
brilliant  member. 

"Wot  a  woice  he's  got!   I  never!"  observed   the 


114  SPURGEON 

admiring  costermonger.  "Wot  a  vvoice!  1  tell 
yer,  he'd  a  made  a  wery  fine  coster  he  would,  and 
no  bloomin'  error!" 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  voice  was  indeed  a  charm,  and 
the  common  people  heard  it  gladly. 

spurgeon's  joke  with  the  PLYMOUTH  BROTHER 

In  the  year  1880  Mr.  Spurgeon  took  a  very 
active  part  in  politics,  to  the  surprise  of  many  of 
his  more  sedate  brethren.  He  tells  the  following 
story  of  this  period: 

"I  had  to  preach  for  my  good  old  friend  John 
Offord,  who  was  half  a  Plymouth  brother  and  half 
a  Baptist.  I  said  to  him,  'I  should  have  been  here 
half  an  hour  sooner,  only  I  stopped  to  vote. ' 

"'My  dear  friend,'  he  said,  'I  thought  you  were 
a  citizen  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  and  not  of  this 
world. ' 

"'So  I  am,'  I  replied,  'but  I  have  an  old  man  in 
me  yet,  and  he  is  a  citizen  of  the  world. ' 

"  'But  you  ought  to  mortify  him. ' 

"'So  I  do,  for  he's  an  old  Tory  and  I  make  him 
vote  Liberal.'" 

THE  TEXT,  THE  SERMON,  AND  THE  SMALL-POX 

As  a  sermonizer  Mr.  Spurgeon  belonged  to  the 
old  school,  and  he  was  sometimes  a  little  severe  on 
the  method  of  making  a  sermon  a  religious  essay 
that  had  very  little  to  do  with  the  text.  He  wanted 
the  sermon  to  be  always  an  elucidation  of  the  text. 
On  one  occasion  a  student  who  had  just  delivered 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  I  I  5 

himself  of  one  of  these  ornate  essays,  shorn  of  the 
old-fashioned  "firstly,  secondly  and  thirdly,"  and 
having  little  to  do  with  the  text,  which  had  been 
used  simply  as  a  motto,  asked  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  a 
candid  criticism.  There  was  little  need  to  ask  him 
to  be  candid,  he  was  sure  to  be  that. 

"Well,"  said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "your  sermon  was 
good  and  thoughtful,  and  safe,  perfectly  safe!" 

"Safe!"  replied  the  student,  "I  don't  quite  un- 
derstand you,  about  the  sermon  being  safe." 

"Oh,  well,  I  mean  this,"  was  the  answer,  "your 
sermon  had  so  little  to  do  with  your  text,  that  if 
the  text  had  had  the  small-pox,  the  sermon  would 
not  have  caught  it." 

MR.     SPURGEON    A    MATCH    FOR    THE    CUSTOM-HOUSE 

OFFICERS 

In  the  year  1885  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  passing  from 
France  to  Italy.  When  he  reached  the  border  the 
fussy  Italian  agents  wanted  to  seize  some  fruit  he 
had  in  his  possession.  A  smile  stole  over  Mr. 
Spurgeon 's  face.  He  knew  it  was  utterly  in  vain 
to  argue  the  point  with  them,  and  so  he  quietly 
withdrew  three  or  four  paces  into  French  territory 
and,  sitting  down  on  his  baggage,  quietly  ate  the 
fruit  in  full  view  of  the  officials,  who  could  do 
nothing  but  grind  their  teeth  and  use  the  choicest 
Italian. 

HOW    THE  BOY  SPURGEON  KILLED  OLD  RHODES 

One  of  the  members  of  the  church  at  Stam- 
bourne,  named   Rhodes,  was   in   the  habit   of  fre- 


1  l6  SPURGEON 

qtienting  the  public-house,  greatly  to   the   grief  of 
his  pastor.      Little  Charles  had   doubtless   noticed 
his  grandfather's  sorrow  (^n  this  account,  ami    laid 
il  to  heart.      One  tl;iy   he    siuldenh'    cxclainucl.  in 
the  luMriug  ol  Mr.  S|)urgeon,  "I'll  kill  oKl  KIuhIcs, 
that    1   will!"     "Hush!   hush!    my   dear."    saiil    his 
grandfather,  ">-ou  mustn't  talk  so;  it's  vi^-y  wrong, 
you  knt)w,  and  }'ou'll  get  taken  up  b}'  the  p(.)lice  if 
you  do  anything  wrong."     "Oh,  but  I  shall  not  do 
anything  bad;    but  I'll  kill  him  though,  that  I  will." 
The  good  grandfather   was    puzzled,  but   yet   per- 
fectly sure  that  the  child    would    not    do    anything 
which  he  knew  to  be  wrong,  so  he  let  it  pass  with 
some    half-mental    remark     aln>ut    "that     strange 
child."     Shortly  after,  however,  the  above  conver- 
sation was  brought  to  his  miiul   by  the   child   ciun- 
ing  in  and  saying,  "I've   killed    oKl    Rhodes;   he'll 
never   grieve  my  dear  grandpa    any    nune."     "My 
dear  child,"  said    Mr.    Spurgeon,  "what    have   you 
done.''  Where  have  you   been.?"     "I  haven't   been 
doing   any    harm,  grandpa,"  said    the  child;   "I've 
been  about  the  Lord's  work,  that's  all."     Nothing 
more  could  be  elicited  from  littlc>  Charles.     Before 
long  the    mystery  was   explained.      "(^Ul    Rhodes" 
called  to  see  his  pastor,  and,  with    downcast  looks 
and  evident  sorrow  of  heart,  narrated  the  stiuy  of 
how  he  had  been  killed,  sium^what  in  this  fashion: 
"I'm  very  sorry  indeed,  my  di-ar    pastor,    to    ha\e 
caused  you  such  grief   and    tr()ubli\       It    was    very 
wrong,    I    know;     but    1    always    U)Vi>l    you,     and 
wouldn't  have  done  it  if   I'd  only   thought."     En- 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  II7 

coiiraged  by  Mr.  Spurgeon's  kind  words,  he  went 
on  with  his  story  thus: — "I  was  a-sittinj,'  in  the 
pubhc,  just  having  my  pipe  and  mug  of  beer,  when 
that  child  comes  in.  To  think  an  old  man  like  mo 
should  be  took  to  task  and  reproved  by  a  bit  ol  a 
child  like  that!  Well,  he  points  at  mc  with  his 
finger  just  so,  and  says,  'What  doest  thou  here, 
Elijah.'  sitting  with  the  ungodly,  and  you  a  mem- 
ber of  a  church,  and  breaking  your  pastor's  heart! 
I'm  ashamed  of  you!  I  wouldn't  break  my  pastor's 
heart,-  I'm  sure.'  And  then  he  walks  away. 
Well,  I  did  feel  angry;  but  I  knew  it  was  all  true, 
and  I  was  guilty;  so  I  put  down  my  pipe,  and  did 
not  touch  my  beer,  but  hurried  away  to  a  lonely 
spot,  and  cast  myself  down  before  the  Lord,  con- 
fessing my  sin  and  begging  for  forgiveness.  And  I 
do  know  and  believe  the  Lord  in  mercy  pardoned 
me;  and  now  I've  come  to  ask  you  to  forgive  me; 
and  I'll  never  grieve  you  any  more,  my  dear  pas- 
tor." 

"reverend,     right      REVIiKEND,     VEKV     REVEREND" 

Mr.  Spurgeon  has  been  handled  severely  by  cer- 
tain  ecclesiastics   for   refusing   the   prefi.x  "Rev." 
Having  received  a  letter   addressed    "To   the  Very 
Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,"  he  replied: 

"I  very  much  demur  to  the  commencement,  'To 
the  Very  Reverend  C.  II.  Spurgeon,'  for  no  rever- 
ence is  due  to  me.  Romaine  used  to  say  that  it 
was  very  astonishing  to  observe  how  many  Rever- 
end, Right  Reverend,  and  Very    Reverend   sinners 


Il8  SPURGEON 

there  were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  Assuredly 
reverend  and  sinner  make  a  curious  combination, 
and  as  I  know  that  I  am  the  second,  I  repudiate 
the  first.  To  me  it  is  surprising  that  such  a  flat- 
tering title  should  have  been  invented,  and  more 
amazing  still  that  good  men  should  be  found  who 
are  angry  if  this  title  be  not  duly  given  to  them." 

Our  American  fondness  for  titles  readily  confers 
degrees  on  him.  But  thus  he  dashes  the  D.  D. 's 
behind  him: — 

"Many  times  we  meet  in  American  newspapers 
with  our  own  name  adorned  or  disfigured  with  a 
doctor's  degree.  In  a  periodical  we  see,  month 
after  month,  an  extract  from 

"The  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  D.  D. 

"We  like  the  prefix  quite  as  well  as  the  affix ; 
that  is  to  say,  we  detest  them  equally.  Robert 
Robinson  wrote  in  his  journal:  'Wondered  how 
any  man  could  be  so  silly  as  to  call  me  Reverend.' 
Shall  we  not  all  wonder,  in  some  more  rational 
condition  of  our  brains,  at  a  great  many  things 
which  we  now  admire.-"' 

"god  send  me  more  leisure" 

"Turner,  the  artist,  said  to  one  who  interrupted 
him  with  a  question,  'There!  you  have  made  me 
lose  fifty  guineas! '  Sir  Walter  Scott  says  in  his 
diary:  'Various  visitors  began  to  drop  in.  I  was 
sick  of  these  interruptions.  God  send  me  moie 
leisure,  and  fewer  friends  to  peck  it  away  by  tea- 
spoonfuls.  '      Others  besides  Sir  Walter   have    had 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  IIQ 

to  breathe  this  prayer.  People  call  on  a  well- 
known  minister  out  of  the  idlest  curiosity,  and 
invent  the  most  perverse  excuses  for  dragging  him 
away  from  his  Vv'ork.  One  would  think  we  were 
wild  beasts,  to  be  stared  at.  Just  as  a  sermon  ig 
shaping  itself,  in  comes  a  pasteboard  from  an  old 
lady  who  has  nothing  on  earth  to  do  but  to  call 
round  on  everybody  she  knows,  and  rob  them  of 
their  time, — wretched  thief*that  she  is.  We  have 
seen  her;  and  lo!  another  knock.  No  message 
can  be  sent  in,  the  party  must  see  the  minister 
himself,  as  his  business  is  strictly  private — ^that 
means  begging.  Here's  another,  whose  pretended 
errand  is  to  ask  if  we  knew  the  Rev.  Mr.  Jones,  of 
Llwwffi,  for  he  was  her  mother's  uncle's  cousin  by 
marriage.  Why  should  we  be  thus  at  every  mor- 
tal's beck  and  call,  and  have  neither  space  for 
meditation,  nor  time  for  devotion.^  People  do  not 
call  on  doctors  or  lawyers  at  this  rate,  and  our 
time  is  quite  as  precious  as  theirs.  We  cannot 
protect  ourselves  by  fees,  and  yet  if  we  do  not  see 
everyone,  there  will  be  such  an  outcry.  All  we 
can  say  is  — they  must  cry,  for  we  cannot  neglect 
our  Master's  business  to  play  lackey  to  everybody 
who  is  moved  by  the  powers  of  darkness  to  call  us 
away  from  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer." 

THE  DEAN  STANLEY  HOAX 

Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been  on  more  than  one  occa- 
sion the  victim  of  a  hoax.  There  are  smart  men 
in  England    as   well   as   in   America.      Sometimes 


I20  SPURGEON 

their  arrows  of  smartness  reach  much  further  than 
they  intend.  A  notable  instance  of  this  occurred 
early  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Tabernacle  history.  He 
received  one  day  a  letter  from  the  late  Dean  Stan- 
ley, apologizing  for  his  inability  to  dine  with  Mr. 
Spurgeon  on  a  given  date,  closing  with  words  of 
kindly  Christian  salutation,  such  as  Dean  Stanley 
would  be  sure  to  write.  This  letter  from  West- 
minster cloisters  was  qflite  a  mystery  to  the  non- 
conformist of  Newington  Butts,  from  the  fact  that 
he  had  not  dreamed  of  sending  the  Dean  any  such 
invitation.  IVlr.  Spurgeon's  good  mother-wit  stood 
by  him  as  it  always  did;  he  wrote  a  polite  and 
friendly  letter  to  the  Dean,  saying  there  must  be 
some  mistake,  probably  a  hoax,  as  he  had  not 
written  or  instructed  the  writing  of  any  such  invi- 
tation. In  closing,  he  said  he  could  not  apologize 
for  what  he  had  not  done,  and  then,  with  a  touch 
of  humor,  he  slyly  hinted  that  he  half  wished,  as  he 
came  to  think  of  it,  that  the  whole  thing  was  true. 
But  the  silly  hoax  did  not  end  there.  Dean  Stan- 
ley replied,  inviting  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  Westminster, 
and  a  friendship  began  that  lasted  to  the  end  of 
Stanley's  life;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
if  the  Dean  had  been  wholly  free  to  follow  the 
bent  of  his  inclinations,  he  would  have  invited  Mr. 
Spurgeon  to  preach  in  Westminster  Abbey. 

SHORT  PRAYERS  ON  A  COLD  NIGHT 

Mr.  Spurgeon    always   had   an   aversion  to   long 
prayers.      It  was  his  invariable  method  to  urge  his 


EPISODES    AND    ANECDOTES  121 

brethren  to  be  brief  in  prayer.      On  one  very  cold 
night  he  made  the  following  special  plea  for   brev- 

ity: 

"Now  it  is  a  cold  night,  and  if  anybody  prays 
very  long,  somebody  will  be  frozen  to  death:  I 
remember  that  Paul  preached  a  long  sermon  once, 
and  a  young  man  tumbled  out  of  a  window  and 
killed  himself.  If  anybody  gets  frozen  to-night,  I 
am  not  like  Paul  and  cannot  restore  him;  so  please 
don't  render  a  miracle  necessary,  as  I  cannot  per- 
form it." 

A  RAP  AT  THE    DEACONS 

"I  recollect  being  years  ago  in  a  church  which 
was  almost  defunct  externally,  and  altogether 
defunct  internall}^  and  after  sermon,  during  which 
I  felt  a  terrible  chill  of  soul,  I  went  into  the  vestry, 
and  there  I  saw  two  important  persons  leaning 
heavily  against  the  fire-place.  I  said  to  them, 
'Are  you  the  deacons  of  the  church.^'  They  an- 
swered, 'Yes,  sir.'  I  replied,  'I  thought  so!'  I 
did  not  explain  further.  These  pillars  of  the  church 
evidently  needed  propping  up.  Sluggish  ease  will 
not  do!  Brethren,  we  must  have  life  more  abun- 
dantly, each  one  of  us,  and  it  must  flow  out  into  all 
the  duties  of  our  office:  warm  spiritual  life  must  be 
manifest  in  the  prayer,  in  the  singing,  in  the  preach- 
ing, and  even  in  the  shake  of  the  hand  and  the 
good  word  after  service. 


CHAPTER  X 

PROVERBIAL  PHILOSOPHY — THE  SALT  CELLARS 

'•Good  words  are  worth  much  and  cost  little." 

— George  Herbert. 

"  Because  the  preacher  was  wise,  he  still  taught  the  people 
knowledge;  yea,  he  gave  good  heed,  and  sought  out,  and  set  in  or- 
der, many  proverbs."  — Solomon. 

In  the  year  1889  Mr.  Spurgeon  published  two 
volumes  entitled  "Salt  Cellars."  They  are  com- 
posed of  proverbs  from  all  nations,  set  in  order, 
and  followed  by  racy  comments  almost  as  brief 
and  generally  more  pungent  than  the  proverbs 
themselves.  These  characteristic  volumes  are 
specially  useful  for  their  suggestiveness.  Preach- 
ers, editors,  authors,  the  wide  world  over,  would 
find  these  "Salt  Cellars"  a  perpetual  help.  In  the 
preface  to  these  gathered  treasures  of  "Proverbial 
Philosophy"  Mr.  Spurgeon  says:  — 

For  many  years  I  have  published  a  sheet  alma- 
nac, intended  to  be  hung  up  in  workshops  and 
kitchens.  This  has  been  known  as  "John  Plough- 
man's Almanack,"  and  has  had  a  large  sale.  It  has 
promoted  temperance,  thrift,  kindness  to  animals, 
and  a  regard  for  religion,  among  working  people. 
The  placing  of  a  proverb  for  every  day  for  twenty 
years  has   cost    me   great    labor,  and  I    feel   that  I 


PRG\ERBIAL    PHILOSOPHY  1 23 

cannot  afford  to  lose  the  large  collection  of  sen- 
tences which  I  have  thus  brought  together;  yet 
lost  they  would  be,  if  left  to  die  with  the  ephemeral 
sheet.  Hence  these  two  volumes.  They  do  not 
profess  to  be  a  complete  collection  of  proverbs,  but 
only  a  few  out  of  many  thousands. 

The  salt  of  proverbs  is  of  great  service  if  dis- 
creetly used  in  sermons  and  addresses;  and  I 
have  hope  that  these  salt  cellars  of  mine  may  be 
resorted  to  by  teachers  and  speakers,  and  that 
they  may  find  them  helpful.  There  are  many 
proverb  books,  but  none  exactly  like  these  I 
have  not  followed  any  one  of  the  other  collections, 
although,  of  necessity,  the  most  of  the  quaint  say- 
ings are  the  same  as  will  be  found  in  them.  Some 
of  my  sentences  are  quite  new,  and  more  are  put 
into  a  fresh  form.  The  careful  omission  of  all 
that  are  questionable  as  to  purity  has  been  my 
aim;  but  should  any  one  of  them,  unknown  to  me, 
have  another  meaning  than  I  have  seen  in  it,  I 
cannot  help  it,  and  must  trust  the  reader  to  accept 
the  best  and  purest  sense  which  it  bears ;  for  that 
is  what  it  meant  to  inc.  It  is  a  pity  that  the  salt 
of  a  proverb  should  ever  be  unsavory;  but,  be- 
yond doubt,  in  several  of  the  best  collections, 
there  are  very  questionable  ones,  which  ought  to 
be  forgotten.  It  is  better  to  select  than  indiscrimi- 
nately to  collect.  An  old  saying  which  is  not  clean 
ought  not  to  be  preserved  because  of  its  age;  but 
it  should,  for  that  reason,  be  the  more  readily 
dropped,  since  it    must   have   done   harm    enough 


124  SPURGEON 

already,  and  the  sooner  the  old  rottenness  is  buried 
the  better. 

My  homely  notes  are  made  up,  as  a  rule,  of 
other  proverbial  expressions.  They  are  intended 
to  give  hints  as  to  how  the  proverbs  may  be  used 
by  those  who  are  willing  to  flavor  their  speech 
with  them.  I  may  not,  in  every  case,  have  hit 
upon  the  first  meaning  of  the  maxims;  possibly, 
in  some  instances,  the  sense  which  I  have  put 
upon  them  may  not  be  the  general  one;  but  the 
meanings  given  are  such  as  they  may  bear  without 
a  twist,  and  such  as  commended  themselves  to 
me  for  general  usefulness.  The  antiquary  has  not 
been  the  guide  in  this  case,  but  the  moralist  and 
the  Christian. 

From  what  sources  I  have  gleaned  these  prov- 
erbs it  is  impossible  for  me  to  tell.  They  have 
been  jotted  down  as  they  were  met  with.  Having 
become  common  property,  it  is  not  easy  to  find 
out  their  original  proprietors.  If  I  knew  where  I 
found  a  pithy  sentence,  I  would  acknowledge  the 
source  most  freely;  but  the  gleanings  of  years,  "in 
innumerable  fields,  cannot  now  be  traced  to  this 
literary  estate  or  to  that.  In  the  mass,  I  confess 
that  almost  everything  in  these  books  is  borrowed 
— from  cyclopedias  of  proverbs,  "garlands,"  alma- 
nacs, books,  newspapers,  magazines — from  any- 
where and  everywhere.  A  few  proverbs  I  may 
myself  have  made,  though  even  this  is  difficult; 
but,  from  the  necessity  of  the  case,  sentences 
which  have  become  proverbs  arc  things  to  be 
quoted,  and  not  to  be  invented. 


PROVERBIAL    PHILOSOPHY  12$ 

A  cat  with  a  silver  collar  is  none  the  better 
mouser. — Fine  dress,  learned  degrees,  high  titles, 
and  grand  offices  do  not  give  ability.  We  have 
heard  of  doctors  of  divinity  who  were  duller  preach- 
ers than  the  generality  of  the  clergy. 

A  false  tale  is  a  nimble  footman. — It  runs  every- 
where, and  knocks  at  everybody's  door  long  before 
the  truth  is  out  of  bed. 

A  fool's  gun  is  soon  fired. — He  has  little  to  say, 
but  he  is  in  a  desperate  hurry  to  say  it.  In  olden 
times  they  said,  "A  fool's  bolt  is  soon  shot." 

A  loose  tooth  and  a  fickle  friend  are  two  evils. 
— The  sooner  we  are  cleared  of  them  the  better; 
but  who  likes  the  wrench.-* 

Always  in  a  hurry,  always  behind. — A  little 
punctuality  would  save  life  from  being  a  worry,  a 
flurry,  a  hurry,  and  a  scurry.  Half  the  ease  of  life 
oozes  away   through    the   leaks   of    unpunctuality. 

An  ass  may  think  he's  Solomon;  but  he  isn't. — 
"If  a  man  think  himself  to  be  something  when  he 
is  nothing,  he  deceiveth  himself." 

z\void  the  "Queen's  Head"  and  comfort  your 
wife's  heart. 

A  sermon's  length  is  not  its  strength. — It  may 
be  very  much  its  weakness.  In  this  case  brevity 
is  a  virtue.  It  is  a  pity  to  weary  the  head  when 
we  should  win  the  heart.  Some  divines  are  long 
in  their  sermons  because  they  are  short  in  their 
studies. 

Be  a  man,  and  not  a  masher.—  Don't  want  to 
know  what  this  means;  the  subject  is  too  insignifi- 
cant. 


126  SPURGEON 

Be  chaste  as  a  lily. — Never  was  this  exhortation 
more  needed  than  now  when  men  are  trying  to 
legalize  impurity.  Young  men,  shun  all  unchas- 
tity! 

Bear  the  hen's  cackle  for  the  sake  of  the  eggs. — 
Little  annoyances  must  be  put  up  with  because  of 
great  advantages. 

Before  you  doctor  others,  try  your  own  physic. — • 
Especially  if  you  try  to  teach  the  gospel.  Never 
preach  beyond  your  own  experience. 

Before  you  hang  up  your  hat,  look  at  the  peg. 
— See  what  sort  of  family  you  will  be  connected 
with  by  the  marriage.  Observe  well  your  mother- 
in-law. 

Believe  not  half  you  hear,  and  repeat  not  half 
you  believe. — My  uncle  used  to  say,  "When  you 
hear  an  ill  report  about  anyone,  halve  it,  and 
then  quarter  it,  and  then  say  nothing  about  the 
rest." 

Better  give  a  shilling  than  lend  half-a-crown. — 
You  will  save   eighteen   pence  by  the  transaction. 

Bills  look  best  receipted. — The  queen's  likeness 
on  a  receipt  stamp  is  a  cheering  work  of  art  when 
seen  at  the  foot  of  an  account. 

Busy  tongues  make  idle  hands. — It's  woeful  to 
have  a  house  full  of  cacklers,  and  never  an  egg 
from  the  whole  of  them.  While  they  talk  about 
everything,  they  do  nothing. 

Buy  not  on  trust;  down  with  the  dust. — A  shop- 
keeper's sign  in  China  bore  the  inscription:  "No 
credit;  we  have  learned  wisdom  from  former  cus- 
tomers." 


PROVERBIAL    PHILOSOPHY  12/ 

Buy  one  fine  thing  and  you  must  buy  ten  more. 
— Thus  the  piano  on  the  hire  system  leads  to  no 
end  of  purchases,  and  the  family  is   impoverished. 

A  man  in  debt  is  caught  in  a  net. — Some  never 
get  out  of  it:  they  do  not  pay  anyone,  and  yet 
they  live  on,  like  Tom  Farbehind,  of  whom  we 
read: — 

•'  His  last  debt's  paid,  poor  Tom's  no  more. 
Last  debt!  Tom  never  paid  a  debt  before." 

A  man  is  known  by  the  company  he  shuns, — 
Quite  as  much  as  by  the  company  he  keeps. 

A  man  is  not  bad  because  a  ,viper  bites  him. — ■ 
Excellent  persons  are  liable  to  be  assailed  by  ma- 
licious slanderers,  who,  because  of  their  serpent 
nature,  take  delight  in  attacking  the  good.  An 
apostle  once  had  a  viper  fasten  upon  his  hand,  but 
he  shook  it  off  into  the  fire,  and  it  did  him  no  harm, 

A  man  is  only  the  head,  a  good  wife  is  the 
crown.  —Solomon  is  our  authority  for  this. — Prov. 
xii:  4. 

A  man  may  be  a  fool  and  not  know  it. — Indeed 
it  is  generally  the  case  that  he  is  not  aware  of  his 
own  folly.  If  he  did  know  it,  he  would  not  be  a 
fool  any  longer. 

A  man  may  be  a  great  divine  and  yet  have  no 
religion. 

A  man  may  dig  his  grave  with  his  teeth. — Glut- 
tons, bon  vivants,  and  even  careless  eaters  may 
commit  suicide  while  eating. 

A  man  may  drown  himself  in  a  quart  pot.—" 
Have  you  not  seen  it  done."* 


128  SPURGEON 

A  man  may  tell  a  lie  till  he  believes  it. — And 
this  is  often  done.  We  have  heard  persons  tell 
tales  which  we  are  sure  are  not  true.  Those  stories 
have  altered  year  after  year,  to  our  knowledge,  but 
the  narrators  are  quite  sure  of  their  accuracy. 
They  have  told  the  story  so  often  that  they  have 
persuaded  themselves  into  a  firm  faith  in  it. 

A  man  may  threaten  and  yet  be  afraid. 

Buy  the  best.  Things  may  cost  less,  and  be 
worthless. — Horrible  cheapness  is  ruining  both 
buyer,  seller,  and  producer.  If  we  get  things  for 
less  money,  there  is  less  material  or  less  work  in 
them. 

Better  be  new-born  than  high-born. — The  re- 
generate possess  a  nobler  nature  than  the  proudest 
of  earth's  nobility  if  they  are  not  born  from  above. 

Better  nail  your  heart  to  the  Cross  than  your 
ears  to  the  pulpit. -^That  is  to  say,  true  love  to 
Jesus  is  better  than  slavishly  following  any  human 
preacher,  and  accepting  all  that  he  may  say. 

Call  me,  and  I'll  call  thee. — Puff  me,  and  I'll 
puff  thee.  Mutual-admiration  societies  are  very 
common.  Some  seem  to  be  in  league  to  support 
each  other's  falsehoods. 

Day  of  rest,  of  days  the  best. — A  poet  calls  the 
Sabbath,  "Heaven  once  a  week," 

Dirt  cheap  is  generally  dear  dirt. — We  pay  less 
and  get  less.  Modern  cheap  things  are  often  mere 
rubbish,  "made  to  sell,"  or  stained  with  the  blood 
of  the  poor  worker. 

Don't  burn  your  lips  with  other  men's   broth. — 


PROVERBIAL    PHILOSOPHY  1 29 

If  you  get  sipping  a  little  with  them,  and  mixing 
up  with  their  affairs,  you  will  come  in  for  a  share 
of  their  trouble  when  it  is  served  out  hot   to  them. 

Don't  go  to  sea  in  an  egg-shell. — Trust  only  in 
that  which  is  worthy  of  trust;  do  not  risk  your 
money  on  a  bubble  scheme,  nor  your  soul  on  a 
novel  doctrine. 

Earn  all  you  can;  save  all  you  can;  give  all  you 
can. — This,  I  think,  was  John  Wesley's  saying. 
It  embodies  much  of  his  shrewd  sense  and  conse- 
cration. Some  take  firstly  and  secondly,  but 
thirdly  is  too  much  for  them;  giving  goes  against 
the  grain. 

Great  bodies  move  slowly. — It  must  be  so, 
Hence  the  difficulty  of  moving  a  corporation,  a 
parliament,  or  a  committee. 

Law  is  a  bottomless  pit;  keep  far  from  it. — 
Therefore,  "agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly"  or 
thou  and  he  may  both  be  in  the  abyss.  "The  suit 
is  ended,"  said  the  lawyer;  "both  parties  are 
cleaned  out." 

Be  in  the  right  way,  but  be  in  nobody's  way. 

Be  it  weal  or  be  it  woe, 
It  will  not  evermore  be  so. 

Our  condition  will  change  and  this  is  a  good  rea- 
son why  we  should  neither  presume  on  the  pres- 
ent, nor   despair   concerning  it. 

"The  world  goes  up,  and  the  world  goes  down, 
And  the  sunshine  follows  the  rain; 
And  yesterday's  sneer,  and  yesterday's  frown. 
Can  never  come  over  again." — C.  Kings  ley. 

Be  just  to  all,  but   trust   not   all. — It   would   be 


130  SPURGEON 

unjust  not  to  trust  some;      it  would   be   unwise  to 
trust  m'any. 

Be  kind  to  mankind. — We  are  all  of  a  kind,  all 
of  kin,  or  say,  all  kinned,  and  therefore  we  should 
be  kind  to  each  other. 

Be  kind  to  your  horse,  for  it  cannot  complain: 
Be  tender  when  using  the  whip  or  the  rein. 

There  is  a  special  venom  in  cruelty  to  dumb  ani- 
mals. Their  silence  should  be  eloquent  with  every 
heart. 

Be  low  in  humility  and  high  in  hope. — He  who 
will  not  bend  his  head  in  humility  will  run  against  a 
beam,  he  that  will  not  hold  up  his  head  in  hopeful- 
ness will  not  be  cheered  by  an  early  sight  of  the 
good  which  is  waiting  for  him. 

Be  low,  or  you  will  be  sent  below. — Many  have 
had  "with  shame  to  take  the  lowest  room,"  because 
they  would  push  themselves  forward  where  they 
had  no  right  to  be. 

Who  wrongly  takes  the  highest  place 
Shall  lie  sent  down  with  mucli  disgrace. 

Be  merrily  wise  and  wisely  merry. — It  is  to  be 
done,  though  it  will  need  prudence  and  prayer. 

Be  neither  careworn  nor  careless. 

Be  no  time-server,  and  yet  serve  your  times. — • 
As  David  served  his  generation  by  the  will  of  God, 
so  should  we;  but  this  is  a  very  different  thing 
from  standing  cap  in  hand  to  curry  favor  with 
those  who  for  a  while  are  in  power. 

Everyone  thinks  his  own  sack  to  be  the  heavi- 
est.— Each  one  thinks  his  lot  the  worst;    but  he  is 


PROVERBIAL    PHILOSOPHY  I3I 

mistaken.      If  he  thought  himself  the  worst  of  the 
lot  he  might  be  right. 

Everyone  will  be  thy  friend 
Whilst  thou  hast  wherewith  to  spend; 
But  if  store  or  crowns  be  scant, 
No  man  will  supply  thy  want. 

We  fear  this  is  too  often  the  fact;  but  assuredly 
it  is  not  always  so,  nor  is  it  often  so  with  gracious 
men. 

Every  path  hath  its  puddle. — No  man's  life  is 
quite  beyond  rebuke:  no  man's  course  is  without 
its  difficulties  and  sorrows. 

Every  pea  helps  to  fill  the  S5.ck. — Every  wor- 
shiper increases  the  congregation,  every  member 
helps  to  make  up  the  church,  every  penny  enlarges 
the  collection. 

Every  peddler  sells  the  very  best  pins. — At  least 
he  says  so,  and  he  ought  to  know. 

Every  pig  can  grunt. — It  needs  no  genius  to 
grumble  and  find  fault.  He  who  can  do  nothing 
else  is  often  great  in  this  art.  Let  the  creature 
grunt. 

Every  poor  man  is  a  fool  in  the  judgment  of  a 
fool. — The  same  fool  considers  every  wealthy  per- 
son to  be  a  paragon  of  wisdom.  The  poorest 
twaddle  is  eloquence  when  it  comes  from  a  noble- 
man's mouth.  Lord  Fitznoodle  is  the  patron 
saint  of  fools. 

Every  potter  praises  his  own  pot. — If  he  does 
not  do  so,  who  will.^  Potters  cannot  afford  to  keep 
trumpeters,  and  therefore  they  praise  their  own 
ware.      We  all  do  so,  more  or  less.      This  proverb 


1 32  SPURGEON 

often  runs,  "Every  potter  praises  his  own  pot, 
and  all  the  jnore  If  it  is  cracked.''^  Does  not  self- 
praise  imply  a  crack  somewhere? 

Every  question  is  not  for  me  to  answer. — If  I 
attempt  to  do  so  I  shall  show  my  ignorance. 
"Teach  thy  tongue  to  say  'I  do  not  know, '"is  a 
Talmudic  proverb. 

Fire  begins  with  little  sparks:  crime  begins  with 
evil  thoughts. 

First  come,  first  served. — A  fair  rule.  No  one 
ought  to  wish  to  go  out  of  his  turn  at  the  expense 
of  others,  even  though  he  may  think  himself  a  per- 
son of  importance. 

First  comes  owing,  and  then  comes  lying. — For 
the  debtor  invents  false  excuses,  and  makes  untruth- 
ful promises,  so  as  to  stave  off  the  day  of  payment. 

First  look  up,  and  then  lookout. — Look  to  God 
first,  and  then  watch  for  every  honorable  oppor- 
tunity of  getting  on  in  business. 

First  practice  at  home,  then  preach  abroad. — It 
is  not  every  man  that  would  like  to  preach  to  his 
neighbors  from  his  own  door-step. 

First  the  distiller,  then  the  doctor,  then  the 
undertaker. 

First  thrive,  then  wive,  then  strive. 

First  understand,  and  then  undertake. — It  is  the 
height  of  folly  to  undertake  a  matter  of  which  you 
do  not  know  the  ins  and  outs.  Many  have  burnt 
their  fingers  with  such  blind  agreements.  Never 
sign  what  you  have  not  seen. 

Fish  bred  in  dirty  pools  will  surely  taste  of  mud. 


PROVERBIAL    PHILOSOPHY  I33 

— I  remember  having  received,  as  a  present,  some 
fine  carp  taken  from  the  village  pond.  To  put  the 
knife  into  them  was  quite  enough  for  me:  a  friend 
who  ate  of  them  was  seriously  ill.  The  fish  had 
lived  upon  the  filth  of  the  parish,  and  could  not 
be  clean  eating.  Those  who  are  bred  in  vice  are 
sure  to  show  it  in  their  character. 

Fit  words  are  fine;   but  often  fine  words  are  not 
fit.  —  If    the   language   is   suitable   to   express   the' 
truth,  it  is  everything.      Sometimes  grand  oratory 
is  great  absurdity. 

Flattery  is  pap  for  fools. 

'Tis  an  old  maxim  of  the  schools 
That  flattery's  the  food  of  fools; 
And  whoso  likes  such  airy  meat. 
Will  soon  have  nothing  else  lo  eat. 

Be  deaf  with  one  ear,  and  blind  with  one  eye. — 
Some  things  it  is  well  neither  to  hear  nor  see. 
Discretion  will  tell  us  when  to  be  observantly 
blind,  and  forgetfully  deaf. 

Be  good,  and  then  do  good. — You  cannot  really 
do  more  than  you  are. 

Be  good,  get  good,  and  do  good. — Do  all  the 
good  you  can ;  to  all  the  people  you  can;  in  all 
the  ways  you  can;  as  often  as  you  can;  and  as 
long  as  you  can. 

Be  good,  or  it  will  not  be  good  to  be. — Without 
grace  in  the  heart,  it  were  better  for  that  man  that 
he  had  never  been  born.  Even  for  this  world  he 
who  does  no  good  dies  "much  unlamented." 

Be  good  within;  do  good  without. — When  a 
candle  is  alight  within  a  lantern  it  sheds  a  light  all 


134  SPURGEON 

around:  but  if  the  lantern  be  dark  within  it  is  of 
no  use  to  those  outside.  It  is  the  same  with  men. 
Have  Hght  in  yourselves. 

Be  hardy,  but  not  hard. — Endure  hardship  your- 
self; but  do  not  become  unkind  to  others  because 
you  are  strong  and  can  rough  it.  A  hardy  man 
with  a  tender  heart  is  a  beautiful  character;  but 
an  unfeeling  tyrant  is  a  curse  to  his  household. 

Be  honest,  and  thus  outwit  the  rogues. — Honesty 
perplexes  the  cunning.  They  think  you  are  prac- 
ticing some  deep  policy,  and  they  are  baffled. 

Be  hospitable,  but  take  nobody  in. — In  other 
words — Receive  many,  but  deceive  none. 

Be  humble,  or  you'll  stumble. — "Pride  goeth 
before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a 
fall."— Prov.  xvi:   i8. 

Be  in  good  spirits  without  ardent   spirits. 

Be  in  the  mill  and  expect  to  have  flour  on  your 
coat. — Your  associations  in  business  and  friendship 
will  tell  upon  your  reputation  and  character. 

Every  monkey  has  his  tricks. — Spoken  of  larkish 
fellows  who  annoy  people  with  their  follies. 

Everyone  feels  the  cold  according  as  he  is  clad. 
—Where  the  garments  of  faith  and  patience  are 
worn,  the  Arctic  winter  of  poverty  is  endured  with- 
out harm;  but  trying  circumstances  freeze  the  life 
out  of  some  men,  because  their  religion  is  a  dread- 
fully thin  and  flimsy  fabric. 

Everyone  for  himself  is  the  pig's  doctrine. — 
And  there  are  a  great  many  believers  in  it.  The 
worshipers  of  Number  One  are  numerous,  and 
enthusiastic.      Self  is  the  man! 


PROVERBIAL    PHILOSOPHY  I  35 

As  I  walked  by  myself,  I  said  to  myself, 
And  myself  said  again  unto  me: 
"  Look  to  thyself,  take  care  of  thyself, 
For  nobody  cares  for  thee." 

Everyone  is  wise  after  the  business  is  over. — 
This  is  the  especial  wisdom  of  the  unwise.  Yet 
we  could  all  do  much  better  if  we  had  to  do  it  over 
again :  at  least,  we  think  so.  We  are  fools  enough 
to  imagine  that  we  should  not  be  fools  again ! 

Everyone  must  row  with  the  oars  he  has. — 
This  is  wisdom.  Instead  of  quarreling  with  our 
tools,  let  us  do  our  best  with  them.  Paddle  your 
own  canoe  with  such  paddles  as  come  to  hand. 

Everyone  takes  his  pleasure  whfere  he  finds  it. — 
Hence  a  man's  pleasures  become  the  index  of  his 
character.  If  he  takes  pleasure  in  sin,  it  is  because 
he  loves  it.  If  he  frequents  the  pit,  it  is  because 
he  is  going  there. 

Everyone  thinks  he  could  have  done  better. — 
Had  he  been  consulted,  mistakes  would  have  been 
avoided,  and  grander  results  would  have  been  ob- 
tained. Others  may  be  all  very  well ;  but  zvc  live 
at  Nonsuch  House,  in  the  parish  of  Nonpareil. 

Every  one  to  his  liking,  as  the  man  said  when 
he  kissed  his  cow. — Happily,  in  this  case,  the  kiss- 
ing would  neither  involve  an  action  for  assault, 
nor  excite- another  man's  jealousy  concerning  the 
lady.      There  is  no  accounting  for  tastes. 

Find  you  out  your  sins,  or  your  sins  will  find 
out  you. 

Fine  birds  are  all  the  more  likely  to  be  plucked. 
— Pretty  people  are  tempted,  and  great  men  are 
assailed. 


136  SPURGEON 

Fine  clothes  cannot  hide  the  clown. — They  far 
oftener  betray  him:  he  does  not  feel  at  home  in 
them  any  more  than  a  dog  in  a  blanket,  or  a  hog 
in  armor. 

Fine  feathers  make  fine  birds. — Yet  garments 
can  only  make  a  vain  person  what  Masson  calls  "a 
decorated  fool."  A  Puritanic  student  once  called 
certain  fine  ladies  "ambulating  blocks  for  milli- 
nery." Well,  dress  as  they  may,  it  is,  at  least,  a 
pity  that  they  do  not  leave  feathers  to  birds,  and 
not  murder  our  songsters  to  bedeck  their  own 
heads. 

Fine  promises  are  frail  securities. — That  is  to 
say,  when  they  come  from  our  fellow  mortals. 
Many  have  been  ruined  by  the  rascality  which 
promised,  but  never  intended  to  perform.  Such 
promises  are  solid  lies:  not  so  much  falsehood  in 
word  as  falsehood  in  fact. 

Fine  stables  do  not  make  good  horses. — A  man 
may  live  in  a  college  and  be  a  dunce,  or  dwell 
under  the  eaves  of  the  house  of  God  and  be  an 
infidel.  A  villa  may  have  a  villain  for  its  tenant, 
and  a  mansion  may  hold  a  lord  without  either 
manor  or  manners.  Ecclesiastical  architecture 
does  not  secure  piety.  Many  a  poor  drone  of  a 
preacher  has  had  the  emptying  of  a  fine  Gothic 
edifice. 

Fine  words  have  great  weight  with  feeble  minds. 
— The  authors  of  proverbs  to  this  effect,  of  which 
there  are  very  many,  had  evidently  been  misled  by 
fine  oratory,  and  at  last  arrived  at   the  conclusion 


THE    SALT    CELLARS  T37 

that  words  are  but  air,  and  that  there  is  no  build- 
ing upon  them. 

Finery  is  foolery.  — A  lady  asked  the  Rev.  John 
Newton  what  was  the  best  rule  for  female  dress 
and  behavior.  "Madam,"  said  he,  "so  dress  and 
so  conduct  yourself  that  persons  who  have  been  in 
your  company  shall  not  recollect  what  you  had 
on."  When  so  much  is  spent  on  dress  that  the 
house  is  impoverished  the  folly  is  extreme.  It 
suggests  the  epigram — 

*'  What  is  the  reason,  can  you  guess, 

Why  men  are  poor  and  women  thinner? 
So  much  do  they  for  dinner  dress, 

There's  nothing  left  to  dress  for  dinner." 

He  that  a  watch  would  wear,  just  this  must  do. 
Pocket  his  watch,  and  watch  tiis  pocket  too. 

We  have  heard  of  one  who  covered  his  watch  with 
fish-hooks;  but  the  worst  of  it  was  that  he  only 
remembered  what  he  had  done  when  he  put  his 
own  fingers  into  his  watch-pocket. 

He  that  asks  too  much  is  likely  to  get  nothing. 

He  that  burns  most,  shines  most. — There  must 
be  a  self-consumption  to  produce  light.  John  was 
a  burning  and  a  shining  light,  and  the  burning  is 
not  to  be  separated  from  the  shining. 

He  that  by  the  plow  would  thrive, 
Jlimself  must  either  hold  or  drive. 

A  living  can  be  made  by  one  who  works  himself, 
even  where  a  gentleman  farmer  is  a  heavy  loser. 
So  we  have  heard.  At  any  rate,  if  the  farm.er 
cannot  live  who  drives  the  plow,  how  can  he  live 
who  drives  a  fast-trotting  mare? 


138  SPURGEON 

He  that  can  be  won  with  a  feather  will  be  lost 
with  a  straw.— Easily  persuaded  persons  are  no 
great  catch,  for  no  reliance  can  be  placed  upon 
them:    they  are  soon  led  to  the  opposite  side. 

He  that  cuts  himself  willfully  deserves  no  salve. 

He  that  deals  in  dirt  will  not  keep  clean   hands. 

He  that  delights  to  plant  and  set 
Puts  coming  ages  in  his  debt. 

This,  after  all,  is  only  justice;  for  we  also  eat 
of  many  trees  which  our  fathers  planted. 

He  that  deserves  nothing  should  be  content  with 
anything. 

He  that  doth  jest  must  take  a  jest; 
Or  else  to  let  alone  were  best. 

He  that  dwells  in  a  city  where  there  is  a  syna- 
gogue, and  comes  not  to  prayer  there,  is  the  per- 
son that  deserves  the  name  of  a  bad  neighbor. — 
This  is  a  saying  of  the  Jews.  But  how  many  bad 
neighbors  do  we  live  among,  who  are  seldom  seen 
in  the  public  assemblies  of  the  saints  from  year  to 
year! 

He  means  to  buy,  for  he  finds  fault  with  the 
goods. — "It  is  naught,  it  is  naught,  saith  the  buyer." 
Just  because  he  means  to  be  a  buyer. 

He  must  be  a  wise  man  himself  who  can  distin- 
guish one.— So  said  Diogenes  and  we  will  not 
contradict  him. 

He  pares  his  apple  that  would  cleanly  feed.— 
Well  said,  Mr.    Herbert.      Tell  the  story,  if  worth 
telling,    but  not  with  the  oath  or  the  smut — that 
can  be  left  out  with  great  advantage. 


THE    SALT    CELLARS  1 39 

He  preaches  well  who  lives  well.  —  Even  if  he 
does  not  open  his  mouth  his  example  is  a  sermon. 

He  promiseth  to  turn  your  iron  into  gold,  but 
he  will  turn  your  gold  into  iron. — True  of  the  gen- 
tleman who  presents  you  with  a  prospectus  of  a 
company  which  is  to  pay  a  quite  impossible  divi- 
dend. No  doubt  the  concern  will  pay  those  who 
get  it  up. 

He  put  his  finger  in  the  pie,  and  burned  his  nail 
off. 

He  rides  well  who  never  stumbles. — Where  is 
that  man.?     Where  is  his  horse.' 

He  runs  far  who  never  turns., — Unless  he  breaks 
his  neck.  He  will  run  too  far,  if  his  way  be  not 
the  right  one. 

He  shuts  his  eyes,  and  thinks  none  see. 

He  talks  much  who  has  least  to  say. — "How 
would  you  v^ish  your  hair  to  be  cut.'"  asked  the 
barber  one  day  of  Archelaus,  king  of  Macedon, 
and  the  king  made  answer,  "Silently."  Alas!  this 
is  too  rare  a  method  anywhere,  in  anything. 

It  was  said  of  one  man:  — 

He  argued  with  the  greatest  zest, 

'Twas  very  hard  to  put  him  out; 
And  strange  to  say,  he  talked  the  best 

Of  wliat  he  knew  the  least  about. 

A  loveless  life  is  a  living  death. — For  to  love  is 
to  live.      Our  laureate  says:  — 

"  'Tis  better  to  have  loved  and  lost, 
Than  never  to  have  loved  at  all." 

A  mad  parson  makes  a  mad  parish. — For  good 
or   for   bad  the  shepherd   affects   the    flock.      One 

9 


I40  SPURGEON 

wonders  if  that  clergyman  was  of  this  kind  of  whom 
we  read  that  a  thief  stole  his  linen,  and  he  offered 
a  reward  for  the  discovery  of  the  offender,  where- 
upon the  following  verse  was  written  at  the  bot- 
tom of  one  of  the  bills:  — 

"  Some  thief  has  stolen  the  parson's  shirts; 
To  skin  nought  could  be  nearer: 
The  parish  will  give  five  hundred  pounds 
To  him  who  steals  the  wearer." 

A  man  beyond  his  line  is  never  like  to  shine. — 
When  the  cobbler  leaves  his  last  he  also  quits  his 
awl,  and  is  all  at  sea.  What  can  a  man  do  well 
when  he  quits  his  own  business  and  takes  to-  an 
occupation  of  which  he  knows  nothing? 

A  man  brings  the  stones,  but  the  woman  builds 
them  into  the  wall. 

A  man  cannot  prosper  till  he  gets  his  wife's 
leave. — She  must  practice  economy,  or  all  his 
earnings  will  insensibly  melt  away. 

"A  man  may  spare, 
And  still  be  bare, 

If  his  wife  be  nowt,  if  his  wife  be  nowt; 
But  a  man  may  spend, 
And  have  money  to  lend, 
If  his  wife  be  owt,  if  his  wife  be  owt." 

A  man  had  better  have  his  hands  in  his  own 
pockets  than  in  other  people's.  —  Persons  usually 
put  their  hands  into  their  pockets  because  there  is 
nothing  else  there,  and  nature  abhors  a  vacuum; 
but  hands  in  another  man's  pocket  are  engaged  in 
creating  a  vacuum,  and  that  is  a  crime  against 
both  natural  and  national  law, 

A  man  had  need  be  a  great  philosopher  to  bear 
toothache  patiently. 


THE    SALT    CELLARS  I4I 

He  is  wise  who  follows  the  wise. 

He  is  wise  who  knows  his  own  business. — He 
may  not  be  a  university  man,  but  he  knows  enough 
to  get  through  the  universe. 

He  knows  the  water  best  who  has  waded  through. 
— There  is  nothing  like  personal  experience. 

He  laughs  at  scars  who   never   felt  a  wound. — 
The  power  to  sympathize  can   only  come  by  per 
sonal  suffering. 

He  laughs  best  who  laughs  last. — Because  he 
will  be  surest  of  his  laugh,  and  will  probably  laugh 
at  those  who  laughed  at  him.  If  he  can  laugh 
when  the  whole  thing  is  ended-,  he  has  the  best 
cause  for  his  merriment. 

He  likes  mutton  too  well  who  eats  the  wool. — 
We  are  not  bound  to  follow  a  man,  faults  and  all. 

He  lives  longest  who  is  awake  most  hours. — 
That  is  to  say,  if  he  is  not  kept  awake  by  sickness. 
or  care,  or  excessive  labor;  for  these  may  shorten 
life  though  they  add  to  the  waking  hours.  Doubt- 
less early  rising  is  a  great  addition  to  our  oppor- 
tunities for  work. 

He  liveth  long  who  liveth  well. — Indeed  the 
way  to  measure  life  is  not  by  its  years,  but  by  its 
deeds. 

He  looks  as  if  butter  would  not  melt  in  his 
mouth. — This  is  the  sort  of  man  whom  you  must 
never  trust. 

He  loses  indeed  who  loses  at  last. 

He  loses  least  in  a  quarrel  who  has  had  least  to 
say  in  it. 


142  SrURGEON 

He  may  well  swim  who  has  his  head  held  up. — 
Just  so!  W^c  arc  able  to  swim  the  seas  of  tempta- 
tion only  because  grace  keeps  us  from  sinking. 

He  may  wisely  run  who  finds  he  cannot  stand 
his  ground. 

He  is  a  stupid  who  loses  patience  with  a  stupid. 
— "Ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye  yourselves  are 
wise  " — 2  Cor.  xi:  12.  We  find  out  how  foolish 
we  are  when  a  great  stupid  brushes  our  fur  the 
wrong  way,  and  raises  our  wrath. 

He  is  a  weak  friend  who  cannot  bear  with  his 
friend's  weakness. 

He,  is  best  who  has  done  best  — With  few  excep- 
tions this  is  the  rule.  "By  their  fruits  shall  ye 
know  them." — Matt,  vii:  20. 

He  is  blind  who  thinks  he  sees  everything. — The 
observant  man  recognizes  many  mysteries  into 
which  he  cannot  pretend  to  see,  and  he  remembers 
that  the  world  is  too  wide  for  the  eye  of  any  one 
man.  But  modern  sophists  are  sure  of  everything, 
especially  if  it  contradicts  the  Bible. 

He  is  fioe  who  dares  to  be 
In  the  right  witli  two  or  three. 

This  liberty  has  to  be  paid  for;  but  there  is  a 
sweetness  in  it  which  those  only  know  who  have 
tasted  it. 

He  is  kind  to  himself  who  is  kind  to  his  wife. — 
Is  she  not  bone  of  your  bone.^  Does  not  your  hap- 
piness interweave  itself  with  hers.? 

He  is  no  one's  friend  who  is  his  own  enemy. 

He  is  not  the  best  carpenter  who  makes  the  most 


THE    SALT    CELLARS  I 43 

chips. — But  the  reverse.  He  who  does  his  work 
in  a  masterly  manner  is  usually  A'ery  neat  and 
clean  in  it.  The  proverb,  however,  means  that 
the  best  workers  make  no  fuss,  and  create  no  dis- 
order. 

He  is  right  sure  who  is  surely  right. 

He  is  very  absent-minded  who  searches  for  the 
ass  on  which  he  is  riding. — He  must  be  brother  to 
that  other  Celestial,  who  cried  out,  "Here's  my 
bundle,  here's  my  umbrella;    but  where  am  I.'*" 

He  is  very  blind  who  cannot  see  the  sun.  —  How 
blind  must  he  be  who  cannot  see  the  God  who 
made  the  sun! 

He  that  is  blind  will  nothing  see, 
What  light  so  e'er  about  him  be. 

In  showers,  the  umbrella  at  home  is  of  no  use. — 
It  is  like  the  Dutchman's  anchor.  When  the 
storm  came  on  he  said  that  he  had  a  first-rate 
anchor  at  home. 

In  spending  spare, 
Of  debts  beware. 

In  talks  prefer  quality  to  quantity. — Don't  utter 
sheer  nonsense,  such  as  Dr.  Darwin  alludes  to  in 
his  lines: 

"  Hear  the  pretty  ladies  talk, 
Tittle  tattle,  tittle  tattle! 
Like  their  pattens  when  they  walk, 
Pittle  pattle,  pittle  pattle." 

In  the  coldest  flint  there  is  hot  fire. — Persons 
who  seem  slow  and  patient  have  still  a  temper, 
and  will  fire  up  if  too  much  provoked.  Let  us  be 
careful  not  to  arouse  dormant  passion.  It's  ill 
waking  sleeping  tigers. 


144  SPUKGEON 

In  the  end  things  will  mend. — Time  sides  with 
patience,  heals  sorrows,  and  moves  difficulties; 
therefore  let  us  "learn  to  labor  and  to  wait." 

In  the  evening  one  may  praise  the  day. — But  it 
is  well  to  see  how  things  look  as  the  hours  pass 
away.  Some  acts  which  seemed  to  promise  well 
at  first  may  not  in  the  long  run  turn  out  to  be 
quite  so  wise  as  they  looked. 

In  the  front  they  bear  the  brunt. — No  one  who 
considers  his  own  ease  or  pleasure  should  desire 
to  be  a  leading  man:  he  is  little  more  than  the 
chief    drudge,  while   he    is   supposed  to  be  a  king. 

In  the  wedding  cake  hope  is  the  sweetest  of  the 
plums. 

In  this  life  repentance  is  never  too  late. — On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  never  too  soon.  It  is  also  to  be 
remembered  that  God,  who  will  accept  late  repent- 
ance, may  never  give  it. 

In  trade,  competition  prevents  imposition. — No 
doubt  the  public  are  gainers,  though  tradesmen 
grumble. 

In  every  fault  there  is  folly.  It  is  always  unwise 
to  sin. 

In  fair  weather  prepare  for  foul. — The  beauty 
of  our  English  weather  is,  that  when  it  is  bad,  we 
may  hope  that  it  will  soon  change.  Its  fault  is, 
that  when  it  is  good,  we  may  be  pretty  sure  it  will 
soon  alter. 

In  for  a  penny,  in  for  a  pound. — It  is  so  with  a 
certain  order  of  expenses:  once  begin  and  you 
must  go  on,  and  cannot  pull   up  when  you  would. 


THE    SALT    CELLARS  ^45 

In  giving  and  taking, 
It's  easy  mistaking. 

Therefore  allowances  should  be  made  for  error. 
Say  not:  "It  is  a  fraud,"  but  judge  it  to  be  amis- 
take.  Count  money  twice,  even  after  your  own 
kin.  Keep  correct  books.  When  you  err  your- 
self, let  it  be  against  yourself. 

In  half  the  affairs  of  this  busy  life 
(As  that  same  day  I  said  to  my  wife), 
Our  troubles  come  from  trying  to  put 
The  left-hand  shoe  on  the  right-hand  foot. 

A  little  adjustment  would  save  a  world  of  trouble; 
but  common  sense  is  very  uncommon  sense.  We 
put  salt  upon  the  plum-pudding  and  grumble  at 
its  taste;  we  mix  the  unsuitable,  and  the  result  is 
uncomfortable. 

In  judging  what  a  boy  will  be 
Mark  what  he  is  in  infancy. 

For  the  child  is  the  father  of  the  man.  Quick 
eyes  may  see  the  future  life  of  the  man  in  the 
little  ways  of  the  child. 

In  law  there's  many  a  loss  without  a  gain,  but 
never  a  gain  without  a  loss. 

In  Orange  everything  grows  except  oranges. — A 
name  is  frequently  a  mere  name.  Orange  is  too 
cold  a  region  for  the  orange  tree:  the  province 
bears  the  name  of  the  fruit  it  cannot  grow.  Some 
Christians  have  little  that  is  Christian  about  them. 
Some  "brethren"  are  sadly  unbrotherly.  Sur- 
names are  said  to  go  by  contraries:  "Mr.  Make- 
peace was  bred  an  attorney." 

In  a  calm  sea  we  are  all  good  sailors. — We  sup- 


140  SPURGEON 

pose  that  wc  can  endure  trouble  with  great  equa- 
nimity; but  when  it  really  comes,  we  are  as  much 
vexed  by  it  as  others  are. 

In  a  fiddler's  house  one  learns  to  dance. — The 
motion  of  the  music  makes  the  feet  move  almost 
involuntarily.  When  one  gets  into  a  family  one 
is  apt  to  fall  into  the  ways  of  the  house. 

In  a  large  Hock  there  will  be  one  lame  sheep. — 
Large  families  are  seldom  without  one  weak  child. 
In  religious  communities  we  may  look  for  a  pro- 
portion of  feeble  souls. 

In  a  leopard  we  expect  spots.  ^ — In  irreligious 
men  we  look  for  ill  habits,  which  could  not  be  tol- 
erated in  members  of  churches. 

In  strangers'  company  l)e\vare; 

Of  both  thy  tongue  and  purse  take  care. 

In  a  walking  newspaper  the  leading  article  is 
scandal. — Our  advice  is — do  net  take  it  in,  nor  do 
anything  else  to  increase  the  circulation  of  the  red 
rag. 

In  buying  a  horse  expect  to  be  sold. 

In  choice  of  bride  let  grace  preside. — We  fear 
that  as  a  rule  nature  has  far  more  to  do  with  it 
than  grace. 

In  company  guard  your  tongue,  in  solitude  your 
heart  — Our  words  need  watching;  but  so  also  do 
our  thoughts  and  imaginations,  which  grow  most 
active  when  we  are  alone. 

In  conduct  don't  make  trifles  of  trifles.  — Regard 
the  smallest  action  as  being  either  right  or  wrong 
and  make  a  conscience  of  little  things. 


THE    SALT    CELLARS  1 47 

In  deep  waters  men  find  great  pearls. — Our 
worst  troubles  are  often  our  greatest  enrichments. 

In  every  beginning  think  of  the  end. — In  that 
case  many  things  would  be  quitted  in  their  be- 
ginnings, for  no  one  would  wish  to  encounter  the 
end. 

Ill  in  kits  is  worse  in  cats. — For  old  people  to 
do  wrong  is  inexcusable,  but  youth  may  be  plead- 
ed as  some  little  apology. 

Ill -matched  horses  draw  badly.  —If  one  pulls  and 
the  other  jibs,  it  is  a  bad  thing  for  the  family 
coach.  Husband  and  wife  should  be  of  one  mind, 
and  specially  in  religion.  "Be 'ye  not  unequally 
yoked." 

Ill  news  flies  fast  enough. — Hence,  "no  news  is 
good  news";  for,  if  there  had  been  bad  to  hear,  we 
should  have  heard  it.  People  seem  more  eager  to 
publish  the  evil  than  the  good;  probably  because 
they  are  evil. 

Ill  weeds  always  grow  apace; 
Folly  runs  a  rapid  race. 

Ill  won  is  generally  ill  worn. — A  righteous  fatal- 
ity seems  to  prevent  the  dishonest  from  enjoying 
their  plunder.  He  who  steals  eels  finds  them  turn 
to  snakes.  Ill-gotten  goes  rotten.  What  the  devil 
brings  the  devil  takes  away. 

Ill  words  are  bellows  to  the  fire  of  anger. —  He 
that  is  quiet  causeth  no  riot. 

Ills  that  God  blesses  are  my  good; 

All  unblest  good  is  ill; 
And  all  is  right  that  seems  most  wrong 

If  it  he  God's  dear  will. 


148  SPURGEON 

A  fine  distich,  which  deserves  to  be  made  pro- 
verbial, seeing  it  is  a  conglomerate  of  proverbs, 
and  full  of  grace.  It  has  been  wisely  said  that 
"ills  are  wells  when  God  blesses  them." 

Imitate  the  best,  not  the  worst. — Our  propen- 
sity to  imitate  is  very  strong,  hence  the  importance 
of  selecting  a  good  model.  Johnson  says  that  no 
man  becomes  great  by  imitation,  but  we  doubt  it; 
in  the  beginning  of  life  the  imitation  of  a  good 
model  leads  on  to  originality. 

Improve  time  in  time  while  time  doth  last; 
For  all  time  is  no  time  when  time  is  past. 

Impatience  is  the  sting  of  affliction. — And  this 
we  put  into  it  ourselves.      What  folly! 


CHAPTER  XI 

"JOHN  ploughman's  TALK" 

A  country  life  is  sweet, 

In  moderate  cold  and  heat; 
To  walk  in  the  air  how  pleasant  and  fair! 

In  every  field  of  wheat, 
The  fairest  of  flowers  adorning  the  bowers. 

And  every  meadow's  brow; 
So  that,  I  say,  no  courtier  may 
Compare  with  them  who  clothe  in  gray, 

And  follow  the  useful  plough.   ' 

They  rise  with  the  morning  lark, 

And   labor  till  almost  dark; 
Then,  folding  their  sheep,  they  hasten  to  sleep, 

While  every  pleasant  park 
Next  morning  is  ringing  with  the  birds  that  are  singing 

On  each  green,  tender  bough. 
With  what  content  and  merriment 
Their  days  are  spent  whose  minds  are  bent 

To  follow  the  useful  plough! 

If  success  is  ever  to  be  regarded  as  a  proof  of 
worth,  then  the  fact  that  nearly  400,000  copies 
of  "John  Ploughman's  Talk"  have  been  sold,  and 
the  sale  is  still  going  on,  is  a  fact  that  bears  incon- 
trovertible evidence  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  knew  how 
to  write  for  the  people.  He  was  at  one  time  the 
best  abused  man  in  England,  he  lived  to  have 
more  hearers  and  more  readers  than  any  man  of 
his  time.  A  perusal  of  a  handful  of  selections 
from  this  matchless  combination  of  common  sense, 
practical  religion  and  inimitable  humor,  will  serve 
to  convince  the   reader    that  "John    Ploughman's 

140 


150  SPURGEON 

Talk"  was  popular  simply  because  it   deserved  to 
be. 

MR.   SPURGEON  TALKS  OF    HIS  "TALK" 

In  "John  Ploughman's  Talk"  1  have  tried  to  talk 
for  ploughmen  and  common  people.  Hence  re- 
lined  taste  and  dainty  words  have  been  discarded 
for  strong  old  proverbial  expressions  and  homely 
phrases.  I  have  aimed  my  blows  at  the  vices  of 
the  many,  and  tried  to  inculcate  those  moral  virt- 
ues without  which  men  are  degraded  and  miser- 
able. Much  that  needs  to  be  said  to  the  toiling 
masses  would  not  suit  well  the  pulpit  and  the  Sab- 
bath. These  lowly  pages  may  teach  thrift  and  in- 
dustry all  the  days  of  the  week,  in  the  cottage  and 
the  workshop;  and  if  some  learn  these  lessons  I 
shall  not  repent   the   adoption  of  the   rustic   style. 

Ploughman  is  a  name  I  may  justly  claim.  Every 
minister  has  put  his  hand  to  the  plough — it  is  his 
business  to  break  up  the  fallow  ground  and  cast 
in  good  seed.  That  I  have  written  in  a  semi- 
humorous  vein  shall  need  no  apology,  if  thereby 
sound  moral  teaching  wins  a  hearing  from  the  mill- 
ion. There  is  no  particular  virtue  in  being  seri- 
ously unreadable. 

ALL  IS  LOST  THAT  IS  POURED  INTO  A    CRACKED    DISH 

The  cook  who  pours  her  soup  into  a  cracked 
dish,  is  wasting  her  precious  liquor,  for  it  runs  out 
almost  as  fast  as  it  runs  in.      The  sooner  she  stops 


u 

< 

y. 

W 

< 
H 

H 
O 

O 

5 
U 
H 
y. 


^HE  AEW  York      ' 
^Ufil^IC  LIBRARY 

^i-OEN  FOUNDATIONS 
L 


JOHN    ploughman's    TALK  I  53 

that  game  the  better.  This  makes  me  think  of  a 
good  deal  of  preaching;  it  is  labor  in  vain,  because 
it  does  not  stay  in  the  minds  of  the  hearers,  but 
g^es  in  at  one  ear  and  out  at  the  other.  When 
men  go  to  market  they  are  all  alive  to  do  a  trade, 
but  in  a  place  of  worship  they  are  not  more  than 
half  awake,  and  do  not  seem  to  care  whether  they 
profit  or  not  by  what  they  hear.  I  once  heard  a 
preacher  say,  "Half  of  you  are  asleep,  half  are 
inattentive,  and  the  rest — "  He  never  finished 
that  sentence,  for  the  people  began  to  smile,  and 
here  and  there  one  burst  out  laughing.  Certainly, 
many  only  go  to  meeting  to  stare  about. 

"Attend  your  church,  the  parson  cries; 
To  church  each  fair  one  goes; 
The  old  ones  go  to  close  their  eyes, 
The  young  to  eye  their  clothes." 

You  might  as  well  preach  to  the  stone  images  in 
the  old  church  as  to  people  who  are  asleep.  Some 
old  fellows  come  into  our  meeting,  pitch  into  their 
corner,  and  settle  themselves  down  for  a  quiet 
snooze  as  knowingly  as  if  the  pew  was  a  sleeping- 
car  on  the  railway.  Still,  all  the  sleeping  at  serv- 
ice is  not  the  fault  of  the  poor  people,  for  some 
parsons  put  a  lot  of  sleeping  stuff  into  their  ser- 
mons. Will  Shepherd  says  they  mesmerize  the 
people.  (I  think  that  is  the  right  word,  but  I'm 
not  sure.)  I  saw  a  verse  in  a  real  live  book,  by 
Mr.  Cheales,  the  vicar  of  Brockham,  a  place  which 
is  handy  to  my  home.      I'll  give  it  you:  — 

"The  ladies  praise  our  curate's  eyes; 
I  never  see  their  light  divine, 
For  when  he  prays  he  closes  them, 
And  when  he  preaches  closes  mine." 


154  SPURGEON 

Well,  if  curates  are  heavy  in  style,  the  people 
will  soon  be  heavy  in  sleep.  Even  when  hearers 
are  awake,  many  of  them  are  forgetful.  It  is  like 
pouring  a  jug  of  ale  between  the  bars  of  a  grid- 
iron, to  try  and  teach  them  good  doctrine.  Water 
on  a  duck's  back  does  have  some  effect,  but  ser- 
mons by  the  hundred  are  as  much  lost  upon  many 
men's  hearts  as  if  they  had  been  spoken  to  a  ken- 
nel of  hounds.  Preaching  to  some  fellows  is  like 
whipping  the  water  or  lashing  the  air.  As  well 
talk  to  a  turnip,  or  whistle  to  a  dead  donkey,  as 
preach  to  these  dull  ears.  A  year's  sermons  will 
not  produce  an  hour's  repentance  till  the  grace  of 
God  comes  in. 

We  have  a  good  many  hangers-on  who  think 
that  their  duty  to  God  consists  in  hearing  sermons, 
and  that  the  best  fruit  of  their  hearing  is  to  talk  of 
what  they  have  heard.  How  they  do  lay  the  law 
down  when  they  get  argifying  about  doctrines! 
Their  religion  all  runs  to  ear  and  tongue:  neither 
their  heart  nor  their  hand  is  a  scrap  the  better.  This 
is  poor  work,  and  will  never  pay  the  piper.  The 
sermon  which  only  gets  as  far  as  the  ear  is  like  a 
dinner  eaten  in  a  dream.  It  is  ill  to  lie  soaking  in 
the  gospel  like  a  bit  of  coal  in  a  milkpan,  never 
the  whiter  for  it  all. 

What  can  be  the  good  of  being  hearers  only.^  It 
disappoints  the  poor  preacher,  and  it  brings  no 
blessing  to  the  man  hinn^clf.  Looking  at  a  plum 
wcju't  sweetcni  your  mouth,  staring  at  a  coat  won't 
cover  your   back,    and   lying   on   the   bank   won't 


JOHN    ploughman's    TALK  1 55 

catch  the  fish  in  the  river.  The  cracked  dish  is 
never  the  better  for  all  that  is  poured  into  it — it 
is  like  our  forgetful  heart,  it  wants  to  be  taken 
away,  and  a  new  one  put  instead  of  it. 

UNDER  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  CAT's  FOOT 

The  question  was  once  asked,  When  should  a 
man  marry  ?  And  the  merry  answer  was,  that  for 
young  men  it  is  too  soon,  and  for  old  men  it  is  too 
late.  This  is  all  very  fine,  but  it  will  not  wash. 
Both  the  wisdom  and  the  folly  of  men  seem  banded 
together  to  make  a  mock  of  this  doctrine.  Men 
are  such  fools  that  they  must  and  will  marr}',  even 
if  they  marry  fools.  It  is  wise  to  marry  when  we 
can  marry  wisely,  and  then  the  sooner  the  better. 
How  many  show  their  sense  in  choosing  a  partner 
it  is  not  for  me  to  say,  but  I  fear  that  in  many 
cases  love  is  blind,  and  makes  a  very  blind  choice. 
I  don't  suppose  that  some  people  would  ever  get 
married  at'  all  if  love  had  its  wits  about  it.  It  is  a 
mystery  how  certain  parties  ever  found  partners; 
truly  there's  no  accounting  for  tastes.  However, 
as  they  make  their  bed  they  must  lie  on  it,  and  as 
they  tie  the  knot  they  must  be  tied  by  it.  If  a 
man  catches  a  tartar,  or  lets  a  tartar  catch  him, 
he  must  take  his  dose  of  tartaric  acid,  and  make 
as  few  ugly  faces  as  he  can.  If  a  three-legged 
stool  come  flying  through  the  air,  he  must  be  thank- 
ful for  such  a  plain  token  of  love  from  the  woman 
of  his  choice,  and  the  best  thing  he  can  do  is  to 
sit  down  on  it  and  wait  for  the  next   little   article. 


/56  SPURGEON 

When  it  is  said  of  a  man,  "He  lives,  under  the 
sign  of  the  cat's  foot,"  he  must  try  and  please  his 
pussy,  that  she  may  not  scratch  him  more  than 
such  cats  generally  do.  A  good  husband  will  gen- 
erally have  a  good  wife,  or  make  a  bad  wife  bet- 
ter. Bad  Jack  makes  a  great  noise  about  bad  Jill, 
but  there's  generally  twenty  of  one  where  there's 
a  score  of  the  other.  They  say  a  burden  of  one's 
own  choosing  is  never  felt  to  be  heavy,  but  I  don't 
know;  some  men  are  loaded  with  mischief  as  soon 
as  they  have  a  wife  to  carry.      Yet 

A  good  woman  is  worth,  if  she  were  sold, 
The  fairest  crown  that's  made  of  gold. 

She  is  a  pleasure,  a  treasure,  and  a  joy  without 
measure.  A  good  wife  and  health  are  a  man's 
best  wealth ;  and  he  who  is  in  such  a  case  should 
envy  no  man's  place.  Even  when  a  woman  is  a 
little  tart,  it  is  better  than  if  she  had  no  spirit,  and 
made  her  house  into  a  dirt  pie.  A  shrew  is  bet- 
ter than  a  slut,  though  one  can  be  quite  miserable 
enough  with  either.  If  she  is  a  good  housewife, 
and  looks  well  after  the  children,  one  may  put  up 
with  a  Caudle  lecture  now  and  then,  though  a 
cordial  lecture  would  be  a  deal  better.  A  husband 
is  in  a  pickle  indeed  if  he  gets  tied  up  to  a  regular 
scold;  he  might  as  well  be  skinned  and  set  up  to 
his  neck  in  a  tub  of  brine.  Did  you  ever  hear  the 
scold's  song.-*  Read  it,  you  young  folks  who  think 
of  committing  matrimony,  and  think  twice  before 
you  get  married  once. 


JOHN    PLOUGHMAN  S    TALK  1 5/ 

When  in  the  morn  I  ope  mine  eyes 

To  entertain  the  day. 
Before  my  husband  e'en  can  rise, 

I  scold  him  —then  I  pray. 

When  I  at  talile  take  my  place, 

Whatever  he  the  meat, 
I  first  do  scold — and  then  say  grace. 

If  so  disposed  to  eat. 

Too  fat,  too  lean,  too  hot,  too  cold, 
I  always  do  complain; 

Too  raw,  too  roast,  too  young,  too  old- 
Faults  I  will  find  or  feign. 

Let  it  be  flesh,  or  fowl,  or  fish, 

It  never  shall  be  said 
But  I'll  find  fault  with  meat  or  dish, 

With  master  or  with  ma,id. 

But  when  I  go  to  bed  at  night 

I  heartily  do  weep, 
That  I  must  part  with  my  delight — 

I  cannot  scold   and  sleep. 

However,  this  doth  mitigate 

And  much  abate  my  sorrow. 
That  though  to  night  it  be  too  late, 

I'll  early  scold  to  morrow. 

When  the  husband  is  not  a  man,  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at  if  the  wife  wears  the  top-boots ;  the 
mare  may  well  be  the  best  horse  when  the  other 
horse  is  a  donkey.  Well  may  a  woman  feel  that 
she  is  lord  and  master  when  she  has  to  earn  the 
living  for  the  family,  as  is  sometimes  the  case 
She  ought  not  to  be  the  head,  but  if  she  has  all 
the  brains,  what  is  she  to  do.'  What  poor  dawdles 
many  men  would  be  without  their  wives!  As  poor 
softy  Simpkins  says,  if  Bill's  wife  becomes  a  widow, 
who  will  cut  the  pudding  up  for  him,  and  will 
there  be  a  pudding  at  all.'  It  is  grand  when  the 
wife  knows  her  place,  and  keeps  it,  and  they  both 

.0 


158  SPURGEON 

pull  together  in  everything.  Then  she  is  a  help- 
meet indeed,  and  makes  the  house  a  home.  Old 
friend  Tusser  says: 

"  When  husband  is  absent  let  housewife  be  chief, 
And  look  to  their  labor  who  live  from  their  sheaf; 
The  housewife's  so  named  for  she  keepeth  the  house. 
And  must  tend  on  her  profit  as  cat  on  a  mouse." 

He  is  very  pat  upon  it  that  much  of  household 
affairs  must  rest  on  the  wife,  and  he  writes: 

"Both  out,  not   allow, 

Keep  home,  housewife  thou." 

Like  the  old  man  and  woman  in  the  toy  which 
shows  the  weather,  one  must  be  sure  to  be  in  if 
the  other  goes  out.  When  the  king  is  abroad  the 
queen  must  reign  at  home,  and  when  he  returns 
to  his  throne  he  is  bound  to  look  upon  her  as  his 
crown,  and  prize  her  above  gold  and  jewels.  He 
should  feel,  "If  there's  only  one  good  wife  in  the 
whole  world,  I've  got  her."  John  Ploughman 
has  long  thought  just  that  of  his  own  wife,  and 
after  five  and  twenty  years  he  is  more  sure  of  it 
than  ever.  He  never  bets,  but  he  would  not  mind 
wagering  a  farthing  cake  that  there  is  not  a  better 
woman  on  the  surface  of  the  globe  than  his  own, 
very  own  beloved.  Happy  is  the  man  who  is 
happy  in  his  wife.  Let  him  love  her  as  he  loves 
himself,  and  a  little  better,  for  she  is  his  better 
half. 

Thank  (Jod  that  liath  so  blest  thee, 
And  sit  down,  John,  and  rest  thee. 

There  is  one  case  in  which  I  don't   wonder   if    the 


JOHN    PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK  I  59 

wife  does  put  her  mate  under  the  cat's  foot,  and 
that  is  when  he  slinks  off  to  the  pubhc  and  wastes 
his  wages.  Even  then  love  and  gentleness  is  the 
best  way  of  getting  him  home;  but,  really,  some 
topers  have  no  feeling,  and  laugh  at  kindness,  and 
therefore  nobody  can  be  surprised  if  the  poor  wite 
bristles  up  and  gives  her  lord  and  master  a  taste 
of  tongue.  Nothing  tries  married  love  more  than 
the  pothouse.  Wages  wasted,  wife  neglected, 
children  in  rags — if  she  gives  it  him  hot  and  strong, 
who  can  blame  her.^  Pitch  into' him,  good  woman, 
and  make  him  ashamed  of  himself,  if  you  can. 
No  wonder  that  you  lead  a  cat-and-dog  life  while 
he  is  such  a  sorry  dog. 

Still,  you  might  as  well  go  home  and  set  him  a 
better  example,  for  two  blacks  will  never  make  a 
white,  and  if  you  put  him  in  hot  water  he's  sure 
to  get  some  spirits  to  mix  with  it. 

there's  reason  in  roasting  eggs. 

A  good  thing  is  not  good  out  of  its  place.  It  is 
much  the  same  with  lads  and  girls.  You  can't  put 
all  boyL  to  one  trade,  nor  send  all  girls  to  the  same 
service.  One  chap  will  make  a  London  clerk,  and 
another  will  do  better  to  plough,  and  sow,  and 
reap,  and  mow,  and  be  a  farmer's  boy.  It's  no 
use  forcing  them;  a  snail  will  never  run  a  race, 
nor  a  mouse  drive  a  wagon. 

"  Send  a  boy  to  the  well  against  his  will, 
The  pitcher  will  break  and  the  water  spill." 

With    unwilling    hounds    it  is  hard  to  hunt  hares. 


l6o  SPURGEON 

To  go  against  nature  and  inclination  is  to  row 
against  wind  and  tide.  They  say  you  may  praise 
a  fool  till  you  make  him  useful.  I  don't  know  so 
much  about  that,  but  I  do  know  that  if  I  get  a  bad 
knife  I  generally  cut  my  finger,  and  a  blunt  ax  is 
more  trouble  than  profit.  No,  let  me  shave  with 
a  razor  if  I  shave  at  all,  and  do  my  work  with  the 
best  tools  I  can  get. 

Never  set  a  man  to  work  he  is  not  fit  for,  for  he 
will  never  do  it  well.  They  say  that  if  pigs  fly 
they  always  go  with  their  tails  forward,  and  awk- 
ward workmen  are  much  the  same.  Nobody  ex- 
pects cows  to  catch  crows,  or  hens  to  wear  hats. 
There's  reason  in  roasting  eggs,  and  there  should 
be  reason  in  choosing  servants.  Don't  put  a 
round  peg  into  a  square  hole,  nor  wind  up  your 
watch  with  a  corkscrew,  nor  set  a  tender-hearted 
man  to  whip  wife-beaters,  nor  a  bear  to  be  a  reliev- 
ing-offtcer,  nor  a  publican  to  judge  of  the  licensing 
laws.  Get  the  right  man  in  the  right  place,  and 
then  all  goes  as  smooth  as  skates  on  ice;  but  the 
wrong  man  puts  all  awry,  as  the  sow  did  when  she 
folded  the  linen. 

It  is  a  temptation  to  many  to  trust  them  with 
money — don't  put  them  to  take  care  of  it  if  you 
ever  wish  to  to  see  it  again.  Never  set  a  cat  to 
watch  cream,  nor  a  pig  to  gather  peaches,  for  if 
the  cream  and  the  peaches  go  a-missing  you  will 
have  yourself  to  thank  for  it.  It  is  a  sin  to  put 
people  where  they  are  likely  to  sin.  If  you  believe 
tlie   old   saying,  that   when   you  set  a   beggar  on 


JohM  ploughman's  talk  i6i 

horseback  he  will  ride  to  the  devil,  don't  let  him 
have  a  horse  of  yours. 

If  you  want  a  thing  well  done  do  it  yourself,  and 
pick  your  tools.  It  is  true  that  a  man  must  row 
with  such  oars  as  he  has,  but  he  should  not  use 
the  boat-hook  for  a  paddle.  Take  not  the  tongs 
to  poke  the  fire,  nor  the  poker  to  put  on  the  coals. 
A  newspaper  on  Sunday  is  as  much  out  of  place  as 
a  warming-pan  on  the  first  of  August,  or  a  fan 
on  a  snowy  day;  the  Bible  suits  the  Sabbath  a  deal 
better. 

He  who  tries  to  make  money  by  betting  uses  a 
wrong  tool,  and  is  sure  to  cut  his  fingers.  As  well 
hope  to  grow  golden  pippins  on  the  bottom  of  the 
sea  as  to  make  gain  among  gamblers  if  you  are  an 
honest  man.  Hard  work  and  thrifty  habits  are 
the  right  razor;  gambling  is  a  handsaw. 

Some  things  want  doing  gently,  and  telling  a 
man  of  his  faults  is  one  of  them.  You  would  not 
fetch  a  hatchet  to  break  open  an  egg,  nor  kill  a  fly 
on  your  boy's  forehead  with  a  sledge-hammer,  and 
so  you  must  not  try  to  mend  your  neighbor's  little 
fault  by  blowing  him  up  sky-high.  Never  fire  off 
a  musket  to  kill  a  midge,  and  don't  raise  a  hue 
and  cry  about  the  half  of  nothing. 

Do  not  throw  away  a  saw  because  it  is  not  a 
razor,  for  it  will  serve  your  turn  another  day,  and 
cut  your  ham-bone  if  it  won't  shave  off  your  stub- 
ble. A  whetstone,  though  it  cannot  cut,  may 
sharpen  a  knife  that  will.  A  match  gives  little 
light  itself,  but  it  may  light   a   candle   to  brighten 


l62  SPURGEOM 

up  the  room.  Use  each  thing  and  each  man  ac- 
cording to  common-sense  and  you  will  be  uncom- 
monly sensible.  You  don't  milk  horses  nor  ride 
cows,  and  by  the  same  rule  you  must  make  of  every 
man  what  he  is  meant  for,  and  the  farm  will  be  as 
right  as  a  trivet. 

Everything  has  its  use,  but  no  one  thing  is  good 
for  all  purposes.  The  baby  said,  "The  cat  crew 
and  the  cock  rocked  the  cradle,"  but  old  folks 
knew  better— the  cat  is  best  at  mousing  and  the 
cock  at  rousing.  That's  for  that,  as  salt  is  for 
herrings,  and  sugar  for  gooseberries,  and  N  for 
Nicholas.  Don't  choose  your  tools  by  their  looks, 
for  that's  best  which  does  best.  A  silver  trowel 
lays  very  few  bricks.  You  cannot  curry  a  horse 
with  a  tortoise-shell  comb,  or  fell  oaks  with  a  pen- 
knife, or  open  oysters  with  a  gold  toothpick.  Fine 
is  not  so  good  ■&.'=,  fit.  when  work  is  to  be  done.  A 
good  workman  will  get  on  pretty  well  with  a  poor 
tool,  and  a  brave  soldier  never  lacks  a  weapon: 
still,  the  best  is  good  enough  for  me,  and  Jqhn 
Ploughman  does  not  care  to  use  a  clumsy  tool  be- 
cause it  looks  pretty.  Better  ride  on  an  ass  that 
carries  you  than  on  a  steed  which  throws  you;  it 
is  far  better  to  work  with  an  old-fashioned  spade 
which  suits  your  hand  than  with  a  new-fangled 
invention  you  don't  understand. 

In  trying  to  do  good  to  your  fcllov/-men  the 
gospel  is  out  of  sight  the  best  instrument  to  work 
with.  The  new  doctrine  which  they  call  "modern 
thought"  is  nothing    better   than   a   handsaw,    and 


JOHN    ploughman's    TALK  1 63 

won't  work  a  bit.  This  fine  new  nothing  of  a  gospel 
would  not  save  a  mouse,  nor  move  the  soul  of  a 
tomtit ;  but  the  glorious  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
suited  to  man's  need,  and  by  God's  grace  does  its 
work  famously.  Let  every  preacher  and  teacher 
keep  to  it,  for  they  will  never  find  a  better.  Try 
to  win  men  with  its  loving  words  and  precious 
promises,  and  there's  no  fear  of  labor  in  vain. 
Some  praise  the  balm  of  Gilead,  or  man's  morality ; 
many  try  the  Roman  salve,  or  the  oil  of  Babylon; 
and  others  use  a  cunning  ointment  mixed  by  learned 
philosophers;  but  for  his  own  soul's  wounds, 
and  for  the  hurts  of  others,  John  Ploughman  knows 
but  one  cure,  and  that  is  given  gratis  by  the  Good 
Physician  to  all  who  ask  for  it.  A  humble  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus  will  soon  bring  you  this  sovereign 
remedy.    Use  no  other,  for  no  other  is  of  use. 

TRY 

If  you  want  to  do  good  in  the  world,  the  little 
word  "Try"  comes  in  again.  There  are  plenty  of 
ways  of  serving  God,  and  some  that  will  fit  you 
exactly,  as  a  key  fits  a  lock.  Don't  hold  back 
because  you  cannot  preach  in  St.  Paul's;  be  con- 
tent to  talk  to  one  or  two  in  a  cottage;  very  good 
wheat  grows  in  little  fields.  You  may  cook  in 
small  pots  as  well  as  big  ones.  Little  pigeons  can 
carry  great  messages.  Even  a  little  dog  can  bark 
at  a  thief,  and  wake  up  the  master  and  save  the 
house.  A  spark  is  fire.  A  sentence  of  truth  has 
heaven  in  it.      Do  what  you  do   right    thoroughly, 


164  SPURGEON 

pray  over  it  heartily,  and  leave  the  result  to  God. 
Alas!  advice  is  thrown  away  on  many,  like  good 
seed  on  a  bare  rock.  Teach  a  cow  for  seven  years, 
but  she  will  never  learn  to  sing  the  Old  Hundredth. 
Of  some  it  seems  true  that  v.-hen  they  were  born 
Solomon  went  by  the  door,  but  would  not  look  in. 
Their  coat-of-arms  is  a  fool's  cap  on  a  donkey's 
head.  They  sleep  when  it  is  time  to  plough,  and 
weep  when  harvest  comes.  They  eat  all  the  par- 
snips for  supper,  and  wonder  they  have  none  left 
for  breakfast.  Our  working  people  are  shame- 
fully unthrifty,  and  so  old  England  swarms  with 
poor.  If  what  goes  into  the  mash-tub  went  into 
the  kneading-troughs,  families  would  be  better  fed 
and  better  taught.  If  what  is  spent  in  waste  were 
only  saved  against  a  rainy  day,  workhouses  would 
never  be  built. 

Once  let  every  man  say  "Try," 
Very  few  on  straw  would  lie; 
Fewer  still  of  want  would  die; 
Pans  would  all  have  fish  to  fry; 
Pigs  would  fill  the  poor  man's  sty; 
Want  would  cease  and  need  would  fly; 
Wives  and  chiMren  cease  to  cry; 
Poor-rates  would  not  swell  so  high; 
Things  wouldn't  go  so  much  awry — 
You'd  be  glad,  and  so  would  I. 

A  GOOD  WORD  FOR  WIVES 

We  pulled  up  the  horses  at  the  sign  of  the  "Good 
Woman;"  and  as  there  is  good  entertainment  for 
man.  if  jkjI  for  beast,  under  tliat  sign,  we  will  make 
a  sta}'  of  it,  and  dip  our  j)en  into  some  of  that 
superline  ink  which  has  no   galls    in  it.      When  he 


JOHN    ploughman's    TALK  165 

writes  on  so  fair  a  subject,  John  Ploughman  must 
be  on  his  best  behavior. 

I  am  of  Solomon's  mind,  that,  as  a  rule,  he  that 
findeth  a  wife  findeth  a  good  thing.  If  there's  one 
bad  shilling  taken  at  the  grocer's  all  the  neighbors 
hear  of  it,  but  of  the  hundreds  of  good  ones  report 
says  nothing.  A  good  woman  makes  no  noise,  and 
no  noise  is  made  about  her;  but  a  shrew  is  noted 
all  over  the  parish.  Taking  them  for  all  in  all, 
they  are  most  angelical  creatures,  and  a  great  deal 
too  good  for  half  the  husbands." 

It  is  much  to  the  woman's  credit  that  there  are 
very  few  old  sayings  against  husbands,  although  in 
this  case  sauce  for  the  goose  would  make  capital 
sauce  for  the  gander;  and  the  mare  has  as  good 
reasons  for  kicking  as  the  horse  has.  They  must 
be  very  forbearing,  or  they  would  have  given  the 
men  a  Roland  for  every  Oliver.  Pretty  dears, 
they  may  be  rather  quick  in  their  talk,  but  is  it 
not  the  nature  of  bells  and  belles  to  have  tongues 
that  swing  easy  ?  They  cannot  be  so  very  bad  after 
all,  or  they  would  have  had  their  revenge  for  the 
many  cruel  things  which  are  said  against  them; 
and  if  they  are  a  bit  masterful,  their  husbands  can- 
not be  such  very  great  victims,  or  the}'  would 
surely  have  sense  enough  to  hold  their  tongues 
about  it.  Men  don't  care  to  have  it  known  when 
they  are  thoroughly  well  henpecked,  and  I  feel 
pretty  certain  that  the  old  sayings  are  nothing  but 
chaff,  for  if  they  were  true  men  they  would  never 
dare  to  own  it. 


I 66  SPURGEON 

A  true  wife  is  her  husband's  better  half,  his 
lump  of  delight,  his  flower  of  beauty,  his  guardian 
angel,  and  his  heart's  treasure.  He  says  to  her: 
"I  shall  in  thee  most  happy  be.  In  thee,  my 
choice,  I  do  rejoice.  In  thee  I  find  content  of 
mind.  God's  appointment  is  my  contentment." 
In  her  company  he  finds  his  earthly  heaven;  she  is 
the  light  of  his  home,  the  ccMnfort  of  his  soul,  and 
(for  this  world)  the  soul  of  his  comfort.  What- 
ever fortune  God  may  send  him,  he  is  rich  so  long 
as  she  lives.      His  rib  is  the  best  bone  in  his  body. 

The  man  who  weds  a  lovinir  wife, 
Wliatc'cr  hctidcth  him  in  life, 

Sliall  l)ear  up  under  all; 
But  lie  that  fnids  an  evil  mate. 
No  pood  can  come  within  his  gate; 

His  cup  is  fill  d  with  gall. 

A  good  husband  makes  a  good  wife.  Some  men 
can  neither  do  without  wives  nor  with  them;  they 
are  wretched  alone,  in  what  is  called  single  blessed- 
ness, and  they  make  their  homes  miserable  when 
they  get  married;  they  arc  like  Tompkin's  dog, 
which  could  not  bear  to  be  loose,  and  howled  when 
it  was  tied  up.  Happ}'  l>achclors  arc  likel}'  to  be 
happy  husbands,  and  a  happy  husband  is  the  hap- 
piest of  men.  A  well-matched  couple  carry  a  joy- 
ful life  between  them,  as  the  two  spies  carried  the 
cluster  of  Eshcol.  They  are  a  brace  of  birds  of 
Paradise.  They  multiply  their  joys  by  sharing 
them,  and  lessen  their  troubles  by  dividing  them; 
this  is  fine  arithmetic.  The  wagon  of  care  rolls 
lightly   along   as    they  pull    together;   and    when  it 


JOHN    ploughman's    TALK  1 6/ 

drags  a  little  heavily,  or  there's  a  hitch  anywhere, 
they  love  each  other  all  the  more,  and  so  lighten 
the  labor. 

When  a  couple  fall  out,  there  are  always  faults 
on  both  sides,  and  generally  there  is  a  pound  on 
one  and  sixteen  ounces  on  the  other.  When  a 
home  is  miserable,  it  is  as  often  the  husband's 
fault  as  the  wife's.  Darby  is  as  much  to  blame  as 
Joan,  and  sometimes  more.  If  the  husband  won't 
keep  sugar  in  the  cupboard,  no  wonder  his  wife 
gets  sour.  Want  of  bread  makes  want  of  love; 
lean  dogs  fight.  Poverty  generally  rides  home  on 
the  husband's  back,  for  it  is  not  often  the  woman's 
place  to  go  out  working  for  wages.  A  man  down 
our  parts  gave  his  wife  a  ring  with  this  on  it:  "If 
thee  don't  work,  thee  sha'n't  eat."  He  was  a 
brute.  It  is  no  business  of  hers  to  bring-in  the  grist 
— she  is  to  see  it  is  well  used  and  not  wasted; 
therefore,  I  say,  short  commons  are  not  her  fault. 
She  is  not  the  bread-winner,  but  the  bread-maker. 
She  earns  more  at  home  than  any  wages  she  can 
get  abroad. 

It  is  not  the  wife  who  smokes  and  drinks  away 
the  wages  at  the  "Brown  Bear"  or  the  "Jolly 
Topers."  One  sees  a  drunken  woman  now  and 
then,  and  it's  an  awful  sight;  but  in  ninety-nine 
cases  out  of  a  hundred  it  is  the  man  who  comes 
home  tipsy  and  abuses  the  children — the  woman 
seldom  does  that.  The  poor  drudge  of  a  wife  is  a 
teetotaler,  whether  she  likes  it  or  no,  and  gets 
plenty  of  hot  water  as  well  as  cold.      Women   are 


l68  SPURGEOM 

found  fault  with  for  often  looking  into  the  glass, 
but  that  is  not  so  bad  a  glass  as  men  drown  their 
senses  in.  The  wives  do  not  sit  boo/ing  over  the 
tap-room  fire;  they,  poor  souls,  are  shivering  at 
home  with  the  baby,  watching  the  clock  (if  there 
is  one),  wondering  when  their  lords  and  masters 
will  come  home,  and  crying  while  they  wait.  I 
wonder  they  don't  strike.  Some  of  them  are  about 
as  wretched  as  a  cockchafer  on  a  pin,  or  a  mouse 
in  a  cat's  mouth.  They  have  to  nurse  the  sick 
girl,  and  wash  the  dirty  boy,  and  bear  with  the 
crying  and  noise  of  the  children,  while  his  lordship 
puts  on  his  hat,  lights  his  pipe,  and  goes  off  about 
his  own  pleasure,  or  comes  in  at  his  own  time  to 
find  fault  with  his  poor  dame  for  not  getting  him  a 
fine  supper.  How  could  he  expect  to  be  fed  like  a 
fighting  cock,  when  he  brought  home  so  little 
money  on  Saturday  night,  and  spends  so  much  in 
worshiping  Sir  John  Barleycorn.^  I  say  it,  I  know 
it,  there's  many  a  house  where  there  would  be  no 
scolding  wife  if  there  was  not  a  skulking,  guzzling 
husband.  Fellows  not  fit  to  be  cut  up  for  mops 
drink  and  drink  till  all  is  blue,  and  then  turn  on 
their  poor  hacks  for  not  having  more  to  give  them. 
Don't  tell  me-  I  say  it,  and  will  maintain  it,  a 
woman  can't  help  being  vexed  when,  with  all  her 
mending  and  striving,  she  can't  keep  house,  because 
her  husband  won't  let  her.  It  would  provoke  any 
of  us  if  we  had  to  make  bricks  without  straw,  keep 
the  pot  boiling  without  fire,  and  pay  the  piper  out 
of  an  empty  purse.      What  can  she  get  out  of  the 


JOHN    ploughman's    TALK  1 69 

oven  when  she  has  neither  meal  nor  dough?  You 
bad  husbands,  you  are  tlioroughbred  sneaks,  and 
ought  to  be  hung  up  by  your  heels  till  you  know 
better. 

They  say  a  man  of  straw  is  worth  a  woman  of 
gold,  but  1  cannot  swallow  it;  a  man  of  straw  is 
worth  no  more  than  a  woman  of  straw,  let  old  say- 
ings he  as  they  like.  Jack  is  no  better  than  Jill, 
as  a  rule.  When  there  is  wisdom  in  the  husband, 
there's  generally  gentleness  in  the  wife,  and  be- 
tween them  the  old  wedding  wi,sh  is  worked  out: 
"One  year  of  joy.  another  of  comfort,  and  all  the 
rest  of  content."  Where  hearts  agree,  there  joy 
will  be.  United  hearts  death  only  parts.  They 
say  marriage  is  not  often  merry-age,  but  very 
commonly  mar-age;  well,  if  so,  the  coat  and 
waistcoat  have  as  much  to  do  with  it  as  the  gown 
and  petticoat.  The  honeymoon  need  not  come  to 
an  end;  and  when  it  does,  it  is  often  the  man's 
fault  for  eating  all  the  honey,  and  leaving  nothing 
but  moonshine;  when  they  both  agree  that,  what- 
ever becomes  of  the  moon,  they  will  each  keep  up 
their  share  of  honey,  there's  merry  living.  When 
a  man  dwells  under  the  sign  of  the  cat's  foot, 
where  faces  get  scratched,  either  his  wife  did  not 
marry  a  man,  or  he  did  not  marry  a  woman.  If  a 
man  cannot  take  care  of  himself,  his  wit  must  be  as 
scant  as  the  wool  of  a  blue  dog.  I  don't  pity  most 
of  the  men  martyrs;  I  save  my  pity  for  the  women. 
When  the  Dunmow-flitch  is  lost,  neither  of  the 
pair  will  eat  the  bacon;   but   the  wife   is  the   most 


I/O  SPURGEON 

likely  to  fast  for  the  want  of  it.  Every  herring 
must  hang  by  its  own  gill,  and  every  person  must 
account  for  his  own  share  in  home  quarrels;  but 
John  Ploughman  can't  bear  to  see  all  the  blame 
laid  on  the  women.  Whenever  a  dish  is  broke  the 
cat  did  it,  and  whenever  there  is  mischief,  there's 
a  woman  at  the  bottom  of  it — here  are  two  as 
pretty  lies  as  you  will  meet  with  in  a  month's 
march.-  There's  a  why  for  every  wherefore,  but 
the  why  for  family  jars  does  not  always  lie  with 
the  housekeeper.  I  know  some  women  have  long 
tongues,  then  the  more's  the  pity  that  their  hus- 
bands should  set  them  going;  but  for  the  matter 
of  talk,  just  look  into  a  bar  parlor  when  the  men's 
jaws  are  well  oiled  with  liquor,  and  if  any  women 
living  can  ialk  faster  or  be  more  stupid  than  the 
men,  my  name  is  not  John  Ploughman, 

When  I  had  got  about  as  far  as  this,  in  stepped 
our  minister,  and  he  said,  "John,  you've  got  a 
tough  subject,  a  cut  above  you;  I'll  lend  you  a  rare 
old  book  to  help  you  over  the  stile."  "Well,  sir, 
said  I,  "a  little  help  is  worth  a  great  deal  of  fault- 
finding, and  I  shall  be  uncomm.only  obliged  to 
you."  He  sent  me  down  old  William  Seeker's 
"Wedding  Ring;"  and  a  real  wise  fellow  that  Seeker 
was.  I  could  not  do  any  other  than  pick  out  some 
of  his  pithy  bits;  they  arc  very  flavory,  and  such 
as  are  likely  to  glue  themselves  to  the  memory. 
He  says:  "Hast  thou  a  soft  heart?  It  is  of  God's 
breaking.  Hast  thou  a  sweet  wife.'  She  is  of  God's 
making.      The  Hebrews  have  a  saying,   'He  is  not 


JOHN    PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK  I /I 

a  man  that  hath  not  a  woman.'  Though  man 
alone  may  be  good,  yet  it  is  not  good  that  man 
should  be  alone.  'Every  good  gift  and  every  per- 
fect gift  is  from  above. '  A  wife,  though  she  be 
not  a  perfect  gift,  is  a  good  gift,  a  beam  darted 
from  the  Sun  of  mercy.  How  happy  are  those 
marriages  where  Christ  is  at  the  wedding!  Let 
none  but  those  who  have  found  favor  in  God's 
eyes,  find  favor  in  yours.  Husbands  should  spread 
a  mantle  of  charity  over  their  wives'  infirmities. 
Do  not  put  out  the  candle  because  of  the  snuff. 
Husbands  and  wives  should  provoke  one  another 
to  love,  and  they  should  love  one  another  notwith- 
standing provocations.  The  tree  of  love  should 
grow  up  in  the  midst  of  the  family  as  the  tree  of 
life  grew  in  the  garden  of  Eden.  Good  servants 
are  a  great  blessing,  good  children  a  greater  bless- 
ing; but  a  good  wife  is  the  greatest  blessing;  and 
such  a  help  let  him  seek  for  her  that  wants  one; 
let  him  sigh  for  her  that  hath  lost  one;  let  him 
delight  in  her  that  enjoys  one." 

To  come  down  from  the  old  Puritan's  roast  beef 
to  my  own  pot  herbs,  or,  as  they  say,  to  put  Jack 
after  gentleman,  I  will  tell  my  own  experience,  and 
have  done. 

My  experience  of  my  first  wife,  who  will,  I  hope, 
live  to  be  my  last,  is  much  as  follows:  Matrimony 
came  from  Paradise,  and  leads  to  it.  I  never  was 
half  so  happy  before  I  was  a  married  man  as  I  am 
now.  When  you  are  married,  your  bliss  begins.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  where  there  is  much  love  there 


172  SPURGEON 

will  be  much  to  love,  and  where  love  is  scant  faults 
will  be  plentiful.  If  there  is  only  one  good  wife  in 
England,  I  am  the  man  who  put  the  ring  on  her 
finger,  and  long  may  she  v/car  it!  God  bless  the 
dear  soul !  If  she  can  put  up  ic////  me,  she  shall 
never  be  put  down  bj'  me. 

If  I  were  not  married  to-day,  and  saw  a  suitable 
partner,  I  would  be  married  to-morrow  morning 
before  breakfast.  What  think  you  of  that }  "Why," 
says  one,  "I  think  John  would  get  a  new  wife  if  he 
were  left  a  widower."  Well,  and  what  if  he  did, 
how  could  he  better  show  that  he  was  happy  with 
his  first.''  I  declare  I  would  not  say  as  some  do, 
that  they  married  to  have  some  one  to  look  after 
the  children;  I  should  marry  to  have  some  one  to 
look  after  myself.  John  Ploughman  is  a  sociable 
soul,  and  could  not  do  in  a  house  by  himself.  One 
man,  when  he  married  his  fourth  wife,  put  on  the 
ring,— 

"  If  I  survive  I'll  make  it  five." 

What  an  old  Bluebeard!  Marriages  are  made  in 
heaven;  matrimony  in  itself  is  good,  but  there  are 
fools  who  turn  meat  into  poison,  and  make  a  bless- 
ing into  a  curse. 

what!    rob  a  poor  man  of  his  beer.? 

^^IVknt!  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  beer?''''  The  fact 
is  that  they  rob  the  poor  man  by  his  beer.  The 
aK;  jug  robs  the  cupboard  and  the  table,  starves 
the  wife  and  strips  the  children;  it  is  a  great  thief, 
housebreaker,  and  heartbreakcr;   and  the  best  pos- 


JOHN    PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK  1 73 

sible  thing  is  to  break  it  to  pieces,  or  keep  it  on 
the  shelf  bottom  upward.  In  a  newspaper  which 
was  lent  me  the  other  day  I  saw  some  verses  by 
John  Barleycorn,  Jr.,  and,  as  they  tickled  my 
fancy,  I  copied  them  out,  and  there  they  are, — 

What!  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  beer, 
And  give  him  good  victuals  instead? 

Your  heart's  very  hard,  sir,  I  fear, 
Or  at  least  you  are  soft  in  the  head. 

What!  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  mug, 

And  give  him  a  house  of  his  own, 
With  kitchen  and  parlor  so  snug? 

'Tis  enough  to  draw  tears  from  a  stone. 

What!  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  glass, 
And  teach   him  to  read  and  to  write? 

What!  save  him  from  being  an  ass? 
'Tis  nothing  but  malice  and  spite. 

What!  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  ale, 

And  prevent  him  from  beating  his  wife — 

From  being  locked  up  in  a  jail, 
With  penal  employment  for  life! 

Having  given  you  a  song,  I  now  hand  you  a 
handbill  to  stick  up  in  the  "Rose  and  Crown"  win- 
dow, if  the  landlord  wants  an  advertisement.  It 
was  written  many  years  ago,  but  it  is  quite  as  good 
as  new.  Any  beer-seller  may  print  it  who  thinks 
it  likely  to  help  his  trade. 

DRUNKARDS,    READ  THIS! 

DRUNKENNESS 

EXPELS     REASON, 

DISTEMPERS   THE    BODY, 

DIMINISHES      STRENGTH, 

INFLAMES  THE  BLOOD, 

INTERNAL      v 

,      EXTERNAL     f 
CAUSES  ■<  -  WOUNDS: 

^      ETERNAL       (  ' 


INCURABLE 


U 


174  SPURGEON 

IS  J 

A  WITCH    TO  THE   SENSES, 

A  DEMON   TO  THE   SOUL, 

A    THIEF     TO     THE     PURSE, 

A  GUIDE   TO  BEGGARY,    LECHERY  AND  VILLAINY. 

IT   IS 

THE  wife's  woe   AND 

THE    children's   SORROW, 

MAKES    A   MAN 

WALLOW  WORSE   THAN   A   BEAST,    AND 

ACT    LIKE   A   FOOL. 

HE   IS 

A    SELF-MURDERER 

WHO  DRINKS   TO  ANOTHER'S   GOOD   HEALTH, 

AND 
ROBS   HIMSELF   OF    HIS    OWN. 

HOPE 

Eggs  are  eggs,  but  some  are  rotten;  and  so 
hopes  are  hopes,  but  many  of  them  are  delusions. 
Hopes  are  Hke  women,  there  is  a  touch  of  angel 
about  them  all,  but  there  are  two  sorts.  My  boy 
Tom  has  been  blowing  a  lot  of  bird's  eggs,  and 
threading  them  on  a  string;  I  have  been  doing 
the  same  thing  with  hopes,  and  here's  a  few  of 
them,  good,  bad,  and  indifferent. 

The  sanguine  man's  hope  pops  up  in  a  moment 
like  Jack-in-a-box;  it  works  with  a  spring,  and 
does  not  go  by  reason.  Whenever  this  man  looks 
out  of  the  window  he  sees  better  times  coming, 
and  although  it  is  nearly  all  in  his  own  eye  and 
nowhere  else,  yet  to  see  plum-puddings  in  the 
moon  is  a  far  more  cheerful  habit  than  croaking  at 
everything   like   a   two-legged    frog.      This    is  the 


JOHN    ploughman's    TALK  1/5 

kind  of  brother  to  be  on  the  road  with  on  a  pitch- 
dark  night,  when  it  pours  with  rain,  for  he  carries 
candles  in  his  eyes,  and  a  fireside  in  his  heart. 
Beware  of  being  misled  by  him,  and  then  you  may 
safely  keep  his  company.  His  fault  is  that  he 
counts  his  chickens  before  they  are  hatched,  and 
sells  his  herrings  before  they  are  in  the  net.  All 
his  sparrow's  eggs  are  bound  to  turn  into  thrushes, 
at  least,  if  not  partridges  and  pheasants.  Summer 
has  fully  come,  for  he  has  seen  one  swallow.  He 
is  sure  to  make  his  fortune  at  his  new  shop,  for  he 
had  not  opened  the  door  five  minutes  before  two 
of  the  neighbors  crowded  in — one  of  them  wanted 
a  loaf  of  bread  on  trust,  and  the  other  asked  change 
for  a  shilling.  He  is  certain  that  the  squire  means 
to  give  him  his  custom,  for  he  saw  him  reading  the 
name  over  the  shop  door  as  he  rode  past.  He 
does  not  believe  in  slips  between  cups  and  lips,  but 
makes  certainties  out  of  perhapses.  Well,  good 
soul,  though  he  is  a  little  soft  at  times,  there  is 
much  in  him  to  praise,  and  I  like  to  think  of  one 
of  his  odd  sayings,  "Never  say  die  till  you  are  dead, 
and  then  it's  of  no  use,  so  let  it  alone."  There 
are  other  odd  people  in  the  world,  you  see,  be- 
sides John  Ploughman. 

My  neighbor  Shiftless  is  waiting  for  his  aunt  to 
die,  but  the  old  lady  has  as  many  lives  as  nine 
cats,  and  my  notion  is  that  when  she  does  die  she 
will  leave  her  little  money  to  the  Hospital  for 
Diseased  Cats  or  Stray  Dogs,  sooner  than  her 
nephew  Jack  shall   have   it.      Poor  creature,  he   is 


176  SPURGEON 

dreadfully  down  at  the  heel,  and  lays  it  all  on  the 
dear  old  lady's  provoking  constitution.  However, 
he  hopes  on,  and  gets  worse  and  worse,  for  while 
the  grass  grows  the  horse  starves.  He  pulls  at  a 
long  rope  who  waits  for  another's  death;  he  who 
hunts  after  legacies  had  need  have  iron  shoes.  He 
that  waits  for  dead  men's  shoes  may  long  go  bare- 
foot; he  who  waits  for  his  uncle's  cow  need  not 
be  in  a  hurry  to  spread  the  butter.  He  who  lives 
on  hope  has  a  slim  diet.  If  Jack  Shiftless  never 
had  an  aunt,  he  might  have  tucked  up  his  shirt- 
sleeves and  worked  for  himself,  but  they  told  him 
he  was  born  with  a  silver  spoon  in  his  mouth,  and 
that  made  a  spoon  of  him,  so  that  he  is  no  more 
use  at  work  than  a  cow  at  catching  hares.  If  any- 
body likes  to  leave  John  Ploughman  a  legacy,  he 
will  be  very  much  obliged  to  them,  but  they  had 
not  better  tell  him  of  it  for  fear  he  would  not 
plough  so  straight  a  furrow;  they  had  better  make 
it  twice  as  much,  and  take  him  by  surprise.  On 
the  whole,  it  would  be  better  to  leave  it  to  the 
Pastors'  College  or  the  Stockwell  Orphanage,  for 
it  will  be  well  used  in  either  case.  I  wish  people 
would  think  less  about  windfalls,  and  plant  more 
apple  trees.  Hopes  that  grow  out  of  graves  are 
grave  mistakes;  and  when  they  cripple  a  man's 
own  energies,  they  are  a  sort  of  hangman's  rope, 
dangling  round  a  man's  neck. 

Some  people  were  born  on  the  first  of  April,  and 
are  always  hoping  without  sense  or  reason.  Their 
biiip  is  to  come  home,  they  are  to  dig  up  a  pot  of 


JOHN    PLOUGHMAN  S    TALK  1 7/ 

gold,  or  to  hear  of  something  to  their  advantage. 
Poor  sillies,  they  have  wind  on  the  brain,  and 
dream  while  they  are  awake.  They  may  hold  their 
mouths  open  a  long  while  before  fried  ham  and 
eggs  will  come  flying  into  them,  and  yet  they 
really  seem  to  believe  that  some  stroke  of  luck, 
some  windfall  of  golden  apples,  will  one  day  set 
them  up  and  make  gentlemen  of  them.  They 
hope  to  ride  in  their  coaches,  and  by  and  by  find 
themselves  shut  up  in  a  place  where  the  coaches 
won't  run  over  them.  You  rnay  whistle  a  long 
while  before  goldfinches  will  hop  onto  your  thumb. 
Once  in  a  while  one  man  in  a  million  may  stumble 
against  a  fortune,  but  thousands  ruin  themselves 
by  idle  expectations.  Expect  to  get  half  of  what 
you  earn,  a  quarter  of  what  is  your  due,  and  none 
of  what  you  have  lent,  and  you  will  be  near  the 
mark;  but  to  look  for  a  fortune  to  fall  from  the 
moon  is  to  play  the  fool  with  a  vengeance.  A 
man  ought  to  hope  within  the  bounds  of  reason 
and  the  promises  of  the  good  old  Book.  Hope 
leans  on  an  anchor,  but  an  anchor  must  have 
something  to  hold  by  and  to  hold  to.  A  hope 
without  grounds  is  a  tub  without  a  bottom,  a  horse 
without  a  head,  a  goose  without  a  body,  a  shoe 
without  a  sole,  a  knife  without  a  blade.  Who  but 
Simple  Simon  would  begin  to  build  a  house  at  the 
top.''  There  must  be  a  foundation.  Hope  is  no 
hope,  but  sheer  folly,  when  a  man  hopes  for  im- 
possibilities, or  looks  for  crops  without  sowing 
seed,  and  for  happiness  without  doing  good.    Such 


178  SPURGEOM 

hopes  lead  to  great  boast  and  small  roast;  they  act 
like  a  jack-o'-lantern  and  lead  men  into  the  ditch. 
There's  poor  Will  at  the  workhouse,  who  always 
declares  that  he  owns  a  great  estate,  only  the  right 
owner  keeps  him  out  of  it;  his  name  is  Jenyns, 
or  Jennings,  and  somebody  of  that  name,  he  says, 
has  left  enough  money  to  buy  the  Bank  of  England, 
and  one  day  he  is  to  have  a  share  of  it ;  but  mean- 
while poor  Will  finds  the  parish  broth  poor  stuff 
for  such  a  great  gentleman's  stomach;  he  has 
promised  me  an  odd  thousand  or  two  when  he  gets 
his  fortune,  and  I,  am  going  to  build  a  castle  in 
the  air  with  it,  and  ride  to  it  on  a  broomstick. 
Poor  soul,  like  a  good  many  others  he  has  windmills 
in  his  head,  and  may  make  his  will  on  his  thumb- 
nail for  anything  that  he  has  to  give.  Depend 
upon  it,  ploughing  the  air  is  not  half  so  profitable 
as  it  is  easy;  he  who  hopes  in  this  world  for  more 
than  he  can  get  by  his  own  earnings  hopes  to  find 
apricots  on  a  crab  tree.  He  who  marries  a  sloven- 
1}',  dressy  girl,  and  hopes  to  make  her  a  good  wife, 
might  as  well,  buy  a  goose  and  expect  it  to  turn 
out  a  milch  cow.  He  who  takes  his  boys  to  the 
beer  shops,  and  trusts  that  they  will  grow  up  sober, 
puts  his  coffee-pot  on  the  fire  and  expects  to  see  it 
look  bright  as  new  tin.  Men  cannot  be  in  their 
senses  when  they  brew  with  bad  malt  and  look  for 
good  beer,  or  set  a  wicked  example  and  reckon 
upon  raising  a  respectable  family.  You  may  hope 
and  hope  till  your  heart  grows  sick,  but  when  you 
send  your  boy  up  the  chimney,  he'll  come   down 


JOHN    PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK  1/9 

black  for  all  your  hoping.  Teach  a  child  to  lie, 
and  then  hope  that  he  will  grow  up  honest;  better 
put  a  wasp  in  a  tar  barrel  and  wait  till  he  makes  you 
honey.  As  to  the  next  world,  it  is  a  great  pity  that 
men  do  not  take  a  little  more  care  when  they  talk 
of  it.  If  a  man  dies  drunk,  somebody  or  other  is 
sure  to  say,  "I  hope  he  is  gone  to  heaven."  It  is 
all  very  well  to  wish  it,  but  to  hope  it,  is  another 
thing.  Men  turn  their  faces  to  hell,  and  hope  to 
get  to  heaven ;  why  don't  they  walk  into  the  horse- 
pond,  and  hope  to  be  dry.^  Hopes  of  heaven  are 
solemn  things,  and  should  be  tried  by  the  word 
of  God.  A  man  might  as  well  hope,  as  our  Lord 
says,  to  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles, 
as  look  for  a  happy  hereafter  at  the  end  of  a  bad 
life.  There  is  only  one  rock  to  build  good  hopes 
on  and  that  is  not  Peter,  as  the  Pope  says,  neither 
is  it  sacraments,  as  the  old  Roman  beast's  cubs 
tell  us,  but  the  merits  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  There 
John  Ploughman  rests,  and  he  is  not  afraid,  for 
this  is  a  firm  footing,  and  gives  him  a  hope  sure 
and  steadfast,  which  neither  life  nor  death  can 
shake;  but  I  must  not  turn  preacher,  so  please 
remember  that  presumption  is  a  ladder  which  will 
break  the  mounter's  neck,  and  don't  try  it,  as  you 
love  your  soul. 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE  EDITOR  AT    HIS    DESK 

*'  Books  may  be  kept  at  a  smaller  charge  than  preachers.  Good 
books  are  a  very  great  mercy  to  the  world." 

— Richard  Baxter. 

"  If  the  crowns  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  empire  were  laid 
down  at  my  feet  in  exchange  for  my  books  and  my  love  of  reading, 
I  would  spurn  them  all."  — Anhbisliop  Fenelon. 

For  eighteen  years  Mr.  Spurgeon  edited  "The 
Sword  and  Trowel,"  a  monthly  magazine,  that  was 
designed  to  be,  as  the  title-page  indicates,  a  record 
of  "Combat  with  Sin  and  Labor  for  the  Lord." 
Like  much  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  special  work,  this 
was  forced  upon  him.  It  became  necessary  to 
have  a  channel  of  communication  between  him- 
self and  his  many  correspondents,  his  students  and 
his  friends,  scattered  the  wide  world  over.  The 
"Sword  and  Trowel"  was,  from  first  to  last,  all 
through  its  eighteen  volumes,  a  bright,  cheery, 
entertaining  magazine;  and  now  that  the  Editor 
has  passed  away,  these  volumes  will  have  an  added 
value  from  the  fact  that  they,  as  a  complete  series, 
constitute  the  best  possible  history  that  can  be 
obtained  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  of  the 
manifold  organizations  that  were  associated  with 
it,  and  of  its  honored  pastor. 


180 


THE    EDITOR    AT    HIS    DESK  l8l 

"a  continual  tooth-drawing" 

When  Sir  Thomas  Fowell  Buxton  was  wearied 
all  day  long  by  incessant  requests  to  alter  his 
procedure  upon  a  great  political  question,  he  told 
his  daughter  that  he  could  compare  the  importuni- 
ties of  the  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  to 
nothing  but  a  continual  tooth-drawing.  This  is  an 
image  far  too  striking  to  be  left  to  Sir  Powell's 
sole  use.  Many  other  persons  have  been  made  to 
know  what  a  continual  tooth-drawing  means,  and 
we  feel  persuaded  that  many  nriore  are  subjected 
to  similar  processes. 

We  should  think  that  a  miserly  man,  who  takes 
a  sitting  in  a  place  of  worship  frequented  by  a 
liberal  and  energetic  people,  must  frequently  feel, 
when  he  is  asked  over  and  over  again  for  a  sub- 
scription, that  he  had  almost  as  soon  sit  in  a  den- 
tist's chair,  and  feel  the  operator's  forceps  upon 
his  precious  dentals.  His  best  plan  is  to  give  at 
once,  and  so  end  the  pain  of  the  extraction. 

The  same  sort  of  misery  must  be  experienced  by 
the  Christian  who  is  always  sighing — 

"  'Tis  a  point  I  long  to  know," 

and  incessantly  turning  over  the  experience  of  his 
own  heart  to  see  if  he  can  extract  from  it  some 
assuring  evidence  of  his  being  in  Christ.  Most 
of  us  have  undergone  this  unhappy  experience, 
and  even  a  moment  of  it  is  torture — to  have  to 
endure  it  month  after  month  would  be  agony  in- 
deed. Oh,  for  a  childlike  faith  in  Jesus  to  decide 
the  question  at  once! 


182  SPURGEON 

Personally,  we  have  heard  utterances  in  prayer- 
meetings  which  were  painfully  like  a  continual 
tooth-drawing.  They  were  hard,  cold,  heartless, 
dreary,  and  both  as  long  and  as  dismal  as  a  win- 
ter's night.  All  of  a  sudden  we  thought  and  hoped 
that  the  brother  had  done;  but,  alas,  he  took  up 
a  fresh  lease,  and  entered  upon  another  lengthened 
period!  To  all  appearances  he  was  coming  to  a 
conclusion  a  second  time,  when  off  he  went,  like  a 
shot  which  ricochets,  or  a  boy's  stone  which,  when 
thrown  into  the  water,  goes — duck  —duck — drake 
— upon  the  surface.  The  prayer  was  diluted  to 
the  dregs  of  nothing,  but  end  there  seemed  to  be 
none.  Oh,  that  the  tooth  were  out!  The  beloved 
brother  had  said  all  that  could  be  said,  and  prayed 
for  all  that  could  be  prayed  for;  but  he  evidently 
felt  it  necessary  to  begin  again.  We  can  have  too 
much  of  a  good  thing  in  such  a  case,  and  we  \\[sh 
the  friend  thought  so. 

Preachers,  too,  have  caused  us  the  same  memo- 
rable sensation.  The  style  and  manner  have  been 
painful,  and  the  length  of  the  discourse  has  made 
the  agony  a  protracted  one.  Dragging  away  at 
some  metaphysical  subtlety,  which  they  could  not 
bring  into  the  light;  tugging  at  some  unimportant 
difficulty  whose  fangs  defied  their  power;  or  ex- 
plaining with  marvelous  perspicuity  what  was 
clear  as  daylight  when  they  began,  and  marvel- 
ously  foggy,  before  they  came  to  the  end,  they 
have  inflicted  upon  us  "a  continual  tooth-drawing;" 
at  least,  our  patience  was  almost  as  much  strained 


tHE   EDITOR    At    HIS    DESK  1 83 

as  if  a  grinder  had  been  slowly  drawn  from  our 
aching  jaw.  We  are  ready  to  cry,  -'Out  with  it, 
and  have  done,  there's  a  good  man;  for  we  cant 
stand  it  much  longer." 

Worst  of  all,  however,  and  fullest  development 
of  Sir  Powell's  simile,  is  the  clicks  clack,  click, 
clack,  of  a  liuent  female  who  has  gained  your  ear, 
and  means  to  hold  it. 

"  She  never  tires  nor  stops  to  rest, 
But  on  and  on  she  goes." 

We  have  felt  ready  to  open  our  mouth,  and  let 
her  draw  all  our  teeth  seriatim,  if  she  would  but 
leave  off  talking.  She  had  nothing  to  say,  and 
she  said  that  nothing  at  extreme  length,  with  mar- 
velous energy,  and  with  unwearied  repetition.  We 
have  turned  our  head,  we  have  shut  our  eyes,  we 
have  wished  we  had  gun-cotton  in  our  ears  and 
dynamite  in  our  brain ;  but  our  wishes  did  not  de- 
liver us,  we  were  given  over  to  the  tormentor,  and 
must  abide  the  fulfillment  of  our  sentence.  When 
the  operation  has  been  over  we  have  sometimes 
asked  ourselves  what  we  have  done  to  deserve 
such  a  punishment,  and  with  every  desire  to  make 
a  full  confession  of  our  faults,  we  have  not  been 
able  to  discover  anything  which  deserved  so  severe 
a  torment  under  the  present  rule  of  mercy.  At 
the  second  sight  of  the  operator  we  have  fled,  feel- 
ing that  it  would  be  worth  while  to  go  a  mile 
round,  or  leap  over  hedge  and  ditch,  rather  than 
again  experience  "a  continual  tooth-drawing." 


184  SPURGEON 

Moral. — Let  us  all  be  considerate  of  the  feel- 
ings of  others,  for  when  we  imagine  we  are  merely 
tickling  their  ears,  we  may  be  causing  them  as 
much  pain  as  if  we  were  drawing  their  teeth. 

THE    ART  OF  TORMENTING 

One  would  hardly  have  thought  it  worth  an 
author's  while  to  compose  a  treatise  upon  "The 
Art  of  Tormenting;"  yet  such  a  book  exists,  and 
contains  many  ingenious  instructions  by  which  mas- 
ters, husbands,  wives,  and  friends  may  torture 
their  servants,  relatives,  and  acquaintances  to  an 
intolerable  degree.  To  quote  any  of  the  writer's 
suggestions  in  these  pages  would  be  useless,  since 
none  of  our  readers  wish  to  learn  the  science  of 
plaguing  others.  The  ingenious  writer,  a  lady,  by 
the  way,  does  not  recommend  the  clumsy  methods 
of  Roman  emperors  and  Popish  inquisitors,  by 
which  it  is  possible  to  torment  the  bodies  of  men 
and  allow  the  mind  and  spirit  to  remain  at  peace; 
but  she  deals  with  subtler  arts,  by  which  the  mind 
can  be  lacerated  beyond  all  cure,  while  yet  no 
wound  is  seen.  To  torture  the  heart  and  spirit  of 
a  man  is  far  more  cruel  than  to  tear  his  flesh  or 
break  his  bones.  One  sentiment  in  this  amusing 
treatise  struck  us  as  singularly  instructive  to  those 
who  are  the  victims  of  malicious  criticism;  the 
author  says:  "Be  very  careful  daily  to  observe 
whether  your  patient  continues  in  good  health, 
and  is  fat  and  well-liken;  for,  if  so,  you  may  be 
almost  certain    that  your  whole    labor   is   thrown 


THE    EDlTOIv    AT    HIS    DESK  1 85 

away.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  you  perceive  this  to 
be  the  case,  you  must  (to  speak  in  the  phrase  of 
surgeons  when  they  hack  and  hew  a  human  body) 
immediately  choose  another  subject.  All  the 
pleasure  of  tormenting  is  lost  as  soon  as  your  sub- 
ject becomes  insensible  to  your  strokes."  We  are 
almost  reconciled  to  being  corpulent  as  we  read 
these  lines.  Herein  is  wisdom.  Patience  baffles 
malice:  the  malicious  themselves  confess  their 
defeat;  what  can  we  do  better  than  to  offer  the 
passive  resistance  which  is  seen  to-  be  so  effective.'' 
Let  us  no  longer  gratify  our  enemies  by  taking 
notice  of  their  cruel  observations  and  venomous 
insinuations.  If  we  are  callous  we  at  once  defeat 
them;  there  can  be  no  virtue  in  cultivating  a  sensi- 
tiveness which  makes  us  vulnerable.  The  more 
we  smart,  the  more  they  will  scourge ;  but  a  back 
of  leather  laughs  at  the  cat-o' -nine-tails.  By 
doing  our  best  at  all  times  we  shall  be  able  to  defy 
all  the  criticisms  of  on-lookers,  who,  doing  noth- 
ing themselves,  have  all  the  more  leisure  to  find 
fault  with  our  honest  endeavors.  In  all  probabil- 
ity we  shall  never  succeed  in  any  one  instance  in 
pleasing  all  who  call  themselves  our  friends;  and 
as  to  our  enemies,  they  will  never  be  gratified  un- 
less they  see  us  guilty  of  gross  folly;  therefore  our 
wisest  course  is  to  make  sure  of  being  right  in  the 
sight  of  God,  and  then  to  proceed  in  a  straight  line 
with  firm  tread,  whether  we  offend  or  please. 
The  desire  to  inflict  pain  is  ingrained  in  some  nat- 
ures, and  against  these  there  is  no  defense    except 


1 86  SPURGEON 

a  manly  insensibility.  As  chemists  plunge  a  fabric 
in  a  solution  of  alum  and  thus  enable  it  to  defy 
the  flames,  so  should  we  immerse  ourselves  into 
the  consciousness  of  desiring  to  do  right  before 
God,  and  we  shall  be  superior  to  the  fires  of  slan- 
der. We  are  not  able  to  abate  the  fury  of  Nebuch- 
adnezzar's furnace;  but  if  we  can  walk  in  the 
midst  of  it  unharmed,  the  result  will  be  equall}^ 
harmless  and  far  more  sublime. 

Over  against  the  art  of  tormenting  let  us  set  the 
philosophy  of  enduring;  our  bane  and  antidote 
are  both  before  us. 

With  the  beginning  of  each  new  volume  Mr. 
Spurgeon  issued  a  characteristic  address  to  his 
readers.  Here  is  a  part  of  one  of  those  3'early 
epistles:  — 

Kind  Readers: — Throughout  another  year  you 
have  sustained  the  magazine,  and  as  very  many  of 
you  have  expressed  your  satisfaction,  and  few,  if 
any,  have  favored  me  with  a  complaint,  I  feel 
encournged  to  believe  that  you  have  been  pleased 
with  my  monthly  issues.  It  was  once  observed  in 
my  hearing  by  a  friend  who  wished  to  account  for 
niv  fulfillment  of  numerous  duties,  that,  as  for  the 
magazine,  it  was  a  merely  nominal  thing  to  be  the 
editor,  for  few  editors  ever  saw  their  magazines 
till  they  were  in  print.  However  this  may  be  as 
a  rule,  it  does  not  contain  a  spark  of  truth  in  my 
case,  for  I  have  personally  superintended  every 
page,  and  I  do  not  think  a  single  line  of  the    mag- 


THE    EDITOR    AT    HIS    DESK  1 8/ 

azine  has  passed  through  the  press  without  having 
been  read  by  me.  Whether  I  succeed  or  not, 
I  certainly  do  not  delegate  my  task  to  others.  If  I 
had  more  leisure  I  am  sure  I  could  do  better,  and 
it  is  with  unfeigned  satisfaction  that  I  find  my 
subscribers  contented  with  what  I  can  procure  for 
them. 

"The  Sword  and  Trowel"  has  been  the  happy 
means  of  uniting  in  gracious  service  a  band  of 
gracious  givers  and  workers,  who  now  for  these 
seventeen  years  have  joined  to  aid  the  institutions 
which,  though  they  locally  surround  the  Taber- 
nacle, are  really  the  offspring  of  a  congregation 
which  is  found  scattered  throughout  all  lands.  By 
means  of  this  warm-hearted  brotherhood  the  Pas- 
tors' College  has  been  sustained  from  year  to  year, 
until  some  six  hundred  ministers  have  been  edu- 
cated in  it,  the  most  of  whom  are  still  faithfully 
preaching  the  old-fashioned  gospel  in  which  they 
have  been  trained.  In  connection  with  this  enter- 
prise three  brethren  have  been  supported  as  evan- 
gelists, and  their  itinerant  labors  have  been  signally 
successful.  Testimonies  that  churches  have  been 
aroused  and  sinners  converted  by  their  means, 
have  been  plentifully  sent  in,  and  these  pages  have 
been  increased  in  interest  thereby.  Hundreds  of 
thousands  have  heard  the  gospel  through  this  in- 
strumentality. 

As  a  critic  of  other  men's  work  Mr.  Spurgeon 
was  at  least  clear  and  intelligible.  He  could  and 
would  praise  without  stint   when   he   thought   the 


1 88  SPURGEON 

book  was  worthy,  and  he  could  and  would  be 
equally  severe.  Here  follow  a  few  examples,  from 
the  pages  of  the  "Sword  and  Trowel." 

What  is  Truth?  As  it  is  manifested  by  consider- 
ing the    Creator,  Creation,  Revelation,  and  Man. 

We  do  not  see  how  the  author  answers  the  ques- 
tion of  the  title.  After  trying  in  vain  to  read  and 
understand  this  limp,  yellow-covered  emanation, 
we  give  it  up  in  despair,  and  say:  "How  we  wish 
writers  would  have  mercy  upon  readers,  and  at 
least  put  their  nonsense  in  language  that  can  be 
understood."  Some  styles  of  writing  could  fairly 
be  described  as  "pea-soup"  styles, — cloudy,  thick, 
muddy;  but  for  ourselves  we  prefer  clear,  honest, 
downright  Saxon. 

Companion  to  the  Revised  Version  of  the  English 
Nezu  Testament. 

By  a.  Roberts,    D.  D. 

Every  student  of  the  Bible  who  can  afford  half- 
a-crown  should  get  this  most  useful  and  entertain- 
ing volume.  It  contains  the  sort  of  reading  which 
has  the  most  charm  for  us,  for  it  deals  with  the 
Scriptures  themselves  and  their  meaning  in  a  most 
pleasant  manner.  Reading  this  "Companion,"  the 
alterations  of  the  Revised  Version  become  vastly 
more  intelligible. 

LIGHT    LITERATURE 

For  novels  of  all  sorts  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  a 
supreme    contempt.      Even   religious    novels    met 


THE    EDITOR    AT    HIS    DESK  1 89 

with  little  favor  at  his  hands;  but  for  the  rest  he 
thought  novel-reading  a  great  waste  of  time.  He 
says:  — 

"We  would  sooner  break  stones.  As  folks  will 
have  these  religious  fictions,  we  do  our  best  to  let 
them  know  which  of  them  are  well-intentioned, 
but  we  do  not  advise  the  reading  of  them  to  any 
great  extent.  A  little  pastry  may  be  all  very  well 
(our  slow  digestion  suggests  that  the  less  the  bet- 
ter) but  to  live  upon  it  would  be  to  generate  dys- 
pepsia and  all  sorts  of  ills;  even  so,  an  interesting 
story  now  and  again  may  be  a  relief  and  a  pleasure, 
but  a  constant  course  of  such  reading  must  injure 
both  mind  and  heart.  From  the  quantity  of  fiction 
which  we  have  lately  received,  we  should  think 
that  its  perusal  needs  no  encouraging,  and  a  little 
repression  might  be  healthy." 

The  Fatherhood  of  God 

One  of  the  most  poetic,  beautiful,  pseudo-philo- 
sophic, but  altogether  erroneous  books  on  the 
Fatherhood  of  God  which  we  ever  read.  As  insid- 
ious and  attractive  as  it  can  be,  but  altogether 
subversive  of  the  very  fundamental  truths  of  the 
gospel  concerning  man's  ruin,  regeneration,  and 
redemption.  Our  advice  concerning  it  would  be 
the  same  as  given  with  respect  to  the  proper  way 
of  preparing  cucumber:  "Carefully  peel  and  slice 
it,  flavor  with  pepper,  salt,  and  vinegar,  and  then 
— eat  it.''   Oh,  no;    throw  it  on  the  diingJiill T 


12 


igO  SPURGEON 

The  Masque    Torn   Off. 

By  T.   de  Witt  Talmage,  D.  D. 

With  Mr.  Talmage  in  preaching  the  gospel  we 
are  heartily  at  one,  but  from  Mr.  Talamge  as  an 
amateur  detective  we  part  company.  It  may  not 
only  be  right  to  enter  the  dens  of  New  York  in 
order  to  expose  their  evils,  but  it  may  even  be 
heroic  to  do  so;  it  is  not,  however,  a  work  which 
we  would  undertake  for  any  consideration,  nor  one 
from  which,  according  to  our  judgment,  any  great 
benefit  can  arise.  Mr.  Talmage  seems  to  us  to 
make  small  progress  in  depth  of  spirituality  and 
fullness  of  divine  experience,  but  to  be  straining 
himself  to  say  striking  things.  This  is  not  a  state 
of  things  to  be  commended,  and  we  hope  that 
the  preacher  will  grow  out  of  it;  at  the  same  time 
we  are  sure  that  his  sermons  have  charms  for 
many  minds,  and  that  they  do  not  deserve  the 
savage  condemnation  which  critics  have  poured 
upon  them. 

A   Man  every  Inch   of  Iliui:    or.    The    Story    of 
Frank  Fullcrton' s   School-days. 

By  J.  Jackson  Wray. 

Capital!  first-rate!  and  every  other  adjective 
that  will  express  our  unmingled  admiration  of  this 
book  of  books  for  English  boys.  Once  let  it  be 
seen  and  dipped  into,  and  no  boy  will  be  able  to 
rest  until  he  has  read  to  the  end;  and  then  he'll 
want  more.      Why,  it  kept  us  up  long   after    bed- 


THE    EDITOR    AT    HIS    DESK  IQI 

time,  made  us  laugh  and  cry  just  as  it  liked,  and, 
when  we  left  off,  set  us  longing  to  be  young  again, 
took  the  wrinkles  out  of  our  face,  and  almost  made 
our  creaking  limbs  to  grow  supple !  Well  done, 
Mr.  Wray!  You  have  given  young  and  old  boys 
alike  a  treat,  and  in  the  name  of  boydom  in  gen- 
eral, we  vote  you  "a  brick."  It's  just  the  book  for 
a  Christmas-box,  a  birthday  present,  or  a  prize 
gift,  and  we  hope  will  be  as  plentifully  scattered  as 
snowflakes  in  January. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE  NEWSPAPER  A  BIBLE  AND  A  TEXT-BOOK 

"I  read  the  newspaper  that  I  may  see  how  my  heavenly  Father 
governs  the  world."  — John  Newton. 

"  I  believe  that  a  great  and  good  newspaper  is  as  sacred  in  its 
own  way  as  the  Bilile.  It  has  something  in  it  of  the  very  present 
word  of  God  to  man,  and  the  very  present  word  of  man  to  God." 

— Robert  Collyer. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  Puritan  at  heart,  as  we 
have  said  before.  He  was  not  "a  man  of  the 
world,"  and  yet  he  was  neither  bhnd  to  what  was 
going  on  about  him,  nor  deaf  to  the  voices  that 
were  sometimes  harmonious  and  sometimes  most 
discordant.  He  was  a  man  of  strong  faith,  and 
beheved  that  this  is  God's  world  after  all!  That 
grand  line  of  Robert   Browning's: 

"God  is  in  heaven!     All's  right  with  the  world," 

fitly  expresses  the  complacent  confidence  with 
which,  especially  in  earlier  years,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
looked  on  the  tumult  and  the  strifes  of  men.  With 
an  ever-observant  eye  he  saw  what  many  missed. 
And  with  an  eye  ever  "single"  God-ward,  he  saw 
relations  in  passing  events  that  escaped  the  com- 
mon hasty  glance.  The  history  of  every  day  re- 
vealed to  him  that  God  was  moving  in  the  affairs 
of  men.      And  so  the   newspaper   became  a  sort  of 


THE    NEWSPAPER    A    BIBLE  1 93 

later  Bible,  and    in   turn   a  text-book.      Speaking 
of  the  newspaper,  Mr.  Spurgeon  says:  — 

"We  have  read   the    newspaper   during  the  last 
three  months  that  we  might   find    illustrations  of 
the  teaching  of  our   heavenly  Father's  Word;    and 
we  think  we  have  not  read   in    vain,  for  we    have 
gathered  instances  in  proof  and  facts  in  explana- 
tion which  we  have    jotted  down  in   these   pages. 
The  worlds  of  nature  and  of  providence  are  full  of 
parallels  to  things  moral   and   spiritual,  and   serve 
as  pictures  to  make  the  written  book  of  inspiration 
more  clear  to  the  children  of  God.      The  Bible  it- 
self abounds  in  metaphors,  types,  and  symbols;    it 
is  a  great  picture-book;  there  is  scarcely  a  poetical 
figure  which  may  not  be  found  in  the  law  and  the 
prophets,  or  in  the  words  of  Jesus  and  His  apostles. 
The  preacher  is  bidden  to  speak  as  the  oracles  of 
God,  and  consequently  he  should  imitate  their  illus- 
trative method,  and  abound  in  emblems  and  para- 
bles.     A  sermon  which  is  full  of    'likes'    is    full  of 
windows  to  enlighten  the  mind  and  hands  to   hold 
it  captive.      Discourses   decked   with    similes   will 
not  only  give  pleasure  to  the  children,  but  persons 
of   riper   years    will    be    charmed    and    instructed 
thereby." 

In  this  chapter  we  have  placed  a  few  examples 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  happy  treatment  of  current 
events. 

BLAME  THE  SCALE-MAKER 

"  The  woman  said,  The  serjjent  Ijcgiiiled  me  and  I  did  eat." 

— Gen.  Hi :  ly. 
"  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden."  — Gen.vi:  ^. 


194  SPURGEON 

The  "South  London  Press,"  June  22,  reports 
the  following,  among  a  number  of  other  cases  of 
unjust  weights  and  measures:  "A.  B.,  cheese- 
monger. One  machine.  Defendant  said  he  paid 
a  scale-maker  30  s.  6  d.  to  attend  to  it,  and  the 
neglect  was  his.  The  chairman  said  one  of 
the  first  things  defendant  should  have  attended 
to  was  the  correctness  of  his  scales  and  weights. 
Fined  £\.  Defendant  thought  the  scale-maker 
ought  to  pay  the  fine.  The  clerk:  'We  look  to 
you;  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  scale-maker. '" 

National  law  is  based  upon  the  principle  of  per- 
sonal responsibility,  and  it  will  not  allow  a  trans- 
gressor to  escape  by  pleading  that  he  has  shifted 
the  burden  of  duty  upon  another.  If  in  any  case 
responsibility  could  be  transferred,  it  surely  should 
be  under  the  circumstances  before  us;  but  the  law 
knows  nothing  of  scale-makers,  it  deals  with  trad- 
ers; and  if  anything  be  wrong  with  scales  or  weights 
it  does  not  hold  the  shopkeeper  guiltless,  but  visits 
the  wrong  upon  him,  even  though  he  may  have 
employed  a  person  to  keep  his  weights  in  order. 
This  course  appears  to  be  severe,  but  it  is  both  just 
and  necessary;  there  would  be  no  security  for  the 
purchaser,  nor  indeed  for  government  itself,  if  the 
essential  principle  of  personal  responsibility  could 
be  departed  from.  Every  man  iiiust  bear  his  own 
burden. 

Yet  this  truth  is  too  often  put  into  the  back- 
ground. In  religion  men  have  often  acted  as  if 
they    had    altogether    forgotten    that  it  must   of 


THE    NEWSPAPER    A    BIBLE  I95 

necessity  be  strictly  personal.  We  hear  of  spon- 
sors promising  and  vowing  no  end  of  things,  and 
of  priests  performing  service  and  doing  the  devo- 
tions of  others.  Proxies,  however,  in  such  matters 
are  a  sheer  delusion;  all  true  religion  is  a  personal 
thing;  men  sin  personally,  and  they  must  person- 
ally repent  of  that  sin,  or  personally  bear  the  guilt 
of  it.  No  man  can  receive  the  new  birth  on  be- 
half of  another,  nor  can  another  man's  faith  ex- 
cuse us  from  believing  in  Jesus.  Sanctification  is 
not  a  boon  to  be  vicariously  received,  any  more 
than  heaven  can  be  vicariously  enjoyed.  A  man 
may  fancy  that  he  pays  a  priest  or  a  minister  to 
do  his  religion  for  him,  just  as  the  tradesman  paid 
the  scale-maker;  but  the  law  does  not  recognize 
the  transaction,  it  deals  with  principals  only.  We 
cannot  leave  our  heavenly  business  in  the  hands  of 
a  clergyman  as  we  place  our  secular  affairs  in  the 
hands  of  a  lawyer;  we  must  believe  in  Jesus  Christ 
on  our  own  account,  or  judgment  will  go  against 
us.  It  is  true  that  in  the  matter  of  our  justifica- 
tion before  God,  we  have  been  redeemed  by  the 
blood  of  our  Substitute,  and  are  accepted  in  His 
imputed  righteousness;  but,  in  the  practical  appli- 
cation of  the  blessings  thus  procured,  everything 
must  be  direct  and  personal.  Another  may  pro- 
cure us  food,  but  he  cannot  eat  or  digest  it  for  us; 
Jesus  has  become  our  bread  from  heaven,  but  we 
must  individually  partake  of  Him  it  we  would  live 
forever.  Another  may  bring  us  a  candle,  but  we 
cannot  see  the  light  except  with  our  own  vision, — 


196  SPURGEON 

nay,  more,  even  the  Sun   of  Righteousness  makes 
no  man  to  see  except  by  his  own  eyes. 

Never,  then,  let  us  leave  our  doctrinal  views  to 
be  settled  for  us  by  the  Church,  but  let  us  search 
the  Scriptures  for  ourselves;  let  us  not  derive  our 
peace  and  confidence  from  the  good  opinion  of 
our  pastor  and  the  deacons,  but  aim  at  attaining  a 
full  assurance  of  our  calling  and  election  by  the 
seal  of  the  Spirit  upon  our  own  hearts;  neither  let 
us  leave  the  work  of  the  Lord  to  be  discharged  by 
others,  but  honestly  render  our  fair  share  of  the 
service.  We  must  ask  for  grace  to  see  to  our  own 
scales,  and  cease  to  leave  to  the  scale-maker  a 
matter  which  is  altogether  our  own  concern. 

THE  EVIL    WROUGHT    BY  ONE  MAN 

"  One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good."         — Eccles .  ix:i8. 

*'  That  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity." 

—  Josh.  xxii:2o. 

An  American  paper  contains  the  following  para- 
graph: "An  oil-train  of  forty  oil-tanks  ran  into  a 
heavy  freight-«train  near  Slatington,  Pennsylvania. 
The  engineer  of  the  latter  train  had  been  com- 
pelled to  stop  to  cool  off  a  hot  'journal,'  but  the 
conductor  had  sent  no  one  back  to  warn  following 
trains  of  danger.  Several  persons  were  killed  and 
about  forty  injured — the  result  of  one  man's  care- 
lessness." Amid  the  blaze  of  the  oil,  the  screams 
of  burning  men  and  women,  and  the  charred  re- 
mains of  the  unhappy  victims,  ^\e  see  how  great  a 
calamity  may  arise  out  of  a  little  neglect,  and  how 
much   the    destiny  of  others    may  hang    upon   the 


THE    NEWSPAPER    A    BIBLE  19/ 

acts  of  one  man  Have  we  a  due  sense  of  our  own 
personal  responsibility  ?  Have  we  ever  reflected  that 
our  own  conduct  may  influence  others  for  good  or 
evil  throughout  eternity  ?  We  may  have  no  wicked 
intent,  and  yet  our  carelessness  and  indifference 
may  be  as  fatal  to  immortal  souls  as  if  we  had  been 
profane  or  profligate.  Moral  virtues,  apart  from 
religion,  may  suggest  to  our  children  that  godliness 
is  needless;  was  not  their  father  an  excellent  man, 
and  yet  he  was  unconverted?  Thus  may  genera- 
tion after  generation  be  kept  in  spiritual  death  by 
an  argument  fetched  from  the  irreligion  of  one  who 
was  in  other  respects  a  model  character.  Who 
among  us  would  desire  this.'* 

Even  if  we  hope  that  we  are  ourselves  saved,  it 
should  cause  us  grave  question  if  we  are  not  bring- 
ing others  to  Jesus. 

A  destroyer  of  souls  will  have  an  awful  doom  at 
the  last,  and  he  who  failed  to  do  his  best  to  save 
his  fellows  will  not  be  held  guiltless  before  the 
Lord. 

LADIES'   DRESS 

"I  will  .  .  .   that  women  adorn    themselves  in  modest  apparel, 
with  shamefacedness  and  sobriety,"  — /  Tim.   it:  8,  g. 

"Be  clothed  with  humility."  — /    Peter  v:  ^. 

On  the  I  ith  of  April,  in  the  course  of  an  action 
brought  by  the  well-known  modiste,  "Madame 
Rosalie,"  against  a  gentleman  of  property  to  com- 
pel him  to  pay  a  debt  contracted  by  his  wife,  it 
was  stated  in  evidence  that  from  $2,500  to  $ro,- 
ooo  a  year  might  be  considered  a  reasonable  sum 


198  SPURGEON 

for  a  lady  moving  in  good  society  to  expend  on 
dress.  The  gentleman's  wife,  in  the  witness-box, 
repudiated  with  lofty  scorn  the  idea  that  the  former 
amount  was  sufficient.  The  lady  is  an  invalid,  has 
never  been  presented  at  court,  and  is  not  called 
into  company,  and  yet  was  indebted  for  millinery  to 
a  very  large  amount. 

Is  it,  then,  a  fact  that  so  large  a  sum  is  con- 
sidered needful  for  the  clothing  of  one  human 
form."  Surely  the  luxury  of  the  old  Roman  empire 
is  infecting  our  beloved  country:  may  God  grant 
that  it  may  not,  in  our  case  also,  be  a  sign  of  the 
decay  of  the  nation.  Women  should  be  too  con- 
siderate of  the  needs  of  the  sick  and  suffering  to 
spend  their  money  so  wastefully.  A  blanket  placed 
on  the  bed  of  a  poor  old  woman  would  be  a  better 
ornament  to  a  lady's  character  than  all  the  lace  a 
dukedom  could  purchase.  Yet  so  it  is;  but — tell 
it  not  in  Gath — a  lady  cannot  be  dressed  under 
$10,000  a  year! 

Are  we  wrong  if  we  place  side  by  side  with  this 
modern  fact  a  description  of  the  follies  of  women 
of  the  olden  times .^  "Moreover  the  Lord  saith, 
Because  the  daughters  of  Zion  are  haughty,  and 
walk  with  stretched 'forth  necks  and  wanton  eyes, 
walking  and  mincing  as  they  go,  and  making  a 
tinkling  with  their  feet:  therefore  the  Lord  will 
smite  with  a  scab  the  crown  of  the  head  of  the 
daughters  of  Zion,  and  the  Lord  will  discover  their 
secret  parts.  In  that  day  the  Lord  will  take  away 
the  bravery  of  their  tinkling  ornaments  about  their 


THE    NEWSPAPER    A    BIBLE  1 99 

feet,  and  their  cauls,  and  their  round  tires  hke  the 
moon,  the  chains,  and  the  bracelets,  and  the  muf- 
flers, the  bonnets,  and  the  ornaments  of  the  legs, 
and  the  headbands,  and  the  tablets,  and  the  ear- 
rings, the  rings,  and  nose  jewels,  the  changeable 
suits  of  apparel,  and  the  mantles,  and  the  wim- 
ples, and  the  crisping-pins,  the  glasses,  and  the 
fine  linen,  and  the  hoods  and  the  vails." — Isaiah 
iii:    16-23. 

What  a  contrast  is  the  teaching  of  the   Apostle 
Peter,    in   his    first    epistle,  at   the   third  chapter: 
"Whose  adorning  let  it  not  be  that  outward  adorn- 
ing of  plaiting  the  hair,  and  of  wearing  of  gold,  or 
of  putting  on  of  apparel,    but  let  it  be   the    hidden 
man  of  the  heart,  in  that  which  is  not  corruptible, 
even  the   ornament   of   a   meek   and   quiet    spirit, 
which  is  in  the  sight  of  God   of  great   price.      For 
after  this  manner  in  the  old  time  the   holy  women 
also,  who  trusted  in  God,  adorned  themselves,  be- 
ing in  subjection  unto  their  own  husbands."    Peter 
sends  the  ladies   to  a   wardrobe   better    than    any 
which   the   frivolous  possess,  and   to  a  jewel-case 
richer  than  ever  belonged  to  the  vain  and    showy; 
but,  alas,  the  mass  of  women  do  not  care  to  adorn 
themselves  in   this   right   royal    fashion!     Pride  of 
dress  is  so  childish   that   one   wonders   to  see  it  in 
grown-up  people.      The  old  proverb   speaks  of  be- 
ing twice  children;   but  fops  and   dandies  of  either 
sex  are  always  children.      Archbishop  Leighton  has 
well  said:     "It  is  strange   upon   how   poor  things 
men   and   women   will   be   vain,  and  think  them- 


200  SPURGEON 

selves  somebody;  not  only  upon  some  comeliness 
in  their  face  or  feature,  which,  though  poor,  is  yet 
a  part  of  themselves,  but  of  things  merely  without 
tj^em;  that  they  are  well  lodged,  or  well  mounted, 
or  well  appareled,  either  richly  or  well  in  fashion. 
Light,  empty  minds  are  like  bladders,  blown  up 
with  anything." 

The  only  excuse  we  can  think  of  for  some  dressy 
women  is  that  they  think  themselves  very  ugly. 
What  deformity  must  exist  if  it  needs  ten  thou- 
sand a  year  to  cover  it !  If  these  persons  accurately 
gauge  their  lack  of  personal  charms,  they  must  be 
suffering  under  a  fearful  measure  of  uncomeliness. 
Why,  ten  or  twenty  families  could  be  reared  in 
comparative  comfort  upon  the  amount  thus  ex- 
pended in  wastefulness,  and  as  matters  go  with 
the  agricultural  laborers  in  many  of  the  shires, 
forty  of  the  families  owned  by  Hodge  and  his  com- 
panions, including  all  the  father  Hodges  and  their 
wives,  could  be  decently  provided  for  upon  ten 
thousand  a  year.  It  will  not  bear  thinking  of. 
Yet  many  women  professing  godliness  are  shock- 
ingly extravagant,  and  can  never  be  happy  till 
their  heads  are  tricked  out  with  strange  gear  and 
their  bodies  with  fashionable  millinery.  They 
little  think  how  much  they  degrade  themselves 
and  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God.  A  forgiven  sinner 
decked  out  in  the  Haunting  garments  of  a  worldling, 
casts  suspicion  upon  her  own  pardon.  If  she  had 
ever  been  renewed  in  heart,  would  she,  could  she, 
adorn  herself  after  the  manner  of  a  Jezebel.^   It  is 


THE    NE^^^: TAPER    A    BIBLE  20I 

hard  to  think  of  a  disciple  of  the  Lord  wasting  her 
substance  upon  personal  decoration.  Does  the 
lowly  Jesus  keep  company  with  persons  who  spend 
hours  at  the  glass,  adorning,  if  not  adoring,  their 
own  flesh  ?  Can  extravagance  and  fashionableness 
be  pleasing  to  the  Lord?    No.     Assuredly  not. 

We  are  not  judging  that  "neat  handsomeness" 
which  George  Herbert  says  "doth  bear  the  sway," 
but  we  are  sorrowful  when  we  see  those  who  set 
themselves  up  as  examples,  and  move  in  a  position 
where  no  outward  show  is  required,  going  beyond 
ordinary  worldly  women  in  extravagance.  It  is 
the  bane  of   society  and   the   disgrace  of   religion. 

We  wonder  how  much  of  the  extravagance  of 
female  dress  could  be  traced  to  the  man-millinery 
of  Anglican  priests.  Church  congresses  have  been 
edified  by  exhibitions  of  ecclesiastical  finery,  in 
which  were  seen  robes  and  vestments  of  the  costli- 
est material  and  the  gaudiest  colors.  We  have 
read  of  altar  frontals  which  have  taken  years  to 
finish,  and  are  valued  at  more  than  $2,500.  All 
this  to  deck  out  a  table!  No  wonder  that  it  costs 
so  much  to  dress  a  woman.  When  men,  and  even 
ministers,  take  to  resplendent  trappings,  who  can 
wonder  that  the  weaker  sex  exercise  a  larger 
liberty?  For  shame,  ye  so-called  priests,  put  away 
your  baby  garments,  and  quit  yourselves  like  men ! 

THE  RACE  AND  ITS  SPECTATORS 

"Wherefore  seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a 
cloud  of  witnesses,  let  us  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which 
doth  so  easily  beset  us,  and  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is 
set  before  us."  -  -Heb.  xii.i. 


202  SPURGEON 

In  an  article  upon  the  University  boat-race  of 
April  13,  the  "Times"  alludes  to  the  dense  throng 
upon  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  to  the  interest 
which  everybody  seemed  to  feel  in  the  struggle, 
and  it  then  very  truthfully  adds:  — 

"Nor  do  the  competitors  themselves  fail  to  gain 
much  from  the  sight  of  the  vast  crowds  which 
attest  the  strength  of  the  popular  interest.  The 
rivalry  would  hardly  be  so  keen  if  the  race  were  to 
be  rowed  amid  the  comparative  privacy  of  a  pro- 
vincial stream  or  lake.  Some  years  ago  this  was 
kept  out  of  sight  in  a  high  and  mighty  way,  by  the 
suggestion  that,  to  prevent  the  contest  from  being 
vulgarized,  or  for  some  other  reason,  it  ought  to 
be  held  at  some  quieter  place  than  the  neighbor- 
hood of  London.  Loch  Maree,  in  the  wilds  of 
Ross-shire,  would  afford  charming  tranquillity  and 
a  few  scores  of  cool  spectators.  But  the  stimulus 
of  a  great  public  competition  would  be  gone,  and 
if  we  may  venture  to  assume  that  undergraduates 
are  made  of  the  same  stuff  as  other  human  beings, 
that  stimulus  is  essential  to  such  muscular  exertion 
as  we  see  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge." 

This  excellently  illustrates  the  meaning  of  the 
apostle  when  he  represents  believers  as  running 
for  a  prize,  with  saints,  apostles,  and  martyrs  look- 
ing on.  The  stimulus  communicated  by  specta- 
tors is  his  prominent  idea.  No  doubt  the  young 
oarsmen  find  a  stimulus  in  every  eye  that  gazes 
upon  them,  and  if  the  crowd  were  thinned  they 
would  take  less  interest  in  their  task.     The  crowds 


THE    NEWSPAPER    A    BIBLE  203 

which  line  the  Thames  may  well  be  compared  to 
clouds,  so  completely  do  they  darken  the  banks 
from  end  to  end  of  the  course;  and  much  more 
ma}'  those  who  gaze  upon  the  Christian's  life  be 
thus  spoken  of.  Myriads  lean  from  heaven,  or  look 
from  earth,  or  peer  upward  from  the  pit.  Holy 
men  of  all  ages,  now  with  God,  join  with  a  great 
host  still  abiding  here  below.  Angels  and  prin- 
cipalities and  powers  unite  as  one  vast  army  and 
observe  us  intently;  and  frowning  demons  of  the 
pit  in  their  dread  array  all  gaze  with  interest  upon 
the  Christian's  work  and  way.  Should  not  every 
glance  animate  us  to  do  our  utmost.'' 

And  what  eyes  there  are  among  those  who  ob- 
serve us!  Had  the  Queen  been  present,  we  could 
imagine  the  young  athletes  straining  themselves 
even  more  than  they  had  done,  for  the  glance  of 
royalty  quickens  energy  to  the  utmost.  In  our 
case,  the  King  of  kings  looks  down  upon  us,  and 
the  Prince  of  Life  with  tender  sympathy  watches 
our  progress.  What  manner  of  race  should  ours 
be  under  the  Lord's  own  eye!  Competitors  of 
former  years  were  at  the  boat-race  to  see  whether 
the  new-comers  would  maintain  the  honor  of  their 
university.  Even  so  the  worthies  of  ancient  times, 
who  counted  not  their  lives  dear  unto  them,  take 
pleasure  in  the  efforts  of  those  who  to-day  arc 
wrestling  for  victory,  as  they  themselves  did  in 
ages  past.  The  approving  glances  of  prophets  and 
apostles  may  well  stir  our  souls.  Dear  ones  who 
have  gone  before   also   mark   our   behavior   in  the 


204  SPURGEON 

race.  A  mother  in  heaven  takes  delight  in  the 
ardor  of  her  son;  brothers  "gone  over  to  the  ma- 
jority" are  serenely  glad  as  they  see  their  brothers 
pushing  forward  in  the  noble  cause.  Our  leaders 
in  the  faith,  oarsmen  who  taught  us  how  to  fly 
over  the  waves,  regard  us  with  anxious  interest, 
and  joy  in  our  successes.  These  things  should 
quicken  us,  and  lend  us  arguments  for  unabated 
"energy. 

Of  course  the  apostle  was  not  alluding  to  a  boat- 
race,  but  to  the  Olympian  games.  Those  games 
furnish  a  suggestive  figure,  which  we  leave  the 
reader  to  work  out  at  leisure,  when  we  have  given 
him  a  glimpse  at  the  race  from  the  window  of  good 
Dr.  John  Brown: 

"At  Olympia,  a  town  of  Elis,  games  were  cele- 
brated in  honor  of  Jupiter  once  every  five  years. 
An  almost  incredible  multitude,  from  all  the  states 
of  Greece  and  from  the  surrounding  countries, 
attended  these  games  as  spectators.  The  noblest 
of  the  Grecian  youths  appeared  as  competitors. 
In  this  race,  a  course  was  marked  out  for  the  can- 
didates for  public  fame,  and  a  tribunal  erected  at 
the  end  of  the  course,  on  which  sat  the  judges — 
men  who  had  themselves  in  former  years  been  suc- 
cessful competitors  for  Olympic  honors.  The  vic- 
tors in  the  morning  contests  did  not  receive  their 
prizes  till  the  evening;  but  after  their  exertions 
they  joined  the  band  of  spectators,  and  looked  on 
while  others  prosecuted  the  same  arduous  labors 
whi(  h  they  had  brought  to  an  honorable  termina- 
tion." 


THE    NEWSPAPER    A    BIBLE  20$ 

It  is  a  fine  thought  that  those  honorable  men  in 
the  Church  of  God  who  have  themselves  behaved 
worthily,  take  the  deepest  interest  in  the  young 
men  who  have  newly  set  out  upon  the  race.  Let 
the  youngsters  so  behave  themselves  that  the  vet- 
erans may  never  fear  for  the  cause  of  God.  We 
know  that  a  great  deal  of  anxiety  is  felt  just  now,  for 
the  rising  race  shows  signs  of  being  unstable  and 
superficial,  but  we  hope  for  better  things,  and  even 
trust  that  the  men  of  the  commg  age  will  outstrip 
their  predecessors,  and  draw  forth  the  approving 
shouts  of  the  encompassing  cloud  of  witnesses. 


13 


CHAPTER  XIV 

PSALMS  AND  HYMNS  AND  SPIRITUAL  SONGS 

"Sing  unto  Him,  sing  psalms  unto  Him:  talk  ye  of  all  His  won- 
drous works."  — David. 

"  Speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual 
songs,    singing    and    making    melody    in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord.  " 

—Fau/. 

Neither  Mr.  Spurgeon  nor  his  warmest  admirers 
would  claim  for  him  the  genius  of  the  poet.  He 
himself  would  have  been  the  first  to  protest  against 
any  such  claim  made  on  his  behalf.  And  yet 
occasionally  he  indulged  in  the  luxury  of  writing 
verse,  a  few  examples  of  which  will  not  be  unwel- 
come to  the  readers  of  this  volume.  All  birds  are 
not  nightingales,  and  yet  the  thrush  and  the  robin 
and  the  lark,  have  a  right  to  sing  their  songs. 
Even  the  chirp  of  the  sparrow  is  welcome  after  the 
long  silence  of  winter.  If  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been 
disposed  to  justify  his  occasional  "dropping  into 
poetry,"  he  would  probably  have  quoted  Paul's 
words,  and  in  the  exposition  thereof  he  might  have 
suggested  that  it  is  much  better  to  make  melody  in 
the  heart  to  the  Lord,  even  with  feeble  poetry,  than 
to  go  grumbling  all  the  day  long.  He  delighted 
chiefly  in  paraphrases  of  the  psalms.  His  compi- 
lation of  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"  gives  evidence 
that  he  possessed  excellent  judgment  in  the  mat- 
ter of  devotional  poetry. 

2(r, 


PSALMS  AND  HYMNS  AND  SPIRITUAL  SONGS      20/ 

"be  thou  exalted  king  of  kings" 
psalm  xxi 

Thy  strength,  O  Lord,  makes  glad  our  King, 
Who  once  in  weakness    bowed  the  head; 

Salvation  makes  His  lieart  to  sing, 

For  Thou  liast  raised  Him  from  the  dead. 

Thou  hast  bestowed  His  heart's  desires, 
Showered  on  His  path  Thy  blessings  down; 

His  royal  pomp  all  heaven  admires; 
Thou  on  His  head  hast  set  the  crown. 

A  life  eternal  as  Thy  years, 

A  glory  infinite  like  Thine, 
Repays  Him  for  His  groans  and  tears, 

And  fills  His  soul  with  joy  divine. 

O  King,  beloved  of  our  souls. 

Thine  own  right  hand  shall  find  Thy  foes! 
Swift  o'er  their  necks  Thy  chariot  rolls. 

And  earth  Thy  dreadful  vengeance  knows. 

As  glowing  oven  is  Thy  wrath, 

As  flame  by  furious  blast  upblown; 

With  equal  heat  Thy  love  breaks  forth, 
Like  wall  of  fire  around  Thine  own. 

Be  Thou  exalted.   King  of  Kings! 

In  Thine  own  strength  sit  Thou  on  high! 
Thy  Church  Th}'  triumph  loudl}'    sings, 

And  lauds  Thy  glorious  Majesty. 

A  PRAYER   FROM     ZION's    HOLY   HILL 
PSALM  XV 

Lord,  I  would  dwell  with  Thee 

On  Thy  most  holy  hill. 
Oh,  shed  Thy  grace  abroad  in  me, 

To  mold  ma  to  Thy  will. 


208  SPURGEON 

Thy  gate  of  pearl  stands  wide. 

For  those  who  walk  upright; 
But  those  who  basel}^  turn  aside 

Thou  chasest  from  Thy  sight. 

Oh,  tame  my  tongue  to  peace, 
And  tune  my  heart  to  love; 

From  all  reproaches  may  I  cease, 
Made  harmless  as  a  dove. 

The  vile,  though  proudly  great. 

No  flatterer  find  in  me; 
I  count  Thy  saints  of  poor  estate 

Far  nobler  company. 

Faithful,  but  meekly  kind, 

Gentle,  yet  boldly  true, 
I  would  possess  the  perfect  mind 

Which  in  my  Lord  I  view. 

But,  Lord,  these  graces  all 
Thy  Spirit's  work  must  be; 

To  Thee,  through  Jesus'  blood  I  call — 
Create  them  all   in  me. 

MAKE   HASTE,    O    GOD 
PSALM   LXXV 

Make  haste,  O  God,  my  soul  to  bless. 
My  help  and  my  deliverer  Thou! 

Make  haste!   for  I'm  in  deep  distress, 
My  case  is  urgent — help  me  now! 

Make  haste,  O  God!  make  haste  to  save! 

For  time  is  short  and  death  is  nigh! 
Make  haste!   ere  yet  I'm  in  my   grave. 

And  with  the  lost  forever  lie. 

Make  haste!    for  I  am  poor  and  low, 

And  Satan  mocks  my  prayers  and  tears; 

O  God,  in  mercy  be  not  slow. 

But  snatch  me  from  my  horrid   fears. 


PSALMS  AND  HYMNS  AND  SPIRITUAL  SONGS     209 

Make  haste,  O  God,  and  hear  my  cries! 

Then,  with  the  souls  who  seek  Thy  face. 
And  those  who  Thy  salvation  prize, 

I'll  magnify  Thy  matchless  grace. 

JESUS,    POOREST    OF  THE   POOR 
PSALM    XL! 

Jesus,  poorest  of  the  poor! 

Man  of  sorrows!    Child  of  grief! 
Happy  they  whose  bounteous  store 

Ministered  to  Thy  relief. 

Jesus,  though  Thy  head  is  crowned, 
Crowned  with  loftiest  majesty, 

In  Thy  members  Thou  art  found 
Plunged  in  deepest  poverty. 

Happy  they  who  wash  Thy  feet. 

Visit  Thee  in  Thy  distress! 
Honor  great,   and  labor  sweet. 

For  Thy  sake  the  saints  to  bless! 

They  who  feed  Thy  sick  and  faint. 

For  Thyself  a  banquet  find; 
They  who  clothe  the  naked  saint, 

Round  Tliy  loins   the  raiment  bind. 

Thou  wilt  keep  their  soul  alive, 

From  their  foes  protect  their  head; 

Languishing,   their  strength  revive. 
And  in  sickness  make  their  bed. 

Thou  wilt  deeds  of  love  repay; 

Grace  shall  generous  hearts  reward 
Here  on  earth,   and  in  the  day 

When  they  meet  their  reigning  Lord. 

IMMANUEL 
This  beautiful  poem  was  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  his  eighteenth  year. 

When  once  I  mourned  a  load  of  sin; 
When  conscience  felt  a  wound  within; 


210  SPURGEON 

When  all  my  works  were  thrown  away; 

When  on  my  knees  I  knelt  to  pray, 
Then,  blissful  hour,  remembered  well, 
I  learned  Thy  love,   Immanuel. 

When  storms  of  sorrow  toss  my  soul; 

When  waves  of  care  around  me  roll; 

When  comforts  sink,  when  joys  shall  flee; 

When  hopeless  griefs  shall  gape  for  me, 
One  word  the  tempest's  rage    shall    quell- 
That  word.  Thy  name,  Immanuel. 

When  for  the  truth  I  suffer  shame; 

When  foes  pour  scandal  on  my  name; 

When  cruel  taunts  and  jeers  abound; 

When  "Bulls  of  Bashan"  gird  me  round, 
Secure  within  Thy  tower  I'll  dwell — 
That  tower,  Thy  grace,  Immanuel. 

When  hell  enraged  lifts  up  her  roar; 
When  Satan  stops  my  path  before; 
When  fiends  rejoice  and  wait  my  end; 
When  legioned  hosts  their  arrows  send. 

Fear  not,  my  soul,  but  hurl  at  hell 

Thy  battle-cry,   Immanuel. 

When  down  the  hill  of  life  I  go; 
When  o'er  my  feet  death's  waters  flow; 
When  in  the  deep'ning  flood  I  sink; 
When  friends  stand  weeping  on  the  brink, 

I'll  mingle  with  my  last  farewell 

Thy  lovely  name,   Immanuel. 

When  tears  are  banished  from  mine  eye; 
When  fairer  worlds  than  these  are  nigh; 
When  heaven  shall  fill  my  ravished  sight; 
When  I  shall  bathe  in   sweet  delight, 

One  joy  all  joys  shall  far  excel, 

To  see  Thy  face,   Immanuel. 


PSALMS  AND  HYMNS  AND  SPIRITUAL  SONGS     Til 


MARRIED   LOVE — TO   MV   WIFE 

A  pathetic  interest  marks  this  poem  as  we  read  it  to-day  in  the  light  of 
the  fact  that  Mrs.  Spurgeon  now  walks  the  path  of  life  alone.  Mr,  Spur- 
geon  had  gone  to  Hull  to  pieach  in  the  early  years  of  his  married  lite,  and 
while  absent  from  home  he  sent  this  loving  message  to  his  young  wife. 

Over  the  space  that  parts  us,  my  wife, 

I'll  cast  me  a  bridge  of  song; 
Our  hearts  shall  meet,  O  joy  of  my  life, 

On  its  arch  unseen,  but   strong. 


The  wooer  his  new  love's  name  may  wear 

Engraved  on  a  precious  stone; 
But  in  my  heart  thine  image  I  wear. 

That  heart  has  long  been  thine  own. 

The  glowing  colors  on  surface  laid. 

Wash  out  in  a  shower  of  rain; 
Thou  needs' t  not  be  of  rivers  afraid, 

For  my  love  is   dyed  ingrain. 

And  as  every  drop  of  Garda's  lake 

Is  tinged  with  sapphire's  blue. 
So  all  the  powers  of  my  mind  partake 

Of  joy  at  the  thought  of  you. 

The  glittering  dewdrops  of  dawning  love 

Exhale  as  the  day  grows  old; 
And  fondness,  taking  the  wings  of  a  dove. 

Is  gone  like  a  tale  of  old. 

But  mine  for  thee,  from  the  chambers  of  joy, 
With  strength  came  forth  as  the  sun; 

Nor  life  nor  death  shall  its  force  destroy, 
Forever  its  course  shall  run. 

All  earth-born  love  must  sleep  in  the  grave, 

To  its  native  dust  return; 
What  God  hath  kindled  shall  death  out-brave 

And  in  heaven  itself  shall  burn. 


212  SPURGEON 

Beyond  and  above  the  wedlock    tie 

Our  union  to  Christ  we  feel; 
Uniting  bonds  which  were  made  on  high 

Shall  hold  us  when  earth  shall  reel. 

Though  He  who  chose  us  all  worlds  before, 
Must  reio^fi  in  our  hearts  alone, 

We  fondly  believe  that  we  shall  adore 
Together  before  His  throne. 


CHAPTER  XV 

ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT 

"I  preached  that  which  I  felt,  and  that  which  I  felt  most  smart- 
ingly."  — John  Biiiiyan. 

"  That  which  we  have  heard,  which  we  have  seen  with  our  eyes, 
which  we  have  looked  upon,  and  our  hands  have  handled  of  the 
Word  of  Life That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard,  de- 
clare we  unto  you."  —John  the  Evangelist. 

To  the  often-asked  question,  "Wherein  lay  the 
secret  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  wonderful  success  as  a 
preacher?"  there  is  but  one  wise  answer,  and  that 
is  at  once  brief  and  simple.  The  secret  of  the 
whole  matter  lies  in  the  fact  that — he  preached. 
He  did  not  read  an  essay,  he  did  not  discuss  a 
theme,  he  did  not  indulge  in  the  elaboration  of  pet 
theories, — he  preached!  He  was  a  "voice"  crying 
in  the  great  wilderness  of  London,  "Repent,  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  at  your  doors."  He  believed 
he  had  received  a  message  from  God  to  men,  and 
it  was  his  business  to  deliver  that  message.  He 
was  a  forthteller.  There  were  no  tricks  of  oratory 
in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  preaching,  no  affectation,  no 
efforts  after  eloquence,  scarcely  ever  a  perora- 
tion, and  if  ever  one  came,  it  came  as  the  outburst 
of  sudden  emotion,  without  any  mark  of  design. 
He  used  the  uttermost  simplicity  of  speech;  he 
was  both  rich  and   apt    in   illustration;   but,  above 

213 


214  '  SPURGEON 

all,  he  was  intensely  in  earnest.  Preaching  was 
not  a  profession,  it  was  a  passion,  it  was  the  very 
life  of  his  life.  The  possession  of  remarkable 
powers — a  musical  voice,  a  vocabulary  rich  and  sim- 
ple, a  ready  wit — will  account  for  much;  but  not 
all.  Mr.  Spurgeon  consecrated  all  his  powers  to 
the  very  uttermost  to  that  work  which  was  the 
chief  joy  of  his  life.  He  preached  a  living  man  to 
living  men,  and  his  preaching  was  for  the  life  that 
is  and  for  the  life  that  is  to  come.  These  echoes 
from  the  Tabernacle  pulpit  have  been  gathered 
from  the  whole  area  of  his  preaching  through  a 
ministry  of  forty  years. 

A  TERRIBLE  PARABLE 

Hast  thou  never  fled  to  Christ  for  refuge.?  Dost 
thou  not  believe  in  the  Redeemer.?  Hast  thou 
never  confided  thy  soul  to  his  hands.?  Then  hear 
me;  in  God's  name,  hear  me  just  a  moment.  My 
friend,  I  would  not  stand  in  thy  position  for  an 
hour,  for  all  the  stars  twice  spelt  in  gold !  For 
what  is  thy  position.?  Thou  hast  sinned,  and  God 
will  not  acquit  thee;  he  will  punish  thee.  He  is 
letting  thee  live;  thou  art  reprieved.  Poor  is  the 
life  of  one  that  is  reprieved  without  a  pardon!  Thy 
reprieve  will  soon  run  out;  thine  hour-glass  is 
emptying  every  day.  I  see  on  some  of  you  Death 
has  put  his  cold  hand,  and  frozen  your  hair  to 
whiteness.  Ye  need  your  staff,  it  is  the  only  bar- 
rier between  you  and  the  grave  now;  and  you  are, 
all  of  you,  old  and  young,  standing    on   a  narrow 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   2  I  5 

neck  of  land,  between  two  boundless  seas — that 
neck  of  land,  that  isthmus  of  life,  narrowing  every 
moment,  and  you  are  yet  unpardoned.  There  is 
a  city  to  be  sacked,  and  you  are  in  it — soldiers  are 
at  the  gates;  the  command  is  given  that  every 
man  in  the  city  is  to  be  slaughtered  save  he  who 
can  give  the  password.  "Sleep  on,  sleep  on;  the 
attack  is  not  to-day;  sleep  on,  sleep  on."  "But 
it  is  to-morrow,  sir."  "Aye,  sleep  on,  sleep  on; 
it  is  not  till  to-morrow;  sleep  on,  procrastinate, 
procrastinate."  "Hark!  I  hear  a  rumbling  at  the 
gates;  the  battering  ram  is  at  them;  the  gates  are 
tottering."  "Sleep  on,  sleep  on;  the  soldiers  are 
not  yet  at  your  doors;  sleep  on,  sleep  on;  ask  for 
no  mercy  yet;  sleep  on,  sleep  on!"  "Aye,  but 
I  hear  the  shrill  clarion  sound;  they  are  in  the 
streets.  Hark,  to  the  shrieks  of  men  and  women! 
They  are  slaughtering  them;  they  fall,  they  fall, 
they  fall!"  "Sleep  on;  they  are  not  yet  at  your 
door."  "But  hark!  they  are  at  the  gate;  with 
heavy  tramp  I  hear  the  soldiers  marching  up  the 
stairs!"  "Nay,  sleep  on,  sleep  on;  they  are  not 
yet  in  your  room."  "Why,  they  are  there;  they 
have  burst  open  the  door  that  parted  you  from 
them,  and  there  they  stand!"  "No,  sleep  on,  sleep 
on;  the  sword  is  not  yet  at  your  throat;  sleep  on, 
sleep  on!"  \\.  is  at  your  throat;  you  start  with 
horror.  Sleep  on,  sleep  on!  But  you  are  gone! 
"Demon,  why  didst  thou  tell  me  to  slumber!  It 
would  have  been  wise  in  me  to  have  escaped  the 
city  when  first  the  gates  were   shaken.     Why   did 


2l6  SPURGEON 

I  not  ask  for  the  password  before  the  troops  came? 
Why,  by  all  that  is  wise,  why  did  I  not  rush  into 
the  streets,  and  cry  the  password  when  the  soldiers 
were  there?  Why  stood  I  till  the  knife  was  at  my 
throat?  Aye,  demon  that  thou  art,  be  cursed;  but 
I  am  cursed  with  thee  forever!"  You  know  the 
application;   it  is  a  parable   you   can  all  expound. 

THE  KEEPER  OF  THE  LIGHTHOUSE 

I  am  like  the  good  man  and  his  wife  who  had 
kept  a  lighthouse  for  years.  A  visitor,  who  came 
to  see  the  lighthouse,  looking  out  from  the  win- 
dow over  the  waste  of  waters,  asked  the  good 
woman,  "Are  you  not  afraid  at  night,  when  the 
storm  is  out,  and  the  big  waves  dash  right  over 
the  lantern?  Do  you  not  fear  that  the  lighthouse, 
and  all  that  is  in  it,  will  be  carried  away?  I  am 
sure  I  should  be  afraid  to  trust  myself  in  a  slender 
tower  in  the  midst  of  the  great  billows."  The 
woman  remarked  that  the  idea  never  occurred  to 
her  now.  She  had  lived  there  so  long  that  she 
felt  as  safe  on  the  lone  rock  as  ever  she  did  when 
she  lived  on  the  mainland.  As  for  her  husband, 
when  asked  if  he  did  not  feel  anxious  when  the 
wind  blew  a  hurricane,  he  answered,  "Yes,  I  feel 
anxious  to  keep  the  lamps  well  trimmed,  and  the 
light  burning,  lest  any  vessel  should  be  wrecked." 
As  to  anxiety  about  the  safety  of  the  lighthouse, 
or  his  own  personal  security  in  it,  he  had  outlived 
all  that.  Even  so  it  is  with  the  full-grown  be- 
liever.     He    can   humbly   say,    "I    know  whom    I 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   2  1/ 

have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able 
to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him 
against  that  day."  From  henceforth  let  no  man 
trouble  me  with  doubts  and  questionings;  I  bear 
in  my  soul  the  proofs  of  the  Spirit's  truth  and 
power,  and  I  will  have  none  of  your  artful  reason- 
ings. The  gospel  to  me  is  truth.  I  am  content 
to  perish  if  it  be  not  true.  I  risk  my  soul's  eter- 
nal fate  upon  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  and  I  know 
that  there  is  no  risk  in  it.  My  one  concern  is  to 
keep  the  lights  burning,  that  I  may  thereby  benefit 
others. 

SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 

Self-righteousness  is  also  much  promoted  by  the 
almost  universal  spirit  of  trifling  which  is  now 
abroad.  Only  while  men  trifle  with  themselves 
can  they  entertain  the  idea  of  personal  merit  before 
God.  He  who  comes  to  serious  thought,  and  be- 
gins to  understand  the  character  of  God,  before 
whom  the  heavens  are  not  pure,  and  the  angels 
are  charged  with  folly — he,  I  say,  that  comes  to 
serious  thought  and  beholds  a  true  vision  of  God, 
abhors  himself  in  dust  and  ashes,  and  is  forever 
silenced  as  to  any  thought  of  self-justification.  It 
is  because  we  do  not  seriously  examine  our  condi- 
tion that  we  think  ourselves  rich  and  increased  in 
goods.  A  man  may  fancy  that  he  is  prospering  in 
business,  and  yet  he  may  be  going  back  in  the 
world.  If  he  does  not  face  his  books  or  take 
stock,  he  may  be  living  in  a  fool's  paradise,  spend- 


2l8  SPURGEON 

ing  largely  when  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy. 
Many  think  well  of  themselves  because  they  never 
think  seriously.  They  do  not  look  below  the  sur- 
face, and  hence  they  are  deceived  by  appearances. 
The  most  troublesome  business  to  many  men  is 
thought  and  the  last  thing  they  will  do  is  to  weigh 
their  actions,  or  test  their  motives,  or  ponder  their 
ways,  to  see  whether  things  be  right  with  them. 
Self-righteousness  being  supported  by  ignorance, 
by  pride,  by  unbelief,  and  by  the  natural  super- 
ficiality of  the  human  mind,  is  strongly  entrenched 
and  cannot  readily  be  driven  out  of  men. 

Yet  self-righteousness  is  evidently  evil,  for  it 
makes  light  of  sin.  It  talks  of  merit  in  the  case  of 
one  who  has  already  transgressed,  and  boasts  of 
excellence  in  reference  to  a  fallen  and  depraved 
creature.  It  prattles  of  little  faults,  small  failures, 
and  slight  omissions,  and  so  makes  sin  to  be  a  venial 
error  which  may  be  readily  overlooked.  Not  so 
faith  in  God,  for  though  it  recognizes  pardon,  yet 
that  pardon  is  seen  to  come  in  a  way  which  proves 
sin  to  be  exceedingly  sinful.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
doctrine  of  salvation  by  works  has  not  a  word  of 
comfort  in  it  for  the  fallen.  It  gives  to  the  elder 
son  all  that  his  proud  heart  can  claim,  but  for  the 
prodigal  it  has  no  welcome.  The  law  has  no  in- 
vitation for  the  sinner,  for  it  knows  nothing  of 
mercy.  If  salvation  be  by  the  works  of  the  law, 
what  must  become  of  the  guilty,  and  the  fallen, 
and  the  abandoned.'  By  what  hopes  can  these  be 
recalled.'   This  unmerciful  doctrine   bars   the   door 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   219 

of  hope,  and  hands  over  the  lost  ones  to  the  exe- 
cutioner, in  order  that  the  proud  Pharisee  may  air 
his  boastful  righteousness,  and  thank  God  that  he 
is  not  as  other  men  are. 

It  is  the  intense  selfishness  of  this  doctrine 
which  condemns  it  as  an  evil  thing.  It  naturally 
exalts  self.  If  a  man  conceives  that  he  will  be 
saved  by  his  own  works,  he  thinks  himself  some- 
what, and  glories  in  the  dignity  of  human  nature: 
when  he  has  been  attentive  to  religious  exercises 
he  rubs  his  hands  and  feels  that  he  deserves  well 
of  his  Maker;  he  goes  home  to  repeat  his  prayers, 
and  ere  he  falls  asleep  he  wonders  how  he  can  have 
grown  to  be  so  good  and  so  much  superior  to  those 
around  him.  When  he  walks  abroad  he  feels  as 
if  he  dwelt  apart  in  native  excellence,  a  person 
much  distinguished  from  "the  vulgar  herd,"  a  being 
whom  to  know  is  to  admire.  All  the  while  he 
considers  himself  to  be  very  humble,  and  is  often 
amazed  at  his  own  condescension.  What,  is  this 
but  a  most  hateful  spirit  ? 

IGNORANT  OF  THE  PLAN  OF  SALVATION 

I  had  heard  the  plan  of  salvation  by  the  sacrifice 
of  Jesus  from  my  youth  up,  but  I  did  not  know 
any  more  about  it  in  my  innermost  soul  than  if  I 
had  been  born  and  bred  a  Hottentot.  The  light 
was  there,  but  I  was  blind ;  it  was  of  necessity 
that  the  Lord  himself  should  make  the  matter 
plain  to  me.  It  came  to  me  as  a  new  revelation, 
as  fresh  as  if  I  had  never  read  in   Scripture   th;it 


220  SPURGEON 

Jesus  was  declared  to  be  the  propitiation  for  sin 
that  God  might  be  just.  I  believe  it  will  have  to 
come  as  a  revelation  to  every  new-born  child  of 
God  whenever  he  sees  it ;  I  mean  that  glorious 
doctrine  of  the  substitution  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  I 
came  to  understand  that  salvation  was  possible 
through  vicarious  sacrifice;  and  that  provision  had 
been  made  in  the  first  constitution  and  arrange- 
ment of  things  for  such  a  substitution.  I  was 
made  to  see  that  He  who  is  the  Son  of  God,  co- 
equal and  co-eternal  with  the  Father,  had  of  old 
been  made  the  covenant  head  of  a  chosen  people, 
that  He  might  in  that  capacity  suffer  for  them  and 
save  them.  Inasmuch  as  our  fall  was  not  at  the 
first  a  personal  one,  for  we  fell  in  our  federal  re- 
presentative, the  first  Adam,  it  became  possible 
for  us  to  be  recovered  by  a  second  representative, 
even  by  Him  who  has  undertaken  to  be  the  cove- 
nant head  of  His  people,  so  as  to  be  their  second 
Adam.  I  saw  that  ere  I  actually  sinned  I  had  fall- 
en by  my  first  father's  sin;  and  I  rejoiced  that 
therefore  it  became  possible  in  point  of  law  for  me 
to  rise  by  a  second  head  and  representative.  The 
fall  by  Adam  left  a  loophole  of  escape;  another 
Adam  can  undo  the  ruin  made  by  the  first.  When 
I  was  anxious  about  the  possibility  of  a  just  God 
pardoning  me,  I  understood  and  saw  by  faith  that 
He  who  is  the  Son  of  God  became  man,  and  in  His 
own  blessed  person  bore  my  sin  in  His  own  body 
on  the  tree.  I  saw  the  chastisement  of  my  peace 
was  laid  on  Him,  and  that  with  His  stripes  I  was 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   221 

healed.  Dear  friend,  have  yon  ever  seen  that  ? 
Have  you  ever  understood  how  God  can  be  just  to 
the  full,  not  remittin;^  penalty  nor  blunting  the 
edge  of  the  sword,  and  yet  can  be  infinitely  merci- 
ful, and  can  justify  the  ungodly  who  turn  to  Him? 
It  was  because  the  Son  of  God,  supremely  glorious 
in  His  matchless  person,  undertook  to  vindicate 
the  law  by  bearing  the  sentence  due  to  me,  that 
therefore  God  is  able  to  pass  by  my  sin.  The  law 
of  God  was  more  vindicated  by  the  death  of  Christ 
than  it  would  have  been  had  all  transgressors  been 
sent  to  hell.  For  the  Son  of  God  to  suffer  for  sin 
was  a  more  glorious  establishment  of  the  govern- 
ment of  God,  than  for  the  whole  race  to  suffer. 

COME  IN  YOUR  DESHABILLE 

Do  not  attempt  to  touch  yourself  up  and  make 
yourself  something  other  than  you  really  are;  but 
come  as  you  are  to  Him  who  justifies  the  ungodly. 
A  great  artist  some  short  time  ago  had  painted  a 
part  of  the  corporation  of  the  city  in  which  he 
lived,  and  he  wanted,  for  historic  purposes,  to  in- 
clude in  his  picture  certain  characters  well  known 
in  the  town.  A  crossing-sweeper,  unkempt,  rag- 
ged, filthy,  was  known  to  everybody,  and  there 
was  a  suitable  place  for  him  in  the  picture.  The 
artist  said  to  this  ragged  and  rugged  individual, 
"I  will  pay  you  well  if  you  will  come  down  to  my 
studio  and  let  me  take  your  likeness."  He -came 
round  in  the  morning,  but  he  was  soon  sent  about 

his  business;   for  he   had    washed    his   face,    and 
u 


222  SPURGEON 

combed  his  hair,  and  donned  good  clothes.  He 
was  needed  as  a  beggar,  and  was  not  invited  in 
any  other  capacity.  Even  so,  the  gospel  will 
receive  you  into  its  halls  if  you  come  as  a  sinner, 
but  not  else.  Wait  not  for  reformation,  but  come 
at  once  for  salvation.  God  justifieth  the  ungodly, 
and  that  takes  you  up  where  you  now  are.  It 
meets  you  in  your  worst  estate. 

Come  in  your  deshabille.  I  mean,  come  to 
your  heavenly  Father  in  all  your  sin  and  sinful- 
ness. Come  to  Jesus  just  as  you  are,  leprous, 
filthy,  naked,  neither  fit  to  live  nor  fit  to  die. 
Come,  you  that  are  the  very  sweepings  of  crea- 
tion; come,  though  you  hardly  dare  to  hope  for 
anything  but  death.  Come,  though  despair  is 
brooding  over  you,  pressing  upon  your  bosom  like 
a  horrible  nightmare.  Come  and  ask  the  Lord  to 
justify  another  ungodly  one.  Why  should  He  not? 
Come  along  with  you ;  for  this  great  mercy  of  God 
is  meant  for  such  as  you  are.  I  put  it  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  te.xt,  and  I  cannot  put  it  more  strong- 
ly— the  Lord  God  himself  takes  to  himself  this 
gracious  title,  "Him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly." 
He  makes  just,  and  causes  to  be  treated  as  just, 
those  who  by  nature  arc  ungodly.  Is  not  that  a 
wonderful  word  for  you?  Reader,  do  not  rise  from 
your  seat  till  you  have  well  considered  this  matter. 

THE  ATLANTIC  CABLE 

^^^^at  a  wonderful  thing  is   that    union   between 
God  and  the  sinner!   We  have  all  been  thinking  a 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   22  3 

great  deal  lately  about  the  Atlantic  Cable.      It  is  a 
very  interesting   attempt    to   join   two   worlds  to- 
gether.     That  poor  cable,  you   know,  has   had    to 
be  sunk  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  in  the  hope  of 
establishing  a  union  between  the  two  worlds,  and 
now  we    are   disappointed    again.      But,  oh!    what 
an  infinitely  greater  wonder  has  been  accomplished. 
Christ  Jesus  saw  the  two  worlds  divided,  and  the 
great  Atlantic  of  human  guilt  rolled  between.     He 
sank  down  deep  into  the  woes  of  man  till  all  God's 
waves   and  billows   had   gone  over  Him,  that    He 
might  be,  as  it  were,  the  great  telegraphic  communi- 
cation between  God  and  the  apostate  race,  between 
the  Most  Holy  One  and  poor  sinners.      Let  me  say 
to  you,  sinner,  there  was  no  failure  in   the   laying 
down  of  that  blessed  cable.      It  went   down   deep; 
the  end  was  well  secured,  and  it  went   down   deep 
into  the  depths  of  our   sin,  and   shame,  and    woe; 
and  on  the  other  side  it  has  gone  right   up   to   the 
eternal    throne,    and   is   fastened   there    eternally 
fast,  by  God  himself.      You    may  work   that   tele- 
graph to-day,  and  you  may  easily  understand  the 
art  of  working  it  too.      A  sigh  will  work  it;    a   tear 
will  work  it.      Say,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a   sin- 
ner," and  along  the  wire   the   message    will   f^ash, 
and  will  reach  God  before  it  comes  from    you.      It 
is    swifter    far    than    earthly   telegraphs;   ay,    and 
there  will  come  an  answer  back  much  sooner  than 
you    ever   dream    of,  for  it    is    promised — "Before 
they  call   I  will    answer,  and   while    they   are    yet 
speaking  I  will  hear."     Who  ever  heard  of  such  a 


224  SrURGEON 

communication  as  this  between  man  and  man;  but 
it  really  does  exist  between  sinners  and  God,  since 
Christ  has  opened  u[)  a  way  from  the  depths  of 
our  sin  to  the  heights  of  His  glory. 

This  is  for  you  who  are  at  a  distance  from  Him, 
but  He  has  done  more  for  us  who  are  saved,  lor  He 
his  taken  us  right  across  the  Atlantic  of  our  sin 
and  set  us  down  on  the  other  side;  He  has  taken 
us  ouf  of  our  sinful  state,  and  put  us  into  the 
Father's  bosom,  and  there  we  shall  dwell  forever 
in  the  heart  of  God  as  His  own  dear  children. 

I  would  to  God  that  some  might  now  be  led  to 
look  to  the  Savior,  that  some  would  come  with 
weeping  and  with  tears  to  him,  and  say, 

"  'Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul. 
Let  nie  to  thy  bosom  fly.' 

Take  my  case,  and  arbitrate  for  me;  I  accept 
Thine  atonement;  I  trust  in  Thy  precious  blood; 
only  receive  me  and  I  will  rejoice  in  Thee  forever 
with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory." 

OPEN  WIDE  THE   DOOR 

When  the  brazen  serpent  was  lifted  up  in  the 
wilderness,  the  people  v/ere  not  to  look  to  Moses, 
nor  to  the  Tabernacle,  nor  to  the  pillar  of  cloud, 
but  to  the  brazen  serpent  itself.  Looking  was  not 
enough  unless  they  looked  to  the  right  object;  and 
the  right  object  was  not  enough  unless  they  looked. 
It  was  not  enough  for  them  to  know  about  the 
serpent  of  brass;  they  must  each  one  look  to  it  for 
himself.     When  a  man  is  ill,  he  may  have  a  good 


1  T  i 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   -i-5 

knowled,s;e  of  medicine,  and  yet  he  may  die  if  he 
does  not  actually  take  the  healing  draught.  We 
must  receive  Jesus;  for  "to  as  many  as  received 
Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons 
of  God."  Lay  the  emphasis  on  two  words:  We 
must  receive  HIM,  and  we  must  receive  Him. 
We  must  open  wide  the  door,  and  take  Christ 
Jesus  in;  for  "Christ  in  you"  is  "the  hope  of  glory." 
Christ  must  be  no  myth,  no  dream,  no  phantom 
to  us,  but  a  real  man,  and  truly  God;  and  our 
reception  of  Him  must  be  no  forced  and  feigned  ac- 
ceptance, but  the  hearty  and  happy  assent  and 
consent  of  the  soul  that  He  shall  be  the  all  in  all  of 
our  salvation.  Will  we  not  at  once  come  to  Him, 
and  make  Him  our  sole  trust  .-• 

I  WOULD  TO  GOD  WE  HAD  MORE  PLUCK 

The  common  policy  of  our  churches  is  that  of 
great  prudence.  We  do  not,  as  a  rule,  attempt 
anything  beyond  our  strength.  We  measure  means 
and  calculate  possibilities  with  economical  accu- 
racy, then  we  strike  off  a  large  discount  for  contin- 
gencies, and  a  still  larger  as  provision  for  our  ease, 
and  so  we  accomplish  little  because  we  have  no 
idea  of  doing  much.  I  would  to  God  we  had 
more  "pluck."  I  know  of  no  fitter  word;  though 
the  word  may  better  suit  the  camp  than  the 
church,  we  will  for  once  borrow  from  the  barracks. 
Bear  in  mind  that  there  is  nothing  like  courage, 
even  in  ordinary  things.  Sir  Richard  Sutton, 
when  he   was  ambassador  to   Prussia,  was    taken 


226  SPURGEON 

by  Frederick  the  Great  to  see  his  regiment  of 
giants,  every  one  of  whom  stood  six  feet  six  in  his 
shoes.  The  king  said  to  him,  "Do  you  think  any 
regiment  in  the  Enghsh  army  could  fight  my  men, 
man  for  man?"  Sir  Richard  answered,  "Please 
your  majesty,  I  do  not  know  whether  the  same 
number  could  beat  your  giants,  but  I  know  that 
half  the  number  would  try  at  it."  Let  us  attempt 
great  things,  for  .those  who  believe  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  succeed  beyond  all  expectation.  By 
faith  the  worker  lives. 

BELIEVERS  IN    NOTHING 

Certain  thinkers  have  reached  the  blessed  ulti- 
matum of  believing  nothing  at  all  with  anything 
like  certainty  of  belief.  When  these  cultivated 
persons  speak  of  us  they  manifest  great  scorn,  and 
affect  to  believe  that  we  are  natural  fools.  Ah, 
dear!  People  are  not  always  what  they  are  thought 
to  be,  and  it  may  happen  that  a  man  sees  himself 
as  in  a  glass  when  he  thinks  he  is  looking  out  of 
window  at  a  neighbor.  It  is  a  sign  of  great  weak- 
ness when  persons  are  full  of  contempt  for  others. 
If  in  any  review  or  pamphlet  a  writer  parades 
his  culture,  you  may  be  sure  that  he  has  been 
lying  fallow  of  late,  and  his  affectations  are  the 
weeds  which  have  come  of  it.  If  it  came  to  a  fair 
contest  upon  the  matter  of  education  and  culture 
the  orthodox  would  be  quite  able  to  hold  their 
own.  Boasting  is  sorry  work;  but  sometimes  per- 
sons must  be   answered   according   to   their   folly, 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   22/ 

and  I  say  boldly  that  in  any  sort  of  mental  tourna- 
ment we  should  not  tremble  to  tilt  with  the  men 
of  "modern  thought."  Be  it  so  or  not,  it  is  ours 
to  believe.  We  believe  that  when  the  Lord  our 
God  gave  forth  a  revelation  He  knew  His  own 
mind,  and  that  He  expressed  Himself  in  the  best 
and  wisest  manner,  and  in  terms  that  can  be  un- 
derstood b}^  those  who  are  teachable  and  truthful. 
We  therefore  believe  that  no  new  revelation  is 
needed,  and  that  the  idea  of  other  light  to  come 
is  practically  unbelief  in  the  light  which  now  is, 
seeing  the  light  of  truth  is  one.  :  We  believe  that 
though  the  Bible  has  been  twisted  and  turned 
about  by  sacrilegious  hands,  it  is  still  the  infallible 
revelation  of  God.  It  is  a  main  part  of  our  re- 
ligion humbly  to  accept  what  God  has  revealed. 
Perhaps  the  highest  form  of  adoration  possible  on 
this  side  the  veil  is  the  bowing  of  our  entire  men- 
tal and  spiritual  being  before  the  revealed  mind  of 
God;  the  kneeling  of  the  understanding  in  that 
sacred  Presence  whose  glory  causes  angels  to  veil 
their  faces.  Let  those  who  please  worship  science, 
reason,  and  their  own  clear  judgment;  it  is  ours  to 
submit  ourselves  before  the  Lord  our  God. 

IN  THE  GALLERIES  OF  VERSAILLES 

The  upper  galleries  at  Versailles  are  filled  with 
portraits,  many  of  them  extremely  valuable  and 
ancient.  These  are  the  likenesses  of  the  greatest 
men  of  all  lands  and  ages,  drawn  by  the  ablest 
artists.      Yet    most    visitors    wander  through   the 


228  SPURGEON 

rooms  with  little  or  no  interest;  in  fact,  after 
noticing  one  or  two  of  the  more  prominent  pict- 
ures, they  hasten  through  the  suite  of  chambers 
and  descend  to  the  other  floors.  Notice  the  change 
when  the  sight-seers  come  to  fine  paintings  like 
those  of  Horace  Vernet,  where  the  inen  and  women 
are  not  inactive  portraits  but  are  activel}'  engaged. 
There  the  warrior  who  was  passed  by  without 
notice  upstairs,  is  seen  hewing  his  way  to  glory 
over  heaps  of  slain,  or  the  statesman  is  observed 
delivering  himself  of  weighty  words  before  an  as- 
sembly of  princes  and  peers.  Not  the  men,  but 
their  actions,  engross  attention.  Portraits  have  no 
charm  when  scenes  of  stirring  interest  are  set  in 
rivalry  with  them.  After  all,  then,  let  us  be  who 
or  what  we  may,  we  must  bestir  ourselves  or  be 
mere  nobodies,  chips  in  the  porridge,  forgotten 
shells  of  the  shore.  If  we  would  impress  we 
must  act.  The  dignity  of  standing  still  will  never 
win  the  prize,  we  must  run  for  it.  Our  iniluence 
over  our  times  will  arise  luainly  from  our  doing 
and  suffering  the  will  of  God,  not  from  our  office 
or  person.  Life,  life  in  earnest,  life  for  God,  this 
will  tell  on  the  age;  but  mere  orderliness  and  pro- 
priet}',  inactive  and  passionless,  \\ill  be  utterly 
inoperative. 

THREE  DAYS  WITHOUT  SUNRISE 

If  kingdoms  should  go  to  rack  the  Christian 
need  not  tremble.  Just  for  a  minute  imagine  a 
scene  like  this:      Suppose  for  the   next   three  days 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   2  29 

the  sun  should  not  rise;  suppose  the  moon  should 
be  turned  into  a  clot  of  blood,  and  shine  no  more 
upon  the  world;  imagine  that  a  darkness  that 
might  be  felt  brooded  over  all  men;  imagine  next 
that  all  the  world  did  tremble  in  an  earthquake 
till  every  tower  and  house  and  hut  fell  down;  im- 
agine next  that  the  sea  forgot  its  place  and  leaped 
upon  the  earth,  and  that  the  mountains  ceased  to 
stand,  and  began  to  tremble  from  their  pedestals; 
conceive  after  that  a  blazing  comet  streamed  across 
the  sky — that  the  thunder  bellowed  incessantly — 
that  the  lightnings  without  a  moment's  pause  fol- 
lowed one  the  other;  conceive  then  that  thou  didst 
behold  divers  terrible  sights,  fiendish  ghosts  and 
grim  spirits;  imagine  next  that  a  trumpet,  waxing 
exceeding  loud,  did  blow ;  that  there  were  heard 
the  shrieks  of  men  dying  and  perishing;  imagine 
that  in  the  midst  of  all  this  confusion  there  was  to  be 
found  a  saint.  My  friend,  "Jesus  Christ,  the  same 
yesterday,  to-da3%  and  forever,"  would  keep  him  as 
secure  amidst  all  these  horrors  as  we  are  to-day. 
OhJ  rejoice!  I  have  pictured  the  worst  that  can 
come.  Then  you  would  be  secure.  Come  what 
may  then,  you  are  safe,  while  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
same. 

god's  CASE  AGAINST  MAN 

Let  us  listen  while  the  great  Creator  speaks: 
may  God  give  me  grace  now  reverently  to  state  it 
in  his  name,  as  one  poor  sinner  stating  God's  case 
against  us  all.      "H-^ar,  O   heavens,  and  give  ear, 


230  SPURGEON 

O  earth:  for  the  Lord  hath  spo.ken,  I  have  nour- 
ished and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  re- 
belled against  me.  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner, 
and  the  ass  his  master's  crib:  but  Israel  doth  not 
know,  my  people  doth  not  consider.  Ah,  sinful 
nation,  a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil 
doers,  children  that  are  corrupters:  they  have 
forsaken  the  Lord,  they  have  provoked  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  unto  anger,  they  are  gone  away  back- 
ward." The  Eternal  God  charges  us,  and  let  me 
confess  at  once  most  justly  and  most  truly  charges 
us,  with  having  broken  all  His  commandments- 
some  of  them  in  act,  some  of  them  in  word,  all  of 
them  in  heart,  and  thought,  and  imagination.  He 
charges  upon  us,  that  against  light  and  knowledge 
we  have  chosen  the  evil  and  forsaken  the  good; 
that  knowing  what  we  were  doing  we  have  turned 
aside  from  His  most  righteous  law  and  have  gone 
astray  like  lost  sheep,  following  the  imaginations 
and  devices  of  our  own  hearts.  The  great  Plaint- 
iff claims  that  inasmuch  as  we  are  His  creatures 
we  ought  to  have  obeyed  Him,  that  inasmuch  as 
we  owe  our  very  lives  to  His  daily  care  we  ought 
to  have  rendered  Him  service  instead  of  disobedi- 
ence, and  to  have  been  His  loyal  subjects  instead 
of  turning  traitors  to  His  throne.  All  this,  calmly 
and  dispassionately,  according  to  the  great  Book 
of  the  law,  is  laid  to  our  charge  before  the  Days- 
man. No  exaggeration  of  sin  is  brought  against 
us.  It  is  simply  declared  of  us  that  the  whole 
head  is  sick   and   the    whole   heart    is    faint ;  that 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   23  1 

there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one;  that 
we  have  all  gone  out  of  the  way,  and  altogether 
become  unprofitable.  This  is  God's  case.  He 
says,  "I  made  this  man;  curiously  was  he  wrought 
in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth;  and  all  his  mem- 
bers bear  traces  of  my  singular  handiwork.  I 
made  him  for  my  honor,  and  he  has  not  honored 
me.  I  created  him  for  my  service,  and  he  has  not 
served  me.  Twenty,  thirty,  forty,  fifty  years  I  have 
kept  the  breath  in  his  nostrils;  the  bread  he  has 
eaten  has  been  the  daily  portion  of  my  bounty;  his 
garments  are  the  livery  of  my  charity ;  and  all  this 
while  he  has  neither  thought  of  me,  his  Creator 
and  Preserver,  nor  done  anything  in  my  service. 
He  has  served  his  family,  his  wife  and  children, 
but  his  Maker  he  has  despised." 

IGNORANCE  AND    PRIDE 

Men  are  ignorant  of  the  law  of  God,  and  of  what 
holiness  really  is.  If  they  knew  that  even  an  evil 
thought  is  a  breach  of  the  law,  and  that  the  law 
once  broken  in  any  point  is  altogether  violated, 
they  would  be  at  once  convinced  that  there  can  be 
no  righteousness  by  the  law  to  those  who  have 
already  offended  against  it.  They  are  also  in  great 
ignorance  concerning  themselves,  for  those  very 
persons  who  talk  about  self-righteousness  are  as  a 
rule  openly  chargeable  with  fault;  and  if  not,  were 
they  to  sit  down  and  really  look  at  their  own  lives, 
they  would  soon  perceive  even  in  their  best  works 
such  impurity  of  motive  beforehand,  or  such  pride 


232  SPURGEON 

and  self-congratulation  afterwards,  that  they  would 
see  the  gloss  taken  off  from  all  their  performances, 
and  they  would  be  utterly  ashamed  of  them.  Nor 
is  it  ignorance  alone  which  leads  men  to  self- 
righteousness,  they  are  also  deceived  by  pride. 
Man  cannot  endure  to  be  saved  on  the  footing  of 
mercy;  he  loves  not  to  plead  guilty  and  throw 
himself  on  the  favor  of  the  great  King;  he  cannot 
brook  to  be  treated  as  a  pauper,  and  blessed  as  a 
matter  of  charity;  he  desires  to  have  a  finger  in 
his  own  salvation,  and  claim  at  least  a  little  credit 
for  it.  Proud  man  will  not  have  heaven  itself 
upon  terms  of  grace;  but  so  long  as  he  can  he  sets 
up  one  plea  or  another,  and  holds  to  his  own 
righteousness  as  though  it  were  his  life.  This  self- 
confidence  also  arises  from  wicked  unbelief,  for 
through  his  self-conceit  man  will  not  believe  God. 
Nothing  is  more  plainly  revealed  in  Scripture  than 
this, — that  by  *.he  works  of  the  law  shall  no  man 
be  justified;  yet  men  in  some  shape  or  other  stick 
to  the  hope  of  legal  righteousness;  they  will  have 
it  that  they  must  prepare  for  grace,  or  assist  mercy, 
or  in  some  degree  deserve  eternal  life.  They  pre- 
fer their  own  flattering  prejudices  to  the  declara- 
tion of  the  heart-searching  God. 

FREE,  GRATIS,  FOR  NOTHING 

I  heard  a  story;  I  think  it  came  from  the  North 
Country: — A  minister  called  upon  a  poor  woman, 
intending  to  give  her  help;  for  he  knew  that  she 
was  very  poor.      With  his  half-crown  in  his  hand, 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   233 

he  knocked  at  the  door;  but  she  did  not  answer. 
He  concluded  she  was  not  at  home,  and  went  his 
way.  A  Httle  after  he  met  her  at  the  church,  and 
told  her  that  he  had  remembered  her  need:  "I 
called  at  3'our  house,  and  knocked  several  times, 
and  I  suppose  you  were  not  at  home,  for  I  had  no 
answer."  "At  what  hour  did  you  call,  sir.?"  "It 
was  about  noon."  "Oh,  dear,"  she  said,  "I  heard 
you,  sir,  and  I  am  so  sorry  I  did  not  answer;  but 
I  thought  it  was  the  man  calling  for  the  rent." 
Many  a  poor  woman  knows  what  this  meant. 
Now,  it  is  my  desire  to  be  heard,  and  therefore  I 
want  to  say  that  I  am  not  calling  fcr  the  rent; 
indeed,  it  is  not  the  object  of  this  book  to  ask 
anything  of  you,  but  to  tell  you  that  salvation  is 
ALL  OF  GRACE,  which  means,  free,  gratis,  for  notic- 
ing. 

Oftentimes,  when  w^e  are  anxious  to  win  at- 
tention, our  hearer  thinks,  "Ah!  now  I  am  going 
to  be  told  my  duty.  It  is  the  man  calling  for  that 
which  is  due  to  God,  and  I  am  sure  I  have  nothing 
wherewith  to  pay.  I  will  not  be  at  home."  No, 
this  book  does  not  come  to  make  a  demarjd  upon 
you,  but  to  bring  you  something.  We  arc  not 
going  to  talk  about  law,  and  duty,  and  punishment, 
but  about  love,  and  goodness,  and  forgiveness,  and 
mercy,  and  eternal  life.  Do  not,  therefore,  act  as 
if  you  were  not  at  home;  do  not  turn  a  deaf  ear, 
or  a  careless  heart.  I  am  asking  nothing  of  you 
in  the  name  of  Go  1  or  man.  It  is  not  my  intent 
to   make   any   requirement    at   your   hands;  but  I 


2  34  SPURGEON 

come,  in  God's  name,  to  bring  you  a  free  gift, 
which  it  shall  be  to  your  present  and  eternal  joy 
to  receive.  Open  the  door,  and  let  my  pleadings 
enter.  "Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together." 
The  Lord  himself  invites  you  to  a  conference  con- 
cerning your  immediate  and  endless  happiness,  and 
He  would  not  have  done  this  if  He  did  not  mean 
well  toward  you.  Do  not  refuse  the  Lord  Jesus 
who  knocks  at  your  door;  for  He  knocks  with  a 
hand  which  was  nailed  to  the  tree  for  such  as  you 
are.  Since  His  only  and  sole  object  is  your  good, 
incline  your  ear  and  come  to  Him.  Hearken  dili- 
gently, and  let  the  good  word  sink  into  your  soul. 
It  may  be  that  the  hour  is  come  in  which  3-ou  shall 
enter  upon  that  new  life  which  is  the  beginning  of 
heaven.  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  reading 
is  a  sort  of  hearing;  faith  may  come  to  you  while 
you  are  reading  this  book.  Why  not .''  O  blessed 
Spirit  of  all  grace,  make  it  so! 

THE  JOY  or  CONSCIOUS  DEPENDENCE  ON  GOD 

If  I  were  asked  what  is  the  sweetest  frame 
within  the  whole  compass  of  human  feeling,  I 
should  not  speak  of  a  sense  of  power  in  prayer,  or 
abundant  revelation,  or  rapturous  joys,  or  con- 
quest of  evil  spirits;  but  I  should  mention  as  the 
most  exquisite  delight  of  my  being,  a  condition  of 
conscious  dependence  upon  God.  It  has  been 
often  associated  with  great  |i;iin  and  humiliation  of 
spirit,  but  it  is  inexpressibly  delightful  to  lie  pas- 
sive  in    the   hand  of  love,  to  die   into    the   life   of 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   235 

Christ.  It  is  deep  joy  to  feel  that  you  do  not 
know,  but  your  heavenly  Father  knows;  that  you 
cannot  speak,  but  "we  have  an  Advocate;"  that 
you  can  scarcely  lift  a  hand,  but  that  He  worketh 
all  your  works  in  you.  The  entire  submission  of 
our  soul  to  our  Lord,  the  full  content  of  the  heart 
with  God's  will  and  way,  the  sure  reliance  of  the 
mind  upon  the  heavenly  presence  and  power — 
this  is  the  nearest  approach  to  heaven  that  I  know; 
and  it  is  better  than  rapture,  for  one  can  abide  in 
it  without  strain  or  reaction. 

"  Oh.  to  be  nothing,  nothing, 
Only  to  lie  at  His  feet." 

It  is  not  so  sublime  a  feeling  as  soaring  aloft  on 
the  wings  of  eagles;  but  for  sweetness — deep,  mys- 
terious, indescribale — it  bears  the  palm.  It  is  a 
blessedness  which  can  bear  to  be  thought  of,  a  joy 
which  never  seems  to  be  a  stolen  one ;  for  surely 
a  poor,  frail  child  has  an  unquestioned  right  to 
depend  upon  God,  a  right  to  be  nothing  in  the 
presence  of  the  All-supporting  One.  I  love  to 
preach  in  such  a  mood,  not  as  though  I  was  about 
to  preach  at  all,  but  hoping  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
would  speak  in  me. 

BELIEVING  DOES  NOT  COME  BY  TRYING 

We  arc  not  strangers  to  the  cry — 

"Oh,  that  I  could  believe, 
Then  all  would  easy  be; 
I  wnuld,  but  cannot;  Lord,  relieve. 
My  help  must  come  from  Thee." 

Many  remain  in  the  dark  for  years  because  they 


236  SPURGEON 

have  no  power,  as  they  say,  to  do  that  which  is 
tlie  giving  up  of  all  power  and  reposing  in  the 
power  of  another,  even  the  Lord  Jesus.  Indeed, 
it  is  a  very  curious  thing,  this  whole  matter  of 
believing;  for  people  do  not  get  much  help  by  try- 
ing to  believe.  Believing  does  not  come  by  tr3-ing. 
If  a  person  were  to  make  a  statement  of  something 
that  happened  this  day,  I  should  not  tell  him  that 
I  would  try  to  believe  him.  If  I  believed  in  the 
truthfulness  of  the  man  who  told  the  incident  to 
me  and  said  that  he  saw  it,  I  should  accept  the 
statement  at  once.  If  I  did  not  think  him  a  true 
man,  I  should,  of  course,  disbelieve  him;  but  there 
would  be  no  trying  in  the  matter.  Now,  when 
God  declares  that  there  is  salvation  in  Christ 
Jesus,  I  must  either  believe  Him  at  once,  or  make 
Him  a  liar.  Surely  you  will  not  hesitate  as  to 
which  is  the  right  path  in  this  case.  The  witness 
of  God  must  be  true,  and  we  are  bound  at  once  to 
believe  in  Jesus. 

But  possibly  you  have  been  trying  to  believe  too 
much.  Now  do  not  aim  at  great  things.  Be  satis- 
fied to  have  a  faith  that  can  hold  in  its  hand  this 
one  truth:  "\^^hile  we  were  yet  v^'ithout  strength, 
in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  He  laid 
down  His  life  for  men  while  as  yet  they  were  not 
believing  in  Him,  nor  were  able  to  believe  in  Him, 
He  died  for  men,  not  as  believers,  but  as  sinners. 
He  came  to  make  these  sinners  into  believers  and 
saints;  but  when  He  died  for  them  He  viewed  them 
as  utterly  without  strength.      If  you   hold   to    the 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT        23/ 

truth  that  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly,  and  believe 
it,  your  faith  will  save  you,  and  you  may  go  in 
peace.  If  you  will  trust  your  soul  with  Jesus,  who 
died  for  the  ungodly,  even  though  you  cannot  be- 
lieve all  things,  nor  move  mountains,  nor  do  any 
other  wonderful  works,  yet  you  are  saved.  It  is 
not  great  faith,  but  true  faith,  that  saves;  and  the 
salvation  lies  not  in  the  faith,  but  in  the  Christ  in 
whom  faith  trusts.  Faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard 
seed,  will  bring  salvation.  It  is  not  the  measure  of 
faith,  but  the  sincerity  of  faith,  which  is  the  point 
to  be  considered.  Surely  a  man  can  believe  what 
he  knows  to  be  true ;  and  as  you  know  Jesus  to  be 
true,  you,  my  friend,  can  believe  in  Him. 

The  cross,  which  is  the  object  of  faith,  is  also, 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  cause  of  it. 
Sit  down  and  watch  the  dying  Savior  till  faith 
springs  up  spontaneously  in  your  heart.  There  is 
no  place  like  Calvary  for  creating  confidence.  The 
air  of  that  sacred  hill  brings  health  to  trembling 
faith.      Many  a  watcher  there  has  said: 

'  While  I  view  thee,  wounded,  grieving, 

Breathless  fiii  the  cursed  tree, 
Lord,  I  feel  my  heart  believing 
That  thou  suffcr'dst  thus  for  me." 

NONE  BUT  GOD  CAN  FORGIVE 

It  is  quite  impossible  for  any  person  to  forgive 
offenses  which  have  not  been  committed  against 
himself.  A  person  has  greatly  injured  you;  you 
can  forgive  him,  and  I  hope  you  will;  but  no  third 
person  can  forgive  him    apart    from   you.      If  the 

15 


238  SPURGEON 

wrong  is  done  to  you,  the  pardon  must  come  from 
you.  If  we  have  sinned  against  God,  it  is  in  God's 
power  to  forgive;  for  the  sin  is  against  himself. 
That  is  why  David  says,  in  the  fifty-first  Psalm: 
"Against  Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned,  and  done 
this  evil  in  Thy  sight;"  for  then  God,  against  whom 
the  offense  is  committed,  can  put  the  offense  away. 
That  which  we  owe  to  God,  our  great  Creator  can 
remit,  if  so  it  pleases  Him;  and  if  He  remits  it,  it 
is  remitted.  None  but  the  great  God,  against 
whom  we  have  committed  the  sin,  can  blot  out 
that  sin;  let  us,  therefore,  see  that  we  go  to  Him 
and  seek  mercy  at  His  hands.  Do  not  let  us  be 
led  aside  b}'  priests,  who  would  have  us  confess  to 
them;  they  have  no  warrant  in  the  Word  of  God 
for  their  pretensions.  But  even  if  they  were  or- 
dained to  pronounce  absolution  in  God's  name,  it 
must  still  be  better  to  go  ourselves  to  the  great 
Lord  through  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mediator,  and  seek 
and  find  pardon  at  His  hands;  since  we  are  sure 
that  this  is  the  right  way.  Proxy  religion  involves 
too  great  a  risk:  you  had  better  see  to  your  soul's 
iirittcrs  yourself,  and  leave  them  in  no  man's 
hands. 

Only  God  can  justify  the  ungodly;  but  He  can 
do  it  to  perfection.  He  casts  our  sins  behind  His 
back,  He  blots  them  out,  He  says  that  though  they 
be  sought  for,  they  shall  not  be  found.  With  no 
other  reason  for  it  but  His  own  infinite  goodness, 
He  has  prepared  a  glorious  way  by  which  He  can 
make  scarlet  sins  as   white  as  snow,    and  remove 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   239 

our  transgressions  from  us  as  far  as  the  east  is 
from  the  west.  He  says,  "I  will  not  remember 
your  sins."  He  goes  the  length  of  making  an  end 
of  sin.  One  of  old  called  out  in  amazement: 
"Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee,  that  pardoneth  in- 
iquity, and  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the 
remnant  of  His  heritage.^  He  retaineth  not  His 
anger  forever,  because  He  delighteth  in  mercy." 

HUSH  THY  TRUMP,    O  WAR 

All  swords  that  have  ever  flashed  from  scabbards 
have  not  aided  Christ  a  single  grain.  Mohamme- 
dans" religion  might  be  sustained  by  cimeters,  but 
Christians'  religion  must  be  sustained  by  love. 
The  great  crime  of  war  can  never  promote  the  re- 
ligion of  peace.  The  battle,  and  the  garment 
rolled  in  blood,  are  not  a  fitting  prelude  to  "peace 
on  earth;  good  will  to  men,"  And  I  do  firmly  hold 
that  the  slaughter  of  men,  that  bayonets,  and 
swords,  and  guns,  have  never  yet  been,  and  never 
can  be,  promoters  of  the  gospel.  The  gospel  will 
proceed  without  them,  but  never  through  them. 
"Not  by  might."  Now  don't  be  befooled  again,  if 
you  hear  of  the  English  conquering  in  China;  don't 
go  down  on  your  knees  and  thank  God  for  it,  and 
say  it's  such  a  heavenly  thing  for  the  spread  of 
the  gospel — it  just  is  not.  Experience  teaches  you 
that;  and  if  you  look  upon  the  map  you  will  find  I 
have  stated  the  truth,  that  where  our  arms  have 
been  ■  victorious,  the  gospel  has  been  hindered 
rather  than  not;   so  that  where  South  Sea   Island- 


240  SPURGEON 

ers  have  bowed  their  knees  and  cast  their  idols  to 
the  bats,  British  Hindoos  have  kept  their  idols; 
and  where  Bechuanas  and  Bushmen  have  turned 
unto  the  Lord,  British  Caffirs  have  not  been  con- 
verted;  not  perhaps  because  they  were  British, 
but  because  the  very  fact  of  the  missionary  being 
a  Briton,  put  him  above  them,  and  weakened  their 
influence.  Hush  thy  trump,  O  war;  put  away 
thy  gaudy  trappings  and  thy  bloodstained  drapery; 
if  thou  thinkest  that  the  cannon  with  the  cross 
upon  it  is  really  sanctified,  and  if  thou  imaginest 
that  thy  banner  hath  become  holy,  thou  dreamest 
of  a  lie.  God  wanteth  not  thee  to  help  his  cause, 
"It  is  not  by  armies,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my 
Spirit,  saith  the  Lord." 

TRUTH  TOUCHES    THE  SPRINGS  OF  ACTION 

Faith  is  chosen  again,  because  it  touches  the 
springs  of  action.  Even  in  common  things  faith 
of  a  certain  sort  lies  at  the  root  of  all.  I  wonder 
whether  I  shall  be  wrong  if  I  say  that  we  never  do 
anything  except  through  faith  of  some  sort.  If  I 
walk  across  my  study  it  is  because  I  believe  my 
legs  will  carry  me.  A  man  cats  because  he  be- 
lieves in  the  necessity  of  food;  he  goes  to  business 
because  he  believes  in  the  value  of  money;  he 
accepts  a  check  because  he  believes  that  the 
bank  will  honor  it.  Columbus  discovered  America 
because  he  believed  that  there  was  another  conti- 
nent beyond  the  ocean;  and  the  Pilgrim  Fathers 
colonized  it  because  they  believed  that  God  would 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   24  I 

be  with  them  on  those  rocky  shores.  Most  grand 
deeds  have  been  born  of  faith ;  for  good  or  for  evil, 
faith  works  wonders  by  the  man  in  whom  it  dwells. 
Faith  in  its  natural  form  is  an  all-prevailing  force, 
which  enters  into  all  manner  of  human  actions. 
Possibly  he  who  derides  faith  in  God  is  the  man 
who,  in  an  evil  form,  has  the  most  of  faith;  indeed, 
he  usually  falls  into  a  credulity  which  would  be 
ridiculous,  if  it  were  not  disgraceful. 

BELIEVE    YOUR  OWN    DOCTRINE 

So  pray  and  so  preach  that  if  there  are  no  con- 
versions you  will  be  astonished,  amazed,  and  bro- 
ken-hearted. Look  for  the  salvation  of  your 
hearers  as  much  as  the  angel  who  will  sound  the 
last  trump  will  look  for  the  waking  of  the  dead. 
Believe  your  own  doctrine!  Believe  your  own 
Savior!  Believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost  wha  dwells  in 
you!  For  thus  shall  you  see  your  heart's  desire, 
and  God  shall  be  glorified. 

LABELED    " UNGODLY !" 

if  God  justifieththe  ungodly,  then,  dear  friend,  he 
can  justify  you.  Is  not  that  the  very  kind  of  per- 
son that  you  are.-*  If  you  are  unconverted  at  this 
moment,  it  is  a  very  proper  description  of  you: 
you  have  lived  without  God,  you  have  been  the 
reverse  of  godly;  in  one  word,  you  have  been  and 
are  ungodly.  Perhaps  you  have  not  even  attended 
a  place  of  worship  on  the  Sabbath,  but  have  lived 
in  disregard  of  God's   day,  and    house,  and    Word 


242  SPURGEON 

— this  proves  you  to  have  been  ungodly.  Sadder 
still,  it  may  be  you  have  even  tried  to  doubt  God's 
existence,  and  have  gone  the  length  of  saying  that 
you  did  so.  You  have  lived  on  this  fair  earth, 
which  is  full  of  the  tokens  of  God's  presence,  and 
all  the  while  you  have  shut  your  eyes  to  the  clear 
evidences  of  His  power  and  Godhead.  You  have 
lived  as  if  there  were  no  God.  Indeed,  you  would 
have  been  very  pleased  if  you  could  have  demon- 
strated to  yourself  to  a  certainty  that  there  was 
no  God  whatever.  Possibly  you  have  lived  a  great 
many  years  in  this  way,  so  that  you  are  now  pretty 
well  settled  in  your  ways,  and  yet  God  is  not  in 
any  of  them.  If  you  were  labeled  ungodly  it 
would  as  well  describe  you  as  if  the  sea  were  to  be 
lab-^led  salt  water.      Would  it  not .-' 

CHRIST  SHALL  BE  FOREVER  PRAISED 

Supposing  the  innumerable  company  of  the  re- 
deemed could  perish,  and  their  immortality  were 
swallowed  up  in  death,  yet,  even  then,  daily  Christ 
world  be  praised!  If  all  of  us  had  departed  from 
the  boundless  sphere  of  being — look  up  yonder! 
See  yon  starry  host;  see  the  mighty  cohorts  of 
cherubs  and  seraphs. -^  Let  men  begone  and  they 
shall  praise  Him;  let  the  troops  of  the  glorified 
cease  their  notes,  and  let  no  sweet  melodies  ever 
come  from  the  lips  of  sainted  men  and  women,  yet 
the  chariots  of  God  are  twenty  thousand,  even 
many  thousands  of  angels,  who  always  in  their 
motions  chant  His  praise.     There  is  an   orchestra 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   243 

on  high,  the  music  of  Vvhich  shall  never  cease,  even 
were  mortals  extinct  and  all  the  human  race  swept 
from  existence.  Again,  if  angels  were  departed, 
still  daily  would  He  be  praised;  for,  are  there  not 
worlds  on  worlds,  and  suns  on  suns,  and  systems 
on  systems,  that  could  forever  sing  his  praise  ?  Yes ! 
The  ocean — that  house  of  storms — would  howl  out 
his  glories;  the  winds  would  swell  the  notes  of  his 
praise  with  their  ceaseless  gales;  the  thunders 
would  roll  like  drums  in  the  ma,rch  of  the  God  of 
armies;  the  inimitable  void  of  ether  would  become 
vocal  with  song;  and  space  itself  would  burst 
forth  into  one  universal  chorus — Hallelujah!  Halle- 
lujah! Hallelujah!  Still  the  Lord  God  omnipotent 
reigneth ! 

THE  FUNERAL  MARCH  OF  THE    SOUL 

ft 

Alas!  for  thee,  that  thy  pulse  should  beat  a 
march  to  hell.  Alas!  that  yonder  clock,  like  the 
muffled  drum,  should  be  the  music  of  the  funeral 
march  of  thy  soul.  Alas !  alas !  that  thou  shouldst 
fold  thine  arms  in  pleasure,  when  the  knife  is  at 
thy  heart.  Alas!  alas!  for  thee,  that  thou  shouldst 
sing,  and  make  merriment,  when  the  rope  is  about 
thy  neck,  and  the  drop  is  tottering  under  thee ! 
Alas !  for  thee,  that  thou  shouldst  go  thy  way,  and 
live  merrily  and  happily  and  yet  be  lost!  Thou 
remindest  me  of  the  silly  moth  that  dances  round 
about  the  flame,  singeing  itself  for  a  while,  and 
then  at  last  plunging  to  its  death.  Such  art  thou ! 
Young  woman,  with  thy   butterlly   clothing,  thou 


244  SPDRGEON 

art  leaping  round  the  flame  that  shall  destroy  thee! 
Young  man,  light  and  frothy  in  thy  conversation, 
gay  in  thy  life,  thou  art  dancing  to  hell;  thou  art 
singing  thy  way  to  damnation,  and  promenading 
the  road  to  destruction.  Alas!  alas!  that  ye  should 
be  spinning  your  own  winding-sheets;  that  ye 
should  every  day  by  your  sins  be  building  your 
own  gallows;  that  by  your  transgressions  ye  should 
be  digging  your  own  graves,  and  working  hard  to 
pile  the  fagots  for  your  own  eternal  burning.  Oh! 
that  ye  were  wise,  that  ye  understood  this,  that 
ye  would  consider  your  latter  end.  Oh!  that  ye 
would  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come! 

god's  highest  glory 

Salvation  is  God's  highest  glory.  He  is  glorified 
in  every  dewdrop  that  twinkles  to  the  morning 
sun.  He  is  magnified  in  every  wood  flower  that 
blossoms  in  the  copse,  although  it  live  to  blush 
unseen,  and  waste  its  sweetness  in  the  forest  air. 
God  is  glorified  in  every  bird  that  warbles  on  the 
spray;  in  every  lamb  that  skips  the  mead.  Do 
not  the  fishes  in  the  sea  praise  Him  ?  From  the  tiny 
minnow  to  the  huge  leviathan,  do  not  all  creatures 
that  swim  the  water  bless  and  praise  his  name.** 
Do  not  all  created  things  extol  Him .-'  Is  there  aught 
beneath  the  sky,  save  man,  that  does  not  glorify 
God.'^  Do  not  the  stars  exalt  Him,  when  they  write 
his  name  upon  the  azure  of  heaven  in  their  golden 
letters.''  Do  not  the  lightnings  adore  Him  when 
they  flash  his  brightness  in  arrows  of    light,  picrc- 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT        245 

ing  the  midnight  darkness?  Do  not  thunders  extol 
him  when  they  roll  like  drums  in  the  march  of  the 
God  of  armies?  Do  not  all  things  exalt  Him,  from 
the  least  even  to  the  greatest  ?  But  sing,  sing,  O 
Universe,  till  thou  hast  exhausted  thyself,  thou 
canst  not  afford  a  song  so  sweet  as  the  song  of 
Incarnation.  Though  creation  may  be  a  majestic 
organ  of  praise,  it  cannot  reach  the  compass  of 
the  golden  canticle — Incarnation!  There  is  more 
in  that  than  in  creation,  more  melody  in  Jesus  in 
the  manger,  than  there  is  in  worlds  on  worlds  roll- 
ing their  grandeur  round  the  throne  of  the  Most 
High. 

WHAT  IS  IT  TO  BELIEVE  IN  HIM 

What  is  it  to  believe  in  Him?  It  is  not  merely  to 
say,  "He  is  God  and  the  Savior,"  but  to  trust  Him 
wholly  and  entirely,  and  take  Him  for  all  your  sal- 
vation from  this  time  forth  and  forever — your 
Lord,  your  Master,  your  all.  If  you  will  have 
Jesus,  He  has  you  already.  If  you  believe  on  Him, 
I  tell  you  you  cannot  go  to  hell ;  for  that  were  to 
make  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  of  none  effect.  It 
cannot  be  that  a  sacrifice  should  be  accepted,  and 
3'et  the  soul  should  die  for  whom  that  sacrifice  has 
been  received.  If  the  believing  soul  could  be  con- 
demned, then  why  a  sacrifice  ?  If  Jesus  died  in  my 
stead,  why  should  I  die  also?  Every  believer  can 
claim  that  the  sacrifice  was  actually  made  for  him: 
by  faith  he  has  laid  his  hands  on  it,  and  made  it 
his  own,  and  therefore  he    may  rest    assured   that 


246  SPURGEON 

he  can  never  perish.  The  Lord  would  not  receive 
this  offering  on  our  behalf,  and  then  condemn  us 
to  die.  The  Lord  cannot  read  our  pardon  written 
in  the  blood  of  His  own  Son,  and  then  smite  us. 
That  were  impossible.  Oh,  that  you  may  have 
grace  given  you  at  once  to  look  away  to  Jesus  and 
to  begin  at  the  beginning,  even  at  Jesus,  who  is 
the  fountain-head  of  mercy  to  guilty  man! 

PARDON  MUST  BE  FOR  THE  GUILTY 

If  you,  dear  friend,  feel  that  you  are  spiritually 
sick,  the  Physician  has  come  into  the  world  for 
you.  If  you  are  altogether  undone  by  reason  of 
your  sin,  you  are  the  very  person  aimed  at  in  the 
plan  of  salvation.  I  say  that  the  Lord  of  love  had 
just  such  as  you  are  in  his  eye  when  He  arranged 
the  system  of  grace.  Suppose  a  man  of  generous 
spirit  were  to  resolve  to  forgive  all  those  who  were 
indebted  to  him;  it  is  clear  that  this  can  only 
apply  to  those  really  in  his  debt.  One  person 
owes  him  a  thousand  pounds;  another  owes  him 
fifty  pounds;  each  one  has  but  to  have  his  bill  re- 
ceipted and  the  liability  is  wiped  out.  But  the 
most  generous  person  cannot  forgive  the  debts  of 
those  who  do  not  owe  him  anything.  It  is  out  of 
the  power  of  omnipotence  to  forgive  where  there 
is  no  sin.  Pardon,  therefore,  cannot  be  for  you 
who  have  no  sin.  Pardon  must  be  for  the  guilty. 
Forgiveness  must  be  for  the  sinful.  It  were  absurd 
to  talk  of  forgiving  those  who  do  not  need  forgive- 
ness— pardoning  those   who  have   never  offended. 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   24/ 

Do  you  think  that  you  must  be  lost  because  you 
are  a  sinner?  This  is  the  reason  why  you  can  be 
saved.  Because  you  own  yourself  to  be  a  sinner 
I  would  encourage  you  to  believe  that  grace  is 
ordained  for  such  as  you  are.  One  of  our  hymn- 
writers  even  dared  to  say — 

"A  sinner  is  a  sacred  thing, 
The  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  him  so," 

STRONG  FAITH  WILL  COME 

You  will  rise  to  strong  faith  in  .due  time.  This 
matured  faith  asks  not  for  signs  and  tokens,  but 
bravely  believes.  Look  at  the  faith  of  the  master 
mariner — I  have  often  wondered  at  it.  He  looses 
his  cable,  he  steams  away  from  the  land.  For 
days,  weeks,  or  even  months,  he  never  sees  sail  nor 
shore;  yet  on  he  goes  day  and  night  without  fear, 
till  one  morning  he  finds  himself  exactly  opposite 
to  the  desired  haven  toward  which  he  has  been 
steering.  How  has  he  found  his  way  over  the 
trackless  deep.^  He  has  trusted  in  his  compass,  his 
nautical  almanac,  his  glass,  and  the  heavenly 
bodies;  and,  obeying  their  guidance,  without  sight- 
ing land,  he  has  steered  so  accurately  that  he  has 
not  to  change  a  point  to  enter  into  port.  It  is  a 
wonderful  thing — that  sailing  or  steaming  without 
sight.  Spiritually  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  leave 
altogether  the  shores  of  sight  and  feeling,  and  to 
say  "Good-bye"  to  inward  feelings,  cheering  prov- 
idences, signs,  tokens,  and  so  forth.  It  is  glorious 
to  be  far  out  on  the  ocean  of  divine  love,  believing 


248  SPURGEON 

in  God,  and  steering  for  heaven  straight  away  by 
the  direction  of  the  Word  of  God.  "Blessed  are 
they  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed;" 
to  them  shall  be  administered  an  abundant  en- 
trance at  the  last,  and  a  safe  voyage  on  the  way. 
Will  not  my  reader  put  his  trust  in  God  in  Christ 
Jesus?  There  I  rest  with  joyous  confidence. 
Brother,  come  with  me,  and  believe  our  Father 
and  our  Saviour.      Come  at  once. 

NONE  RIGHTEOUS 

"There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  In  any 
case  I  have  no  gospel  to  preach  to  the  self-right- 
eous— no,  not  a  word  of  it.  Jesus  Christ  himself 
came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  and  I  am  not  going 
to  do  what  He  did  not  do.  If  I  called  you,  you 
would  not  come,  and,  therefore,  I  will  not  call  you 
under  that  character.  No,  I  bid  you  rather  look 
at  that  righteousness  of  yours  till  you  see  what  a 
delusion  it  is.  It  is  not  half  so  substantial  as  a 
cobweb.  Have  done  with  it!  Flee  away  from  it! 
O  sirs,  the  only  persons  that  can  need  justification 
are  those  who  are  not  in  themselves  just.  They 
need  that  something  should  be  done  for  them  to 
make  them  just  before  the  judgment-seat  of  God. 
Depend  upon  it,  the  Lord  only  does  that  which  is 
needful.  Infinite  wisdom  never  attempts  that 
which  is  unnecessary.  Jesus  never  undertakes 
that  which  is  superfluous.  To  make  him  just  Vv'ho 
is  just  is  no  work  for  God — that  were  a  Inbor  for  a 
fool;    but  to  make  him  just,  who   is    unjust — that  is 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   249 

work  for  infinite  love  and  mercy.  To  justify  the 
ungodly — this  is  a  miracle  worthy  of  a  God.  And 
for  certain  it  is  so. 

GO  ON  IN  THE  NAME    OF    GOD 

No  sermon  is  what  it  ought  to  be  if  faith  be 
absent:  as  well  say  that  a  body  is  in  health  when 
life  is  extinct.  It  is  admirable  to  see  a  man  hum- 
bly conscious  of  weakness,  and  yet  bravely  confi- 
dent in  the  Lord's  power  to  work  through  his  in- 
firmity. We  may  glory  at  large  when  God  is  our 
glory.  Attempting  great  things,  we  shall  not  over- 
do ourselves  in  the  attempt;  and  expecting  great 
things,  we  shall  not  be  disappointed  in  our  expec- 
tation. Nelson  was  asked  whether  a  certain  move- 
ment of  his  ships  was  not  perilous,  and  he  replied, 
"Perilous  it  may  be,  but  in  naval  affairs  nothing 
is  impossible,  and  nothing  is  improbable."  I  make 
bold  to  assert  that  in  the  service  of  God  nothing  is 
impossible  and  nothing  is  improbable.  Go  on,  in 
the  name  of  God;  risk  everything  on  His  promise, 
and  according  to  your  faith  shall  it  be  done  unto 
you. 

WHAT  DOST  THOU  HERE 

Let  me  imagine  a  man  entering  heaven  without 
a  change  of  heart.  He  comes  within  the  gates. 
He  hears  a  sonnet.  He  starts!  It  is  to  the  praise 
of  his  enemy.  He  sees  a  throne,  and  on  it  sits 
one  who  is  glorious;  but  it  is  his  enemy.  He 
walks  streets  of  gold,  but  those   streets    belong  to 


250  SPURGEON 

his  enemy.  He  sees  hosts  of  angels,  but  those 
hosts  are  the  servants  of  his  enemy.  He  is  in  an 
enemy's  house;  for  he  is  at  enmity  with  God.  He 
could  not  join  the  song,  for  he  would  not  know 
the  tune.  There  he  would  stand,  silent,  motion- 
less, till  Christ  would  say,  with  a  voice  louder  than 
ten  thousand  thunders,  "What  dost  thou  here.^ 
Enemies  at  a  marriage  banquet.^  Enemies  in  the 
children's  house.?  Enemies  in  heaven.?  Get  the>? 
gone!  'Depart,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire  in 
hell!'" 

NO    DESIRE  BUT  CHRIST 

It  is  the  highest  stage  of  manhood  to  have  no 
wish,  no  thought,  no  desire,  but  Christ— to  feel 
that  to  die  were  bliss,  if  it  were  for  Christ — that 
to  live  in  penury,  and  woe,  and  scorn,  and  con- 
tempt, and  misery,  were  sweet  for  Christ — to  feel 
that  it  matters  nothing  what  becomes  of  one's  self, 
so  that  our  Master  is  but  exalted — to  feel  that 
though,  like  a  sere  leaf,  we  are  blown  in  the  blast, 
we  are  quite  careless  whither  we  are  going,  so  long 
as  we  feel  that  the  Master's  hand  is  guiding  us 
according  to  his  will;  or,  rather,  to  feel  that  though, 
like  the  diamond,  we  must  be  exercised  with  sharp 
tools,  yet  we  care  not  how  sharply  we  may  be  cut, 
so  that  we  may  be  made  fit  brilliants  to  adorn  his 
crown. 

IDLENESS 

I  do  think  that  one  of  the  worst  sins  a  man  can 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   25  I 

be  guilty  of  in  this  world  is  to  be  idle,  I  can 
almhst  forgive  a  drunkard,  but  a  lazy  man  I  do 
think  there  is  very  little  pardon  for.  I  think  a 
man  who  is  idle  has  as  good  a  reason  to  be  a  peni- 
tent before  God  as  David  had  when  he  was  an 
adulterer,  for  the  most  abominable  thing  in  the 
world  is  for  a  man  to  let  the  grass  grow  up  to  his 
ankles  and  do  nothing.  God  never  sent  a  man 
into  the  world  to  be  idle.  And  there  are  some 
who  make  a  tolerably  fair  profession,  but  who  do 
nothing  from  one  year's  end  to  the  other. 

MEN  HUG  THEIR  VICES 

According  to  ^sop,  an  old  woman  found  an 
empty  jar  which  had  lately  been  full  of  prime  old 
wine,  and  which  still  retained  the  fragrant  smell 
of  its  former  contents.  She  greedily  placed  it 
several  times  to  her  nose,  and  drawing  it  back- 
wards and  forwards  said.  "Oh,  most  delicious!  How 
nice  must  the  wine  itself  have  been,  when  it  leaves 
behind  in  the  very  vessel  which  contained  it  so 
sweet  a  perfume !" 

Men  often  hug  their  vices  when  their  power  to 
enjoy  them  is  gone.  The  memories  of  reveling 
and  wantonness  appear  to  be  sweet  to  the  ungod- 
ly in  their  old  age.  They  sniff  the  empty  bottles 
of  their  follies,  and  only  wish  they  could  again  be 
drunken  with  them.  Age  cures  not  the  evil  heart, 
but  exhibits  in  a  ridiculous  but  deeply  painful  light 
the  indelible  perversity  of  human  nature. 


252  SPURGEON 

HEAVEN  IS  BATHING  IN  SEAS  OF  BLISS 

The  best  enjoyments  of  Christ  on  earth  are  but 
as  the  dipping  of  our  finger  in  water  for  the  cooling 
of  our  thirst;  but  heaven  is  bathing  in  seas  of 
bhss.  Even  so  our  love  here  is  but  one  drop  of 
the  same  substance  as  the  waters  of  the  ocean, 
but  not  comparable  for  magnitude  or  depth.  Oh, 
how  sweet  it  will  be  to  be  married  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  to  enjoy  forever,  and  without  any  in- 
terruption, the  heavenly  delights  of  His  society! 
Surely,  if  a  glimpse  of  Him  melteth  our  soul,  the 
full  fruition  of  Him  will  be  enough  to  burn  up  with 
affection.  It  is  well  that  we  shall  have  more  noble 
frames  in  heaven  than  we  have  here,  otherwise  we 
should  die  of  love  in  the  very  land  of  life. 

SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS  NATURAL 

Self-righteousness  is  natural  to  our  fallen  hu- 
manity. Hence  it  is  the  essence  of  all  false  relig- 
ions. Be  they  what  they  may,  they  all  agree  in 
seeking  salvation  by  our  own  deeds.  He  who 
worships  his  idols  will  torture  his  body,  will  fast, 
will  perform  long  pilgrimages,  and  do  or  endure 
anything  in  order  to  merit  salvation.  The  Romish 
Church  holds  up  continually  before  the  eyes  of  its 
votaries  the  prize  to  be  earned  by  self-denial,  by 
penance,  by  prayers,  or  by  sacraments,  or  by  some 
other  performances  of  man.  Go  where  you  may, 
the  natural  religion  of  fallen  man  is  salvation  by 
his    own    merits.       An    old   divine   has   well   said, 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT   2^3 

every  man  is. born  a  heretic  upon  this  point,  and 
he  naturally  gravitates  toward  this  heresy  in  one 
form  or  another.  Self-salvation,  either  by  his  per- 
sonal worthiness,  or  by  his  repentance,  or  by  his 
resolves,  is  a  hope  ingrained  in  human  nature,  and 
very  hard  to  remove.  This  foolishness  is  bound 
up  in  the  heart  of  every  child,  and  who  shall  get 
it  out  of  him.' 

TRIFLING  WITH  GREAT  TRUTHS 

Here  is  the  greatest  discovery  that  was  ever 
made,  the  most  wonderful  piece  of  knowledge  that 
ever  was  revealed,  and  yet  you  do  not  think  it 
worth  a  thought.  You  come  now  and  then  to 
hear  a  sermon,  but  you  hear  without  heart;  you 
read  the  Scriptures  occasionally,  but  you  do  not 
search  them  as  for  hid  treasure.  It  is  not  your 
first  object  in  life  thoroughly  to  understand  and 
heartily  to  receive  the  gospel  which  God  has  pro- 
claimed; yet  such  ought  to  be  the  case.  What, 
my  friend,  does  your  indifference  say  that  the 
grace  of  God  is  of  no  great  value  in  your  esteem.'' 
You  do  not  think  it  worth  the  trouble  of  prayer, 
of  Bible-reading,  and  attention.  The  death  of 
Christ  is  nothing  to  you — a  very  beautiful  fact,  no 
doubt;  you  know  the  story  well,  but  you  do  not 
care  enough  about  it  to  wish  to  be  a  partaker  in 
its  benefits.  His  blood  may  have  power  to  cleanse 
from  sin,  but  you  do  not  want  remission;  His  death 
may  be  the  life  of  men,  but  you  do  not  long  to 
live  by  Him.      To  be-saved   by  the   atoning   blood 


2  54  SPURGEON' 

dees  not  strike  j-ou  as  being  half  so  important  as 
to  carry  on  your  business  at  a  proiit  and  acquire  a 
fortune  for  your  family.  By  thus  trifling  with 
these  precious  things  you  do,  as  far  as  you  can, 
frustrate  the  grace  of  God  and  make  Christ  to  die 
in  vain. 

CHRIST  LONGING  FOR    THE    CROSS 

Christ  longed  for  the  cross,  because  He  looked 
for  it  as  the  goal  of  all  His  exertions.  He  could 
never  sa}',  "It  is  finished,"  on  His  throne:  but  on 
His  cross  he  did  cry  it.  He  preferred  the  suffering 
of  Calvary  to  the  honors  of  the  multitude  who 
crowded  round  about  Him;  for,  preach  as  He  might, 
and  bless  them  as  He  might,  and  heal  them  as  He 
might,  still  was  His  work  undone.  He  was  strait- 
ened; He  had  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with,  and 
bow  was  He  straitened  till  it  was  accomplished. 
"But,"  He  said,  "now  I  pant  for  my  cross,  for  it 
is  the  topstone  of  my  labor.  I  long  for  my  suffer- 
ings, because  they  shall  be  the  completion  of  my 
great  work  of  grace."  It  is  the  end  that  bringeth 
the  honor;  it  is  the  victory  that  crowneth  the 
warrior  rather  than  the  battle.  And  so  Christ 
longed  for  this.  His  death,  that  He  might  see  the 
completion  of  His  labor. 

EXCELSIOR 

The  artist,  when  he  paints,  knows  right  well 
that  he  shall  not  be  able  to  excel  Apelles;  but  that 
does  not  discourage  him;  he  uses  his  brush  with 


ECHOES  FROM  THE  TABERNACLE  PULPIT 


-d:) 


all  the  greater  pains,  that  he  may  at  least  in  some 
humble  measure  resemble  the  great  master.  So 
the  sculptor,  though  persuaded  that  he  will  not 
rival  Praxiteles,  will  hew  out  the  marble  still,  and 
seek  to  be  as  near  the  model  as  possible.  Thus  so 
the  Christian  man,  though  he  feels  he  never  can 
mount  to  the  heights  of  complete  excellence  and 
perceives  that  he  never  can  on  earth  become  the 
exact  image  of  Christ,  still  holds  it  up  before  him, 
and  measures  his  own  deficiencies  by  the  distance 
between  himself  and  Jesus.  Thi^  will  he  do — for- 
getting all  he  has  attained,  he  will  press  forward, 
crving,  Excelsior!  going  upwards  still,  desiring  to 
be  conformed  more  and  more  to  the  image  of 
Christ  Jesus. 

ELDER  FLOWERS  AT  VARALLO 

One  of  our  party  greatly  needed  some  elder- 
i^ower  water  for  her  face,  upon  which  the  sun  was 
working  great  mischief.  It  was  in  the  Italian 
town  of  Varallo,  and  not  a  word  of  Italian  did  I 
know.  I  entered  a  chemist's  shop  and  surveyed 
his  drawers  and  bottles,  but  the  result  was  )iil. 
Bright  thought,  I  would  go  down  by  the  river,  and 
walk  until  I  could  gather  a  bunch  of  elder-flowers, 
for  the  tree  was  then  in  bloom.  Happily  the 
search  was  successful:  the  flowers  were  exhibited 
to  the  druggist,  the  extract  was  procured. 

SATAN  IS  A  F"OWLER 

Satan  is   a   fowler;   he   has   been   so   and   is   so 


2?6  SPURGEON 

still;  and  if  he  does  not  now  attack  us  as  the  roar- 
ing lion,  roaring  against  us  in  persecution,  he  at- 
tacks us  as  the  adder,  creeping  silently  along  the 
path,  endeavoring  to  bite  our  heel  with  his  poi- 
soned fangs,  and  weaken  the  power  of  grace  and 
ruin  the  life  of  godliness  within  us. 

THE  DEVIL  A3  A  RESPECTABLE  GENTLEMAN 

If  the  devil  comes  to  my  door  with  his  horns 
visible,  I  will  never  let  him  in;  but  if  he  comes 
with  his  hat  on  as  a  respectable  gentleman,  he  is 
at  once  admitted.  The  metaphor  may  be  very 
quaint,  but  it  is  quite  true.  Many  a  nran  has 
taken  in  an  evil  thing,  because  it  has  been  var- 
nished and  glossed  over,  and  not  apparently  an 
evil;  and  he  has  thought  in  his  heart,  there  is  not 
much  harm  in  it;  so  he  has  let  in  the  little  thing, 
and  it  has  been  like  the  breaking  forth  of  water — 
the  first  drop  has  brought  after  it  a  torrent.  The 
beginning  has  been  but  the  beginning  of  a  fearful 
end. 

IF  WE  COULD  BUT  SEE  THINGS  AS  THEY  ARE 

If  we  could  see  things  as  they  are — if  we  were 
not  deceived  by  the  masquerade  of  this  poor  life — 
if  we  were  not  so  easily  taken  in  by  the  masks  and 
dresses  of  those  who  act  in  this  great  drama,  be  it 
comedy  or  tragedy — if  we  could  but  see  what  the 
men  are  behind  the  scenes,  penetrate  their  hearts, 
watch  the  inner  motions,  and  discern  their  secret 
feelings,  we  should  find  but  few  who  could  bear 
the  name  of  "blessed." 


w,  p 


JUN  1  8  1937 


