JOHN  M.  KELLY  LIBRARY 


Donated  by 

The  Redemptorists  of 
the  Toronto  Province 

from  the  Library  Collection  of 
Holy  Redeemer  College,  Windsor 


University  of 
St.  Michael's  College,  Toronto 


*Eflf£M£* 


SPURGEON'S 
ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 


Spurgeon's 
Illustrative  Anecdotes 


Selected  and  Classified  by 

REV.  LOUIS  ALBERT  BANKS,  D.  D. 

Author  of  "Anecdotes  and  Morals,"  "Windows  for 
Sermons,"  etc. 


NEW   YORK   AND   LONDON 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY 


COPYRIGHT,  1906, 

BY 
FUNK   &   WAGNAIXS    COMPANY 


[Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America] 
Published  May,  1906 


COMPILER'S  PREFACE 

The  name  of  Charles  H.  Spurgeon  stands  before  the 
whole  world  as  the  highest  since  the  name  of  Wesley  and 
Whitefield  as  a  successful  preacher  of  the  several  gospels 
in  such  a  way  as  to  win  men  to  Christ.  His  individual 
sermons  are  still  selling  by  hundred  thousands  and  men  are 
still  being  converted  to  Christ  in  all  parts  of  the  world 
through  the  reading  of  his  printed  words.  It  cannot  help 
but  be  of  interest  to  the  preacher  who  desires  to  be  a  soul 
winner  to  become  acquainted  with  the  anecdotes  and  illus 
trations  used  by  this  man  who  was  so  marvelously  blessed 
of  God  in  the  salvation  of  souls.  In  this  book  I  have 
gathered  Spurgeon's  stories.  Some  of  them  were  repeated 
again  and  again  in  his  volumes  of  sermons  and  show  the 
value  which  he  places  on  them  and  the  success  with  which 
he  used  them.  I  send  them  forth  with  a  warm-hearted 
desire  that  on  the  tongue  of  the  multitude  of  preachers 
everywhere  they  shall  go  forth  with  new  life  and  continue 
to  be  winged  arrows  of  the  gospel. 

Louis  ALBERT  BANKS. 

Denver,  Col. 


Contents 


AFFLICTION  PAGE 

Blessings  of  Affliction 1 

Affliction  the  Test  of  Sonship 1 

AMBITION 

Seek  the  Higher  Things 2 

True  Greatness    3 

Noble  Aspiration    3 

Lofty  Ambition   4 

APPEARANCES 

Appearances  Deceptive    5 

ATONEMENT 

The  Christian's  Ruby  Ring 5 

Christ  the  Sin- Bearer 5 

Our   Substitute    6 

Christ  Wins  Us  by  Dying  For  Us 7 

The   Atonement  a  Sword 8 

The  Atonement  Must  be  Proclaimed 8 

A  Joyous    Verdict 9 

Christ  Suffering  in  Our  Stead 9 

The   Sinner's  Ransom 10 

BACKSLIDERS 

A  Lost  Fellowship 10 

Backsliders    Reclaimed    11 

THE  BIBLE 

The  Charm  of  the  Bible 11 

The  Light  of  the  Bible 12 

The   Neglected   Bible 13 

Bible  Precious  Through  Use 13 

Eating  God's  Word 14 

BLESSINGS 

The  Chain  of  Blessings 14 

Christ  Bringing  Blessings 15 

The  Secret  of  Finding  Blessing 15 

CHRIST 

Christ  Best  Known  in  Heaven 16 

Drop    Christ's    Arms 17 

The  Triumph  of  Jesus 17 

Christ  the  Bond  of  Union 19 

Christ  our  Priest 20 

The  Soul's  Food  and  Drink 20 

Wear   Christ's   Uniform 21 

vii 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Christ  in  the  Dying  Hour 22 

Sanctuary   in   Christ 22 

Christ  in  the  Heart  a  Disinfectant 23 

For   Christ's    Sake 24 

Christ  Always  New 24 

"  Bleating  of  the  Sheep  " 25 

Yoked  with  Christ 26 

Christ  Grows  on  the  Growing  Christian 26 

Running  Into   Christ's   Arms 27 

Not  Works  but  Christ 27 

A  True  Friend 27 

The    Elder    Brother 28 

The    Savior    29 

Christ's    Tender    Care 30 

Christ  Seeking  After  Sinners 30 

<   Christ  Pulling  at  Our  Hearts 31 

X  Christ    a   Victor 31 

,  Christ  Ever   the    Same 32 

» Christ   Seeking   the  Lost 32 

"*  The   Humiliation   of  Christ 33 

No  Caste  to  Christ    33 

Christ  Our  Only  Resting  Place 34 

Christ  the  True   Physician 34 

Jesus   Belongs  to   All   Humanity 35 

Christ's  Joy  in  Soul-saving 35 

Christ's  Ownership  in  His  People 35 

Christ  the  Outcast's   Saviour 36 

Overpowering  Love  of  Christ 36 

Christ  as   Engraver 37 

The    Lost    Child 37 

The   Seeking   Shepherd 37 

The  True   Shepherd 38 

Christ  the  Plant  of  Renown 38 

Christ    as    King 39 

Christ  the  Sinner's  Only  Physician 40 

Christ    Inspires    Enthusiasm 41 

Christ's  Delight  in  His  People 41 

Christ  Sufficient  for  All  Kinds  of  Sinners    42 

Christ  as   a   Ferryman 43 

Christ  the  Door    43 

Suffering  for    Christ 44 

Christ  the  Root 45 

Christ  Grows  on   His  Disciples 46 

Christ  the  Pole  Star    47 

Christ  our  Banner   48 

Christ  the  Center  of  Attack 49 

Christ  Our  Guide  49 

Loyalty  to  Christ    50 


CONTENTS  ix 


PAGE 

Christ  Trustworthy    51 

Christ  Bringing  Men  Back  52 

Immediate   Healing    53 

Christ  the  Only  Ark  of  Safety 53 

CHRISTIANS 

Prosperity  Dangerous    54 

The  Idle  Christian  a  Hindrance 55 

The  Righteous  Safe    55 

Impressions  Easily  Wear  Away 56 

Perseverance     57 

Did  not  Really  Wish  to  Die 58 

The    Christian's    Secret 58 

Vagrant  Thoughts    59 

Persecution  the  Fertilizer  of  Religion 60 

Sham   Religion    60 

Indifference   to   Slander    60 

A  Christian  Home   61 

A  Worldly  Christian   62 

The  Christian's  Victory    63 

Unwilling  Doubts  not  Sins 63 

Making  Idols  of  Children 64 

Attractive    Christians    64 

Changeable    Christians    64 

Folly  of  "  the  Blues  " 65 

Sent  of  God   - 65 

The  Martyr's  Victory    66 

Run  When  You  Cannot  Fly 67 

God's  Special   Care 67 

Gloomy  Days  Our  Own  Fault 67 

Present  Victory   68 

The  Common  Christian  Soldier 68 

The  Man  Holding  the  Rope 69 

An  Impregnable  Fortress   69 

A  Son's  Boldness   70 

The  Marks  of  Discipleship  71 

The  Christian's  Walk 71 

Quarreling  with  God   71 

Christian   Fragrance    71 

The  Christian's  Apparel   72 

The  Rooted  Christian   72 

Faith  which  Cannot  be  Shaken 73 

Sham  Christians    74 

The  Hidden  Fountain    74 

The  Christian  Can  Afford  to  be  Poor 75 

The  Christian  Defying  Satan 75 

CHRISTIANITY 

Persecution  Futile  Against  Christianity 76 

The  Democracy  of  Christianity  76 


CONTENTS 


CHURCH  PAGE 

The  Power  of  a  Live  Church 77 

The  Layman's  Privilege    78 

A  Sleeping  Church    79 

CONSCIENCE 

Conscience  Needs  Illumination  80 

A   Fearful   Conscience 80 

True  to  His   Conscience 81 

CONVERSATION 

Vapid  Conversation   81 

CONVERSION 

Look  and  Live 82 

Christ  at  the  Door 82 

Man's  Convent  not  Christ's 83 

A  Stranger  Finding  Christ 83 

Joy  in  Heaven  over  a  Child's  Conversion 84 

A  Strange  Conversion   85 

Conversion  Necessary   85 

Transformation  through  Conversion    86 

Diamonds  Out  of  Pebble  Stones 86 

Changed   by    Conversion 87 

An   Infidel's  Conversion    87 

A  Notable   Conversion    89 

A  New  Creature  90 

The  Brand  Plucked  Out  of  the  Fire 90 

Better  than  He  Expected 91 

Came  to  Scoff  but  Remained  to  Pray 91 

Joy  of  Conversion   92 

THE  CROSS 

The  Token  of  the  Cross 92 

Salvation  at  the  Foot  of  the  Cross 93 

The  Cross  a   Stumbling-block 94 

The  Plea  of  the  Cross 94 

DEATH 

Death  the  End  of  Probation 95 

Dying  Grace    95 

Death  Certain    96 

Death   the  Christian's  Awakening 97 

Certainty  of  Death  Should  Humble  Us 97 

Death  a  Mercy   97 

Death  Like  Going  to  Bed 98 

Death  Sets  Us  Free 98 

A  Messenger  from  the  Grave 99 

Death  Can  Do  No  Real  Harm 99 

Dying  without  Hope   100 

Death  of  the  Wicked 101 


CONTENTS 


DECISION  PAGE 

Indecision     101 

The  Great  Decision   102 

Solemn  Decisions    103 

Prompt   Decision    104 

DUTY 

Day  by  Day 104 

Our  Duty  to  Our  Neighbor 105 

Steadfast  in  Duty    105 

The  Duty  at  Hand    106 

EARNESTNESS 

Wasted  Zeal    106 

Christian  Earnestness    107 

Refreshed  by  Enthusiasm    107 

Earnestness    108 

EXERCISE 

Exercising  Our  Faith    108 

Need  of  Spiritual  Exercise 109 

FAITH 

Fear   and    Faith 109 

Faith   and  Joy    110 

Faith  and  Healing   110 

Faith  and  Feeling Ill 

Unknown  Heroes  of  Faith Ill 

The  Riches  of  Christian  Faith 112 

Superficial    Unbelief    112 

Faith  and  Reason    113 

Danger  of  Unbelief    1 14 

Faith  Awakened  Through  God's  Kindness 114 

"  Little  Faith  "    115 

A  Sham   Faith    116 

The  Rope  of  Faith 116 

Solid  Footing  for  Faith 117 

The  Leap  of  Faith   118 

Confidence  and  Heroism   119 

Pioneers   of   Faith    119 

Faith   Honored    119 

Obedience  of  Faith    121 

Faith  in  Tribulation   122 

FORGIVENESS 

A  Sure  Pardon    123 

A  Free  Pardon   124 

The  Returning  Prodigal    124 

The  Forgiveness  of  God   125 

Christ's  Instant  Pardon   126 

GOD 

Knowing  God    126 

For  His  Son's   Sake .  127 


xii  CONTENTS 


PAGE 

The  Love  of  God   128 

God  Like  a  Mother   128 

A  Father's  Heart    129 

God  Ever  Present 129 

God's  Tenderness    130 

Responsibility  to  God    130 

God's   Call    131 

God  More  Careful  than  a  Mother 132 

Helpfulness  without  God    132 

Depth  of  a  Father's  Love 133 

God  Our  Deliverer   133 

God  Our  Defender    134 

The  Father's  Love   134 

God's  Consideration    135 

God's  Pity   135 

God's  Fatherhood    136 

At  Home  in  God's  Arms 136 

God's  Defense  of  His  Children 137 

The  Patience  of  God   137 

Imitating   God    138 

Under  the  Divine  Shadow    138 

Chastening  a  Pledge  of  Fatherly  Love 139 

Give  God  the  Rudder   140 

GOODNESS 

Genuine    Piety    140 

Good,  but  Good  for  Nothing 141 

GRATITUDE 

Gratitude  for  Spiritual  Blessings 142 

Gratitude  for  Salvation 142 

Expressing  Gratitude 143 

HEARERS 

Hearers,  but  not  Doers    144 

Personal  Application  of  Truth 144 

Deaf   Hearers    145 

HEART 

Writing  on  the  Heart    145 

The  Burglar  in  the  Heart 145 

Tainted   Food    146 

Keeping  the  Heart  Pure 147 

The  Wicked  Heart   147 

The  Trouble  Within 148 

Gospel   Hardened    148 

The  Hardening  Heart   149 

HEAVEN 

Only  the  Good  would  be  Happy  in  Heaven 149  . 

Not  Yet  Due  in  Heaven 150 

No  Strife  in  Heaven 151 


CONTENTS  xiii 


PAGE 

Recognition  of  Friends  in  Heaven 152 

Memory  of  Earth's  Mercies  a  Joy  in  Heaven 152 

The  Rewards  of  Heaven 152 

HINDRANCES 

Overcoming   Hindrances    154 

Overcoming  Difficulties    155 

Meet  Difficulties  Bravely    155 

HOPE 

Hope  "  The  Swimming  Thought  " 156 

Hope  of  Immortality   156 

The  Fountain  of  Hope 156 

Saved  though    Blasted  Hopes 157 

HUMILITY 

Humility  Necessary   158 

Humility  in  Prayer    158 

IMMORTALITY 

The  Healing  of  Death 159 

Immortality     159 

The  Land  of  the  Living 160 

INFIDELITY 

Paul  not  an  Agnostic 160 

Infidelity  a  Frail  Support 160 

IMITATION 

The  Pearl  of  Great  Price 162 

The  Bell  of  Welcome 163 

"  Whosoever  Will  "    163 

Whosoever    164 

JOY 

Christian   Gladness    164 

Afraid  of  Gladness    164 

Superiority  of  Christian  Joy 165 

The  Honey  of  Christian  Experience    165 

Overflowing  Christian  Joy   166 

Joy  without  Bitterness   167 

JUDGMENT 

Judgment  Warped  by  Personal  Consideration 167 

LIFE 

Human    Kindness     168 

True   Wisdom    168 

Known  by  Our  Deeds 169 

Idle   Dreams    169 

A  Wasted  Life   169 

Light  Needed  for  the  Feet 170 

The  Blessedness  of  Old  Age 170 

Making  Our  Own   Epitaph 171 

The  Frailty  of  the  Human  Body 171 


xiv  CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Frailty  of  Human  Life 172 

The  Loneliness  of  Life 172 

Uncertain  Tenure  of  Life 173 

LOVE 

Loving  Our  Neighbors 174 

Christian  Love  Needed   174 

MERCY 

The  Music  of  Mercy 175 

The  Stream  of  Mercy 176 

Covenant  Mercies   176 

Mercy    through    Christ 176 

God's  Mercy  for  All 180 

PEACE 

The  Peace  of  God 181 

A  Peaceful  Mind   182 

Peace  in  Jesus  Only 183 

PRAYER 

Empty  Prayers    183 

Exaltation   in   Prayer 184 

Revival  through  Prayer 185 

Praying  for  the  Lost 186 

A  Poor  Woman's  Throne 187 

A  Spiritual  Birthplace 187 

The  Pledge  of  Security 188 

Secret  Prayer    189 

Won  through  Prayer   189 

Culture  through  Prayer 190 

Weak  through  Lack  of  Prayer 19 1 

Led  by  the  Spirit  in  Prayer 191 

Scoffers  at  Prayer 192 

Telling  Everything  to  Jesus 192 

Praying   for   Special   Things 193 

Definite  Aim  in  Prayer 193 

Prayer   about   Common  Mercies 194 

Praying  for  Our  Friends 194 

Frequent  Prayer   195 

Heaven's   Gate   Always   Open  to  the   Praying  Chris 
tian    195 

A  Futile  Prayer 196 

Paying  and  Praying 196 

A   Prayerless  Man 196 

God  Listening  to  Prayer 196 

Persistent  Prayer  197 

Praying   for    Individuals 198 

PREACHER 

The  Power  of  a  Definite  Purpose 198 

Meditation 199 


CONTENTS  xv 


PAGE 

Saved  by  a  Stray  Sermon 199 

The   True  Preacher 200 

Magnifying  the  Ministry 201 

Christ  in  the  Sermon 201 

Falling  on  the  Promises 202 

Sermons  Born  of  Feeling 202 

Keep  the  Light  Burning „   203 

A  Preacher  Converted 203 

A  Child's  Religion 204 

Sad  results  of  Careless  Conduct 204 

A  sermon  that  went  to  the  Mark 206 

Hiding  Behind  Christ 206 

Too  Much  Red  Tape 20<5 

A  Word  in  Season 207 

A  Dumb    Dog 207 

Fishing  but  Never  Catching 207 

A  Faithful  Messenger 208 

The  Preacher  God's  Messenger  to  the  Conscience 208 

PRIDE 

Insidious   Flattery    209 

Wicked   Pride    210 

Danger  of  Self-Confidence 210 

Need  of  God's  Help 211 

Danger  of  Pride 211 

THE  PROMISES 

Pleading  God's  Promises 212 

Lying  on  the  Promises 213 

God's  Promises    214 

PROPHECY 

A  Marvelous  Prophecy 215 

PROVIDENCE 

A  Providence  217 

Look  at  Both  Sides 218 

Special   Providences 218 

Providence  as  a  Detective 219 

PUNISHMENT 

The   Reckoning 220 

The  Fate  of  the  Self-righteous 221 

A  Lost   Soul 221 

The   Trifler's   Doom 222 

Doom  of  the  Unstable 223 

The  Mocker's  Doom 223 

REGENERATION 

Need  of  a  New  Birth 224 

REPENTANCE 

Personal  Repentance 224 

False  Repentance   225 


xvi  CONTENTS 


RESURRECTION  PAGE 

The  Resurrection  Glory 226 

God's    Cup 227 

Resurrection  of  the  Body 227 

SALVATION 

Free  Salvation  Suits  All 228 

The  Day  of  Probation 228 

The  Great  Salvation 229 

Salvation  only  through  Christ 229 

The  Sinner's  Savior 230 

Sinner's   Clothed  with  Christ 231 

The  Key  to  Salvation 231 

Bread   Without   Price 232 

Folly  of  Rejecting  Salvation 233 

Permanence  of  Grace 233 

No  Condemnation  for  the  Saved 234 

Not  by  Works  but  Grace 234 

Saved    by   Submission 235 

Knocking  for  Mercy 235 

Running  into  God's  Arms 236 

Hungry  for  Salvation 237 

Only  Candidates    Elected 237 

Insecure    Foundations 237 

The  Water  of  Life 238 

Our  Part  in  Salvation 239 

Universal    Amnesty 239 

Safe  in  the  Ark 239 

SATAN 

Resist  the  Devil 240 

Defeating  the  Devil 240 

Satan  and  our  Weak  Spot 242 

The  Devil's   Advocate 243 

SERVICE 

The  Blessedness  of  Service 243 

The    Joy   of    Service 244 

Persevering  Service    245 

The  Service  of  Love 245 

SIN 

Time  Cannot  Cover  Sin 246 

The  Sting  of  Death 246 

Sin's    Cruel    Work 248 

Afraid  of  Sin 249 

A  True  Sight  of  Sin 249 

Sin  Must  be  Abandoned 250 

Danger  of  Little  Sins 250 

Secret  Love  for  Sin 251 

The  Thistle-seed   251 

Hidden   Sin    252 


CONTENTS  xvii 


PAGE 

Sin  will  not  stay  hidden 253 

Sin  Will  Out 253 

Presumptuous   Sins    254 

The  Bravado  of  Sin 255 

Cutting  Sin's  Traces 255 

The  Wolves  of   Sin 256 

Breakling  the  Cart  Ropes  of  Sin 256 

Hiding  Sin  from  God 257 

Sin  a  Poison  of  the  Blood 258 

The  Weight  of  Sin 259 

Sin  Must  be  Given  Up 259 

Sin  Means  Anarchy 260 

The  Scar  of    Sin 261 

Recklessness  of  Sin 262 

Breaking  off   Sin 262 

Secret    Sin 263 

The  Wages  of  Sin 263 

Insincere  Conviction  of  Sin 264 

SINNERS 

Keep  out  of  Temptation 265 

The  Greatest  Loss  of  All 265 

Too-late !     266 

Hope  for  Sinners 267 

The  Sinner  Seeing  Double 267 

Deceiving  one's  Own  Soul 268 

Heathen  in  Cities 269 

A  Hospital  for   Sinners 269 

Secret   Sinners    270 

A  Houseless  Soul 271 

Transient    Feeling    272 

True  Religion  Only  Safeguard  of  Character 272 

The  Point  of  View 273 

Three  Fools    274 

Serving  against    Light 275 

The   Lost    275 

The  Sinner's  Emancipation 276 

God's  Message  through  Mothers 277 

Be  Sure  of  the  Foundation 277 

Foolish  Objections    278 

Christ  Drawing  the  Sinner 279 

The  Hypocrite   279 

A  Note  of  Warning 280 

The  Sinner's  Down  Hill 280 

The  Folly  of  the  Caviller 281 

Ingratitude  of  the  Sinner 281 

The   Foolish   Builder 281 

The  Sinner's  Refuge 282 

The  Sinner's  Folly 28S 


xviii  CONTENTS 


PAGE 

The  Folly  of  Sinners 283 

The  Doom  of  the  Impenitent 284 

SORROWS 

Sorrow  changed  to  Song 285 

SOUL  WINNING 

Sowing  and  Reaping 286 

Won  by  His  Parents'  Love 286 

Fitting  Ourselves  to  Save  Others 287 

Saved  Souls  Most  Useful 288 

The  Lost  Redeemed 288 

Christ  Rejoices  when  the  Christian  Saves  a  Soul ....  289 

Joy   of   Soul-Winning 290 

HOLY  SPIRIT 

The  Holy  Spirit  Invincible 291 

Influence  of  the  Spirit 291 

The  Loving  Comforter 292 

STRENGTH 

Husks  of  Men 292 

Consecration  Source  of  Strength 293 

Strength  in  Consecration 294 

Our  Strength  in  God 294 

Strong  When  God  Leads 295 

Strength  Distributing  Sweetness 296 

Strength  through   Weakness 296 

SYMPATHY 

Christian    Sympathy 297 

Superficial   Sympathy    298 

Sympathy  Born  of  Experience 299 

Sympathy   299 

TALENTS 

Do  What  You  can  Do  Best 300 

Every  Man  in  His  Place 300 

TESTIMONY 

Won  by  his  Wife's  Faith .'....   300 

Tell  your  Own  Story 3 

An  Old  Saint's  Inspiring  Testimony 302 

Value  of  Testimony 302 

Bearing  Testimony   3 

Experience  of  Aged  Christians 303 

TRIALS 

Comfort  in  Trial 304 

Saved  as  by  Fire 30J 

Growing  Great  Through  Trial 306 

Rest  Through   Conflict 307 

Strong  through  Struggle 30i 


CONTENTS  xix 


TRUST  PAGE 

Work  and  Trust 308 

The  Wisdom  of  Trust  in  God 309 

Trust  the  Key  to  Life's  Problem 309 

Trust   in   God 310 

Trust   and   Service 310 

WEAKNESS 

The  Appeal  of  Weakness 310 

WEALTH 

Seeking  Heavenly  Riches 311 

Drowned  by  Riches 311 

Debased  by  Wealth 312 

The  Idolatry  of  Money 313 


1 


Spurgeon's  Illustrative  Anecdotes 

AFFLICTION 

Blessings  of  Afflict  ion.— God  has  beauties  for  every  part 
of  the  world;  and  he  has  beauties  for  every  place  of  ex 
perience?  There  are  views  to  be  seen  from  the  tops 
of  the  Alps  that  you  can  never  see  elsewhere.  Ay,  but 
there  are  beauties  to  be  seen  in  the  depths  of  the  dell 
that  ye  could  never  see  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains; 
there  are  glories  to  be  seen  on  Pisgah,  wondrous  sights 
to  be  beheld  when  by  faith  we  stand  on  Tabor;  but 
there  are  also  beauties  to  be  seen  in  our  Gethsemanes, 
and  some  marvelously  sweet  flowers  are  to  be  culled  by 
the  edge  of  the  dens  of  the  leopards.  Men  will  never 
become  great  in  divinity  until  they  become  great  in 
suffering.  "  Ah ! "  said  Luther,  "  affliction  is  the  best 
book  in  my  library ; "  and  let  me  add,  the  best  leaf  in 
the  book  of  affliction  is  that  blackest  of  all  the  leaves, 
the  leaf  called  heaviness,  when  the  spirit  sinks  within 
us,  and  we  can  not  endure  as  we  could  wish. 

Affliction  the  Test  of  Sonship.— Affliction  is  the  seal  of 
the  Lord's  election.  I  remember  a  story  of  Mr.  Mack, 
who  was  Baptist  minister  in  Northamptonshire.  In 
his  youth  he  was  a  soldier,  and  calling  on  Robert  Hall, 
when  his  regiment  marched  through  Leicester,  that  great 
man  became  interested  in  him,  and  procured  his  release 
from  the  ranks.  When  he  went  to  preach  in  Glasgow, 
he  sought  out  his  aged  mother,  whom  he  had  not  seen 
for  many  years.  He  knew  his  mother  the  moment  he 
i 


2   SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

saw  her;  but  the  old  lady  did  not  recognize  her  son. 
It  so  happened  that  when  he  was  a  child,  his  mother  had 
accidentally  wounded  his  wrist  with  a  knife.  To  com 
fort  him  she  cried,  "  Never  mind,  my  bonnie  bairn,  your 
mither  will  ken  you  by  that  when  ye  are  a  man."  When 
Mack's  mother  would  not  believe  that  a  grave,  fine-look 
ing  minister  could  be  her  own  child,  he  turned  up  his 
sleeve  and  cried,  "Mither,  mither,  dinna  ye  ken  that?" 
In  a  moment  they  were  in  each  other's  arms.  Ah,  breth 
ren,  the  Lord  knows  the  spot  of  his  children.  He  ac 
knowledges  them  by  the  mark  of  correction.  What  God 
is  doing  to  us  in  the  way  of  trouble  and  trial  is  but  his 
acknowledgment  of  us  as  true  heirs,  and  the  marks  of  his 
rod  shall  be  our  proof  that  we  are  not  bastards,  but  true 
sons. 

AMBITION 

Seek  the  Higher  Things.— Some  years  ago,  there  was  a 
crossing-sweeper  in  Dublin,  with  his  broom,  at  the  cor 
ner,  and  in  all  probability  his  highest  thoughts  were  to 
keep  the  crossing  clean,  and  look  for  the  pence.  One 
day,  a  lawyer  put  his  hand  upon  his  shoulder,  and  said 
to  him,  "My  good  fellow,  do  you  know  that  you  are 
heir  to  a  fortune  of  ten  thousand  pounds  a  year?  "  "  Do 
you  mean  it?"  said  he.  "I  do,"  he  said.  "I  have  just 
received  the  information;  I  am  sure  you  are  the  man." 
He  walked  away,  and  he  forgot  his  broom.  Are  you 
astonished?  Why,  who  would  not  have  forgotten  a 
broom  when  suddenly  made  possessor  of  ten  thousand 
a  year?  So,  I  pray  that  some  poor  sinners,  who  have 
been  thinking  of  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  when  they 
hear  that  there  is  hope,  and  that  there  is  heaven  to  be 
had,  will  forget  the  deceitful  pleasures  of  sin,  and  fol 
low  after  higher  and  better  things. 


AMBITION 


True  Greatness. —  I  had  a  good  friend  who  preserved  the 
axle-tree  of  the  truck  in  which  he  wheeled  home  his  goods 
when  he  first  came  to  London.  It  was  placed  over  his 
front  door,  and  he  never  blushed  to  tell  how  he  came  up 
from  the  country,  worked  hard,  and  made  his  way  in 
the  world.  I  like  this  a  deal  better  than  the  affected 
gentility  which  forgets  the  lone  half-crown  which  pined 
in  solitude  in  their  pockets  when  they  entered  this  city. 
They  are  indignant  if  you  remind  them  of  their  poor 
old  father  in  the  country,  for  they  have  discovered  that 
the  family  is  very  ancient  and  honorable;  in  fact,  one 
of  their  ancestors  came  over  with  the  Conqueror.  I 
have  never  felt  any  wish  to  be  related  to  that  set  of 
vagabonds;  but  tastes  differ,  and  there  are  some  who 
think  that  they  must  be  superior  beings  because  they  are 
descended  from  Norman  freebooters.  Nobodies  suddenly 
swell  as  if  they  were  everybody.  Observe  that  Jacob 
does  not  say,  "  Years  ago  I  was  at  home  with  my  father 
Isaac,  a  man  of  large  estate."  Nor  does  he  talk  of  his 
grandfather  Abraham  as  a  nobleman  of  an  ancient  family 
in  Ur,  of  the  Chaldees,  who  was  entertained  by  mon- 
archs.  No,  he  was  not  so  silly  as  to  boast  of  aristocracy 
and  wealth,  but  he  frankly  owns  his  early  poverty:— 
"  With  my  staff,  a  poor,  lonely,  friendless  man,  I  crossed 
this  Jordan,  and  now  I  am  become  two  bands."  It  hum 
bles  him  to  think  of  what  he  was,  but  at  the  same  time 
it  strengthens  him  in  prayer;  for  in  effect  he  pleads, 
"  Lord,  hast  thou  made  two  bands  of  me  that  Esau  may 
have  the  more  to  destroy?  Hast  thou  given  me  these 
children  that  they  may  fall  by  the  sword?"  So  again 
I  say,  that  which  humbled  also  encouraged  him :  he  found 
his  strength  in  prayer  in  those  very  things  which  fur 
nished  motives  for  lowliness. 

Noble  Aspiration. —  I  have  often  used  an  illustration  taken 
from  a  person  who  teaches  the  art  of  growing  taller.  I 
do  not  believe  in  that  art:  we  shall  not  add  a  cubit  to 


4   SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

our  stature  just  yet.  But  part  of  this  professor's  exer 
cise  is,  that  in  the  morning,  when  you  get  up,  you  are  to 
reach  as  high  as  ever  you  can,  and  aim  a  little  higher 
every  morning,  though  it  be  only  the  hundredth  part  of 
an  inch.  By  that  means  you  are  to  grow.  This  is  so 
with  faith.  Do  all  you  can,  and  then  do  a  little  more: 
and  when  you  can  do  that,  then  do  a  little  more  than 
you  can.  Always  have  something  in  hand  that  is  greater 
than  your  present  capacity.  Grow  up  to  it,  and  when 
you  have  grown  up  to  it,  grow  more.  By  many  little 
additions  a  great  house  is  built.  Brick  by  brick  up  rose 
the  pyramid.  Believe  and  yet  believe.  Trust  and  have 
further  trust.  Hope  shall  become  faith,  and  faith  shall 
ripen  to  full  assurance  and  perfect  confidence  in  God 
Most  High. 

Lofty  Ambition.—  "  Who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come 
to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  ?  "  Rise  to  the 
utmost  possible  height.  Fulfill  your  calling  to  its  loftiest 
degree.  Not  only  do  all  that  you  are  sure  you  can  do, 
but  aim  at  something  which  as  yet  is  high  up  among  the 
questions.  Say  to  yourself,  "Who  knoweth?"  That  is 
what  the  ambitious  man  says  when  he  aspires  to  be  great. 
When  Louis  Napoleon  was  shut  up  in  the  fortress  of 
Ham,  and  everybody  ridiculed  his  foolish  attempts  upon 
France,  yet  he  said  to  himself,  "Who  knows?  I  am  the 
nephew  of  my  uncle,  and  may  yet  sit  upon  the  imperial 
throne,"  and  he  did  so  before  many  years  had  passed. 
I  have  no  desire  to  make  any  man  ambitious  after  the 
poor  thrones,  and  honors,  and  riches  of  this  world;  but 
I  would  fain  make  you  all  ardently  ambitious  to  honor 
God  and  bless  men.  Who  knows?  Does  anybody  know 
what  God  may  do  by  you?  Does  anybody  know  what 
capacities  slumber  within  your  bosom? 


ATONEMENT 


APPEARANCES 

Appearances  Deceptive.— I  remember  conversing  with  a 
person,  who  was  concerned  in  one  of  the  great  specu 
lations  which  brought  loss  and  ruin  to  many,  and  as  I 
looked  into  his  honest  face  and  heard  his  open-hearted 
talk,  I  said  to  myself,  "  This  is  not  a  man  who  is  capable 
of  robbery.  He  is  a  plain,  blunt,  farmer-like  sort  of  a 
man,  who  might  even  be  the  victim  of  the  confidence 
trick."  I  afterward  learned  that  this  is  the  usual  style 
of  a  man  who  puffs  a  company,  or  betrays  a  trust.  Of 
course  if  a  man  looks  like  a  thief,  you  button  up  your 
pockets,  and  smile  if  he  invites  you  to  take  shares;  but 
you  are  off  your  guard  when  the  man  appears  to  be  the 
embodiment  of  simple  honesty. 

ATONEMENT 

The  Christian's  Ruby  Ring.—  One  of  our  kings  once  gave 
a  ring  to  his  favorite,  and  said  to  him,  "  I  know  that  at 
the  council  to-morrow  a  charge  of  heresy  will  be  brought 
against  you ;  but,  when  you  come  in,  answer  them  if  you 
will,  but  you  need  be  in  no  fear;  if  you  find  yourself 
brought  to  a  strait,  simply  show  them  the  ring,  and  they 
will  go  no  further."  It  is  even  so  with  us;  the  Lord 
has  given  us  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  to  be  like  a 
ruby  ring  upon  our  finger,  and  now  we  know  how  far 
conscience  may  go,  and  how  far  accusations  from  Satan 
may  go;  we  have  only  to  produce  that  token  and  bar 
all  further  proceedings.  "  He  that  believeth  in  him  is 
not  condemned,"  neither  can  he  be. 

Christ  the  Sin-Bearer.—  An  old  servant  was  once  carrying 
a  large  bough  of  a  tree  to  have  it  cut  into  pieces  to  make 
a  fire.  A  little  boy,  one  of  the  family,  seeing  the  end 
of  it  dragging  along  the  ground  and  making  it  very 


6   SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

heavy,  came  and  took  hold  of  the  end,  and  the  burden 
grew  light.  Then  said  the  servant,  "  Ah !  Master  Frank, 
I  wish  you  could  take  hold  of  one  end  of  the  greater 
burden  that  I  have  to  carry :  I  have  a  burden  of  sin ;  the 
more  I  drag  it  about,  the  heavier  it  becomes.  I  wish 
Jesus  Christ  would  take  hold  of  one  end  of  it."  The  lit 
tle  boy  said,  "  My  mother  told  me,  yesterday,  that  Jesus 
Christ  carries  all  our  sins;  therefore  you  do  not  want 
Jesus  Christ  to  drag  one  end  of  it :  he  will  take  the  whole 
of  it."  The  poor  woman,  who  had  been  long  seeking 
rest,  found  it  by  that  remark  of  the  child.  Yes,  Jesus 
does  take  your  sins.  If  thou  trustest  Christ,  this  is  the 
evidence  that  all  thy  sins  are  laid  on  him. 

"  Sinner,  nothing  do, 
Either  great  or  small; 
Jesus  did  it,  did  it  all, 
Long,   long  ago." 

Our  Substitute. —  You  remember  that  in  Prussia  there  was 
a  law  which  exempted  the  only  son  of  a  widow  from 
going  to  war;  but  it  is  said  that  so  closely  were  they 
driven  for  recruits,  that  the  law  was  for  a  time  rescinded, 
and  the  widow's  only  son  was  taken.  Suppose  such  a 
thing  happened  here,  and  there  should  be  a  widow  whose 
only  son  was  demanded  of  her.  See  her  come  forward, 
saying,  "  Ay,  take  him ;  my  country  is  dearer  to  me  even 
than  he  is."  She  puts  him  forward,  and  says,  "  Go 
forth,  my  son,  to  die  if  it  be  necessary;  I  give  thee  up, 
I  give  thee  willingly."  You  see  the  red,  red  eye  of  the 
widow;  she  hath  wiped  it  dry,  but  she  hath  wept  in  se 
cret;  and  if  we  steal  behind  the  door  when  her  son  is 
gone,  and  see  her  pouring  out  whole  floods  of  sorrow,  we 
can  tell  how  great  must  have  been  her  love  for  her  coun 
try  which  made  her  give  up  him  —  her  all.  Beloved,  we 
never  should  know  Christ's  love  in  all  its  heights  and 


ATONEMENT 


depths  if  he  had  not  died ;  uor  could  we  tell  the  Father's 
deep  affection  if  he  had  not  given  his  Son  to  die. 
Christ  Wins  Us  by  Dying  for  Us.—  There  is  a  story  told 
of  the  Covenanters  —  of  one  named  Patrick  Welwood  — 
whose  house  was  surrounded  at  a  time  when  a  minister 
had  for  security  been  hidden  there.  Claverhouse's  dra 
goons  were  at  the  door,  and  the  minister  had  fled.  The 
master  of  the  house  was  summoned,  and  it  was  demanded 
of  him,  "  Where  is  the  minister  ?  "  "  He  is  gone ;  I  can 
not  tell  whither,  for  I  know  not."  But  they  were  not 
satisfied  with  that;  they  tortured  him,  and  since  he  could 
not  tell  them  where  he  was  (for  in  reality  he  did  not 
know),  they  left  him,  after  inflicting  upon  him  the  tor 
ture  of  the  thumbscrew ;  and  they  took  his  sister,  a  young 
girl  who  was  living  in  the  house.  I  believe  she  did  know 
where  the  minister  was  concealed,  but  on  taking  her  they 
asked  her,  and  she  said,  "No,  I  can  die  myself,  but  I 
can  never  betray  God's  servant,  and  never  will,  as  he  may 
help  me."  They  dragged  her  to  the  water's  edge,  and 
making  her  kneel  down,  they  determined  to  put  her  to 
death.  But  the  captain  said,  "  Not  yet ;  we  will  try  to 
frighten  her ; "  and  sending  a  soldier  to  her,  he  knelt 
down,  and  applying  a  pistol  to  her  ear,  she  was  bidden 
to  betray  the  minister  or  die.  The  click  of  the  pistol 
was  heard  in  her  ear,  but  the  pistol  was  not  loaded. 
She  slightly  shivered,  and  the  question  was  again  asked 
of  her.  "  Tell  us  now,"  said  they,  "  where  he  is,  or  we 
will  have  your  life."  "  Never,  never,"  said  she.  A  sec 
ond  time  the  endeavor  was  made;  this  time  a  couple  of 
carabines  were  discharged,  but  into  the  air,  in  order  to 
terrify  her.  At  last  they  resolved  upon  really  putting 
her  to  death,  when  Trail,  the  minister,  who  was  hidden 
somewhere  near,  being  aroused  by  the  discharge  of  guns, 
and  seeing  the  poor  girl  about  to  die  for  him,  sprang 
forward,  and  cried,  "  Spare  that  maiden's  blood,  and 
take  mine;  this  poor  innocent  girl,  what  hath  she  done?  " 


8    SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

The  poor  girl  was  dead  even  then  with  the  fright;  but 
the  minister  had  come  prepared  to  die  himself,  to  save 
her  life.  0,  my  friends,  I  have  sometimes  thought  that 
her  heroic  martyrdom  was  somewhat  like  the  blessed 
Jesus.  He  comes  to  us,  and  says,  "Poor  sinner,  wilt 
thou  be  my  friend?"  We  answer,  "No."  "Ah!  I  will 
make  thee  so,"  saith  he,  "  I  will  die  for  thee ; "  and  he 
goes  to  die  on  the  cross. 

The  Atonement  a  Sword.—  When  a  man  gets  a  sword,  you 
cannot  be  quite  certain  how  he  will  use  it.  A  gentleman 
has  purchased  a  very  expensive  sword  with  a  golden 
hilt  and  an  elaborate  scabbard;  he  hangs  it  up  in  his 
hall,  and  exhibits  it  to  his  friends.  Occasionally  he 
draws  it  out  from  the  sheath  ,and  he  says,  "Feel  how 
keen  is  the  edge ! "  The  precious  blood  of  Jesus  is  not 
meant  for  us  merely  to  admire  and  exhibit.  We  must 
not  be  content  to  talk  about  it,  and  extol  it,  and  do 
nothing  with  it;  but  we  are  to  use  it  in  the  great  crusade 
against  unholiness  and  unrighteousness,  till  it  is  said  of 
us,  "They  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb." 
This  precious  blood  is  to  be  used  for  overcoming,  and 
consequently  for  holy  warfare.  We  dishonor  it  if  we  do 
not  use  it  to  that  end. 

The  Atonement  Must  be  Proclaimed.—  The  other  day, 
when  I  was  inquiring  about  the  welfare  of  a  certain 
congregation,  my  informant  told  me  that  there  had  been 
few  additions  to  the  church,  altho  the  minister  was 
a  man  of  ability  and  industry.  Furthermore,  he  let  me 
see  the  reason  of  the  failure,  for  he  added,  "I  have 
attended  there  for  several  years,  and  during  all  that 
time  I  do  not  remember  hearing  a  sermon  upon  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ.  The  atonement  is  not  denied,  but  it 
is  left  out."  If  this  be  so,  what  is  to  become  of  our 
churches?  If  the  light  of  the  atonement  is  put  under  a 
bushel,  the  darkness  will  be  dense.  In  omitting  the  cross 
you  haVe  cut  the  tendon  Achilles  of  the  church :  it  can- 


ATONEMENT 


not  move,  nor  even  stand,  when  this  is  gone.  Holy 
work  falls  to  the  ground:  it  faints  and  dies  when  the 
blood  of  Jesus  is  taken  away.  The  cross  must  be  put 
in  the  front  more  than  ever  by  the  faithful,  because  so 
many  are  unfaithful. 

A  Joyous  Verdict. —  You  may  have  seen  a  well-painted 
picture  called  "Waiting  for  the  Verdict."  What  in 
terest  is  displayed  on  every  face!  What  fear  and  trem 
bling  upon  the  countenance  of  the  prisoner!  In  his 
wife  and  the  friends  around  him,  what  anxiety  is  seen! 
"  Waiting  for  the  Verdict "  is  a  sad  picture ;  but  what 
another  might  be  drawn  of  The  Favorable  Verdict 
Received!  The  prisoner  is  acquitted!  O  what  joy!  It 
is  not  possible  to  bring  in  a  verdict  of  "  Not  Guilty " 
for  you  and  for  me,  for  we  are  undoubtedly  guilty;  but 
yet  it  is  possible  by  the  process  of  substitution  and 
divine  grace  to  bring  in  a  just  verdict  by  which  it  is 
witnessed  that  "  There  is  now  no  condemnation." 

Christ  Suffering  in  our  Stead. —  You  know  the  story,  the 
very  excellent  story,  which  I  think  was  first  told  by  Mr. 
Moody,  of  the  man  who  in  the  French  war  was  drawn 
for  a  soldier,  but  a  friend  stepped  in,  and  was  accepted 
as  his  substitute.  That  substitute  served  in  the  war  till 
he  was  slain  in  battle.  The  man  for  whom  he  served 
was  drawn  a  second  time,  but  he  declined  to  serve.  He 
appeared  before  the  court,  and  pleaded  that  he  had  been 
drawn  once,  had  served  in  the  war  by  his  substitute,  and 
must  now  be  regarded  as  dead,  because  his  representa 
tive  had  been  killed.  He  pleaded  that  his  substitute's 
service  was  practically  his  service,  and  it  is  said  that  the 
law  allowed  his  plea.  Assuredly  it  is  according  to  divine 
equity,  even  if  it  be  not  according  to  human  law.  No 
criminal  can  be  hanged  a  second  time;  one  death  is  all 
the  law  requires:  believers  died  in  Christ  unto  sin  once, 
and  now  they  penally  die  no  more.  Our  condemnation 
has  spent  itself  upon  our  gracious  representative.  The 


io      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

full  vials  of  divine  wrath  against  sin  have  been  poured 
upon  the  head  of  the  great  Shepherd,  that  this  sheep 
might  go  free;  and  therein  is  our  joy,  our  comfort,  our 
security.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to 
them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus." 

The  Sinner's  Ransom.— But  there  stands  forth  on  our 
behalf  "the  Wonderful,  the  Counsellor;"  he  takes  his 
brief  in  hand  and  begins  to  plead.  Hark  what  he  says, 
and  see  how  all  opinion  is  turned  at  once !  "  I  confess," 
says  he,  "that  every  word  is  true  that  the  last  accuser 
has  said.  My  client  pleads  guilty  to  every  charge;  but 
I  have  a  full  pardon  signed  by  God's  own  hand,  pur 
chased  by  my  own  blood ; "  and,  stripping  himself,  he 
shows  his  breast,  and  bares  his  arm,  and  says,  "  These 
were  given  to  me  of  my  Father  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world.  I  bare  their  sins  in  my  own  body  on 
the  tree.  My  Father  justified  them;  I  pardoned  them." 
And  then,  mounting  to  the  highest  point,  he  reaches  the 
climax  of  grace  as  he  exclaims,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything 
to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  Canst  thou,  0  God?  Hast 
thou  not  justified?  I  cannot,  for  I  died."  Then  he  sits 
down,  in  triumph,  saying,  "  Whom  he  justified,  them  he 
also  glorified.  Nothing  shall  be  able  to  separate  them 
from  the  love  of  God."  Shall  not  each  ransomed  sinner 
shout  with  joy? 

BACKSLIDERS 

A  Lost  Fellowship.— I  once  asked  a  brother  how  long  it 
was  since  he  had  enjoyed  fellowship  with  Jesus.  His 
reply  was  remarkable.  "I  feel  sorry,"  said  he,  "you 
have  asked  me  that  question,  and  yet  I  must  thank  you. 
Had  you  asked  me  whether  I  continued  in  prayer,  I 
would  have  said  '  Yes/  for,  with  more  or  less  fervor,  I 
do  constantly  pray.  Had  you  inquired  whether  I  en 
deavored  to  walk  honestly  and  uprightly  before  my 


THE  BIBLE  n 


fellow  creatures,  I  should  have  said,  '  Yes,  thank  God, 
I  hope  I  have  not  slipped  with  my  feet ; '  but  when  you 
say,  '  How  long  is  it  since  you  really  have  had  fellow 
ship  with  Jesus  ? '  I  blush  to  own  that  many  a  day  has 
passed  since  I  have  known  this  high  privilege."  Is  that 
so  with  you,  my  dear  brothers  and  sisters  in  Christ?  If 
so,  it  is  very,  very  sad. 

Backsliders  Reclaimed.—  I  remember  one  Monday  after 
noon,  when  we  had  been  waiting  upon  the  Lord  in  prayer 
ever  since  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  that  there  came 
a  most  remarkable  wave  of  prayer  over  the  assembly. 
And  then  two  backsliders  got  up  and  prayed  one  after 
the  other.  According  to  their  own  account,  they  had  been 
very  bad  fellows  indeed,  and  had  sorely  transgressed 
against  God;  but  there  they  were,  broken-hearted  and 
fairly  broken  down.  It  was  a  sight  to  make  angels  re 
joice  as  their  tears  flowed.  Certainly  their  sobs  and 
cries  touched  the  hearts  of  all  of  us  who  were  assembled. 
I  thought  to  myself,  "  Then  God  is  blessing  us,  for  when 
backsliders  come  back  it  is  a  proof  that  God  has  visited 
his  people. 

THE  BIBLE 

The  Charm  of  the  Bible. —  There  is  such  a  charm  about 
the  Bible,  that  he  who  reads  it  little  may  never  perhaps 
feel  the  whole  of  it.  It  is  something  like  the  Maelstrom 
you  have  heard  of,  only  in  a  different  and  more  excel 
lent  sense.  The  Maelstrom  is  a  great  whirlpool  on  the 
coast  of  Norway.  A  ship  at  a  long  distance  from  it  will 
feel  a  little  of  its  attracting  influence,  a  very  little,  yet 
enough  to  make  it  veer  from  its  course;  but  the  nearer 
it  floats  to  the  centre  the  stronger  becomes  the  current, 
and  the  more  forcibly  is  the  vessel  carried  along  by  it, 
until  at  last,  if  the  ship  should  be  so  unhappy  as  to 
near  it,  it  would  whirl  round  at  a  tremendous  rate  until 
it  was  thoroughly  engulphed  in  its  depths.  In  a  higher 


12      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

and  better  sense  the  like  is  true  of  the  Bible.  The 
nearer  you  go  to  it,  and  the  more  closely  you  study  it, 
the  more  rapidly  do  you  revolve  in  its  circles,  the  more 
voraciously  do  you  devour  its  contents,  until  at  last  you 
are  swallowed  up  in  its  glory,  and  long  for  nothing  else 
than  to  prove  the  heights  and  depths  of  this  bliss  un 
fathomable  —  the  love  of  God  revealed  to  us  in  Christ, 
in  his  sacred  Word.  Truly,  of  this  book,  we  may  say, 
"  Thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth." 

The  Light  of  the  Bible.—  I  recollect  a  story  of  Mr.  Hume, 
who  so  constantly  affirmed  that  the  light  of  reason  is 
abundantly  sufficient.  Being  at  a  good  minister's  house 
one  evening,  he  had  been  discussing  the  question,  and 
declaring  his  firm  belief  in  the  sufficiency  of  the  light  of 
nature.  On  leaving,  the  minister  offered  to  hold  him 
a  candle  to  light  him  down  the  steps.  He  said  "  No ; 
the  light  of  nature  would  be  enough;  the  moon  would 
do."  It  so  happened  that  the  moon  was  covered  with  a 
cloud,  and  he  fell  down  the  steps.  "  Ah ! "  said  the 
minister,  "you  had  better  have  had  a  little  light  from 
above,  after  all,  Mr.  Hume."  So,  supposing  the  light 
of  nature  to  be  sufficient,  we  had  better  have  a  little 
light  from  above,  too,  and  then  we  shall  be  sure  to  be 
right.  Better  have  two  lights  than  only  one.  The  light 
of  creation  is  a  bright  light.  God  may  be  seen  in  the 
stars;  his  name  is  written  in  gilt  letters  on  the  brow 
of  night;  you  may  discover  his  glory  in  the  ocean  waves, 
yea,  in  the  trees  of  the  field;  but  it  is  better  to  read  it 
in  two  books  than  in  one.  You  will  find  it  here  more 
clearly  revealed;  for  he  has  written  this  book  himself, 
and  he  has  given  you  the  key  to  understand  it,  if  you 
have  the  Holy  Spirit.  Ah,  beloved,  let  us  thank  God 
for  this  Bible ;  let  us  love  it ;  let  us  count  it  more  precious 
than  much  fine  gold. 


THE  BIBLE  13 


The  Neglected  Bible.-—  And  I  recollect  a  person  once  com 
ing  to  me  in  private;  I  spoke  to  her  about  her  soul,  she 
told  me  how  deeply  she  felt,  how  she  had  a  desire  to 
serve  God,  but  she  found  another  law  in  her  members. 
I  turned  to  a  passage  in  Romans,  and  read  to  her,  "  The 
good  that  I  would  I  do  not;  and  the  evil  which  I  would 
not  that  I  do!"  She  said,  "  Is  that  in  the  Bible?  I 
did  not  know  it."  I  did  not  blame  her,  because  she  had 
no  interest  in  the  Bible  till  then;  but  I  did  not  wonder 
that  there  could  be  found  persons  who  knew  nothing 
about  such  a  passage.  Ah!  you  know  more  about  your 
ledgers  than  your  Bible;  you  know  more  about  your 
day-books  than  what  God  has  written;  many  of  you  will 
read  a  novel  from  beginning  to  end,  and  what  have  you 
got?  A  mouthful  of  froth  when  you  have  done.  But 
you  cannot  read  the  Bible;  that  solid,  lasting,  substan 
tial,  and  satisfying  food  goes  uneaten,  locked  up  in  the 
cupboard  of  neglect;  while  anything  that  man  writes,  a 
catch  of  the  day,  is  greedily  devoured. 

Bible  Precious  Through  Use. —  That  young  man  over  there 
says  it  is  a  "  bore ; "  that  is  the  word  he  uses.  He  says, 
"  My  mother  says  to  me,  when  you  go  up  to  town,  read 
a  chapter  every  day.  Well,  I  thought  I  would  please 
her,  and  I  said  I  would.  I  am  sure  I  wish  I  had  not. 
I  did  not  read  a  chapter  yesterday,  or  the  day  before. 
"We  were  so  busy,  I  could  not  help  it."  You  do  not  love 
the  Bible,  do  you  ?  "  No,  there  is  nothing  in  it  which  is 
interesting."  Ah,  I  thought  so.  But  a  little  while  ago 
I  could  not  see  anything  in  it.  Do  you  know  why? 
Blind  men  cannot  see,  can  they?  But  when  the  Spirit 
touches  the  scales  of  the  eyes,  they  fall  off;  and  when 
he  puts  eye-salves  on,  then  the  Bible  becomes  precious. 
I  remember  a  minister  who  went  to  see  an  old  lady,  and 
he  thought  he  would  give  her  some  precious  promises 
out  of  the  word  of  God.  Turning  to  one,  he  saw  writ 
ten  in  the  margin  "  P.,"  and  he  asked,  "  What  does  this 


14   SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

mean?"  "That  means  precious,  sir."  Further  down, 
he  saw  "  T.  and  P.,"  and  he  asked  what  the  letters  meant. 
"That,"  she  said,  "means  tried  and  proved,  for  I  have 
tried  and  proved  it."  If  you  have  tried  God's  word  and 
proved  it  —  if  it  is  precious  to  your  soul,  then  you  are 
Christians;  but  those  persons  who  despise  the  Bible, 
have  "  neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter." 
Eating  God's  Word.— I  have  many  an  old  book  in  my 
library  in  which  there  have  been  book-worms,  and  I 
have  sometimes  amused  myself  with  tracing  a  worm.  I 
do  not  know  how  he  gets  to  the  volume  originally,  but 
being  there  he  eats  his  way  into  it.  He  bores  a  hole  in 
a  direct  line,  and  sometimes  I  find  that  he  dies  before 
he  gets  half-way  through  the  tome.  Now  and  then  a 
worm  has  eaten  his  way  right  through  from  one  wooden 
cover  to  another;  yes,  and  through  the  cover  also.  This 
was  a  most  successful  book-worm.  Few  of  us  can  eat 
our  way  quite  so  far.  I  am  one  of  the  book-worms  that 
have  not  got  half-way  into  my  Bible  yet;  but  I  am 
eating  my  way  as  fast  as  I  can.  This  one  thing  I  have 
proved  to  myself  beyond  all  question:  I  shall  never, 
never  exhaust  this  precious  Book;  much  less  shall  I  ex 
haust  the  wondrous  person  of  my  divinely-blessed  Lord. 
He  is  that  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven.  He  is 
utterly  inexhaustible. 

BLESSINGS 

The  Chain  of  Blessings.— You  sometimes  see  a  railway 
carriage  or  truck,  fastened  on  to  what  goes  before;  but 
there  is  also  a  great  hook  behind.  What  is  that  for? 
Why,  to  fasten  something  else  behind,  and  so  to  lengthen 
the  train.  Any  one  mercy  from  God  is  linked  on  to  all 
the  mercy  that  went  before  it;  but  provision  is  also 
made  for  adding  future  blessing.  All  the  years  to  come 
are  guaranteed  by  the  ages  past. 


BLESSINGS  15 

Christ  Bringing  Blessings.— I  saw  a  fine  carriage  stop 
ping  the  other  day  at  a  very  humble  hovel;  and  I 
thought  to  myself,  "  that  carriage  is  not  stopping  there 
to  collect  rent,  or  to  borrow  a  broom."  Oh,  no;  that 
lady  yonder  is  calling  round  and  visiting  the  poor,  and 
I  doubt  not  she  has  taken  in  some  nourishment  to  an 
invalid.  I  hope  it  was  so:  and  I  am  sure  my  Lord 
Jesus  Christ's  carriage  never  stops  at  my  door  to  get 
anything  out  of  me :  whenever  he  comes  he  brings  count 
less  blessings  with  him. 

The  Secret  of  Finding  Blessing.— Do  you  remember  the 
story  of  Mr.  Erskine  and  the  good  lady  who  went  to 
hear  him  preach  at  the  communion?  It  was  such  sweet 
preaching,  she  thought  she  had  never  heard  the  like.  So, 
after  service,  she  asked,  Who  the  gentleman  was  that 
preached  to-day;  and,  on  being  told  that  it  was  Mr. 
Ebenezer  Erskine,  she  said,  "  I  will  come  and  hear  him 
again  next  Sunday  morning."  She  went,  she  listened, 
and  she  thought  to  herself,—  "  Well,  this  is  veiy  dry, 
very  heavy  preaching."  She  was  not  at  all  comforted 
by  it;  then,  like  a  foolish  woman,  as  I  should  think  she 
must  have  been,  she  went  into  the  vestry,  and  said, 
"  Oh,  Mr.  Erskine,  I  heard  you  last  Sabbath  with  much 
pleasure,  sir;  I  never  was  so  edified;  and  I  came  again 
this  morning,  but  I  have  been  dreadfully  disappointed." 
So  the  good  man  said,  very  calmly,  "  Pray,  madam,  when 
you  came  to  the  kirk  last  Sunday,  what  did  you  come 
for?"  She  said,  "I  came  to  communion,  sir."  "To 
have  fellowship  with  Christ,  I  suppose  ? "  he  asked. 
"  Yes,  sir."  "  Well,  you  came  for  it,  and  you  had  it. 
And  pray,  what  did  you  come  here  this  morning  for?  " 
Said  she,  "I  came  to  hear  you,  sir."  "And,  you  had 
it,  woman,"  said  he,  "  you  had  it,  and  you  had  not  any 
thing  more  than  that."  Well,  now,  when  people  come 
merely  to  hear  a  minister,  or  for  custom's  sake,  or  for 
form's  sake,  do  they  not  always  get  what  they  come 


16   SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

for?  If  people  come  to  find  fault,  we  always  give  them 
plenty  of  our  imperfections  to  be  entertained  with,  so 
they  need  not  be  disappointed.  If  others  come  merely 
out  of  custom,  they  say,  "  Well,  this  is  my  work,  I  have 
performed  my  duty."  Of  course  it  is,  but  if  you  had 
come  in  through  the  door  —  that  is,  looking  to  Christ, 
looking  for  Christ,  desiring  not  to  see  the  preacher  but 
the  Lord,  not  to  get  the  word  of  man  but  the  Word  of 
God,  to  your  soul  —  I  believe  you  would  have  found 
pasture.  Brethren,  the  sheep  want  pasture.  No  other 
food  will  suit  them.  So  your  soul  wants  heavenly  truth, 
and  if  you  come  to  the  house  of  God  through  Christ, 
you  will  get  it.  If  you  turn  to  the  Bible  through  Christ, 
you  will  find  it  a  rich  storehouse.  If  you  come  to  prayer 
through  the  door  of  Christ,  you  will  find  it  comforting, 
and  so  you  shall  find  pasture. 

CHRIST 

Christ  Best  Known  in  Heaven. —  Christ  will  be  best  known 
in  eternity.  The  riches  of  Christ  are  not  so  much  to 
be  enjoyed  here  as  there.  He  will  give  you  by  the  road 
and  on  the  way  to  heaven  all  your  needs;  your  place  of 
defence  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks,  your  bread  shall 
be  given  you,  and  your  water  shall  be  sure;  but  it  is 
there,  there,  THERE,  where  you  shall  hear  the  song  of 
them  that  triumph,  the  shout  of  them  that  feast.  My 
dear  hearer,  if  you  get  Christ,  you  have  obtained  riches 
which  you  can  take  with  you  in  the  hour  of  death.  Tie 
rich  man  clutched  his  bags  of  money,  and  as  he  laid 
them  on  his  heart,  he  murmured,  l i  They  will  not  do ; 
they  will  not  do ;  take  them  away ! "  If  you  receive 
Jesus  into  your  heart,  he  will  be  death's  best  antidote. 
When  your  disembodied  spirit  quits  this  poor  clay  car 
cass,  as  it  must,  what  will  your  silver  and  gold  do  for 
you  then?  What  will  your  farms  and  your  broad  acres 


CHRIST  I? 


do  for  you  then?  You  must  leave  them  all  behind. 
Even  if  men  buy  you  a  coffin  of  gold,  or  bury  you  in  a 
sarcophagus  of  marble,  yet  of  what  avail  will  that  be? 
But  oh!  if  you  have  Christ,  you  can  fly  up  to  heaven  to 
your  treasure,  and  there  you  shall  be  rich  to  all  the  in 
tents  of  bliss,  world  without  end. 

Drop  Into  Christ's  Arms. —  Your  condition  is  like  that  of 
a  child  in  a  burning  house,  who,  having  escaped  to  the 
edge  of  a  window,  hung  on  by  the  window-sill.  The 
flames  were  pouring  out  of  the  window  underneath,  and 
the  poor  lad  would  soon  be  burnt,  or  falling  would  be 
dashed  to  pieces;  he  therefore  held  on  with  the  clutch 
of  death.  He  did  not  dare  to  relax  his  grasp  till  a 
strong  man  stood  underneath,  and  said,  "  Boy !  drop ! 
drop!  I'll  catch  you."  Now,  it  was  no  saving  faith  for 
the  boy  to  believe  that  the  man  was  strong  —  that  was  a 
good  help  towards  faith  —  but  he  might  have  known  that 
and  yet  have  perished;  it  was  faith  when  the  boy  let  go 
and  dropped  down  into  his  big  friend's  arms.  There 
are  you,  sinner,  clinging  to  your  sins  or  to  your  good 
works.  The  Savior  cries,  "  Drop !  drop  into  my  arms !  " 

The  Triumph  of  Jesus.— When  a  Roman  general  had 
performed  great  feats  in  a  foreign  country,  his  highest 
reward  was  that  the  Senate  should  decree  him  a  triumph. 
Of  course  there  was  a  division  of  spoil  made  on  the 
battle-field,  and  each  soldier  and  each  captain  took  his 
share;  but  every  man  looked  forward  rapturously  to  the 
day  when  they  should  enjoy  the  public  triumph.  On  a 
set  day  the  gates  of  Rome  were  thrown  open ;  the  houses 
were  all  decorated;  the  people  climbed  to  the  roofs,  or 
stood  in  great  crowds  along  the  streets.  The  gates  were 
opened,  and  by  and  by  the  first  legion  began  to  stream 
in  with  its  banners  flying,  and  its  trumpets  sounding. 
The  people  saw  the  stern  warriors  as  they  marched  along 
the  street  returning  from  their  blood-red  fields  of  battle. 


i8       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

After  one  half  of  the  army  had  thus  defiled,  your  eye 
would  rest  upon  one  who  was  the  center  of  all  attraction : 
riding  in  a  noble  chariot,  drawn  by  milk-white  horses, 
there  came  the  conqueror  himself,  crowned  with  the  laurel 
crown  and  standing  erect.  Chained  to  his  chariot  were 
the  kings  and  mighty  men  of  the  regions  which  he  had 
conquered.  Immediately  behind  them  came  part  of  the 
booty.  There  were  carried  the  ivory  and  the  ebony,  and 
the  beasts  of  the  different  countries  which  he  had  sub 
dued.  After  these  came  the  rest  of  the  soldiery,  a  long, 
long  stream  of  valiant  men,  all  of  them  sharing  the 
triumphs  of  their  captain.  Behind  them  came  banners, 
the  old  flags  which  had  floated  aloft  in  the  battle,  the 
standards  which  had  been  taken  from  the  enemy.  And 
after  these,  large  painted  emblems  of  the  great  vic 
tories  of  the  conqueror.  Upon  one  there  would  be  a 
huge  map  depicting  the  rivers  which  he  had  crossed,  or 
the  seas  through  which  his  navy  had  found  their  way. 
Everything  was  represented  in  a  picture,  and  the  popu 
lace  gave  a  fresh  shout  as  they  saw  the  memorial  of 
each  triumph.  And  behind,  with  the  trophies,  would 
come  the  prisoners  of  less  eminent  rank.  Then  the  rear 
would  be  closed  with  sound  of  trumpet,  adding  to  the 
acclamation  of  the  throng.  It  was  a  noble  day  for  old 
Rome.  Children  would  never  forget  those  triumphs; 
they  would  reckon  their  years  from  the  time  of  one  tri 
umph  to  another.  High  holiday  was  kept.  Women 
cast  down  flowers  before  the  conqueror,  and  he  was  the 
true  monarch  of  the  day. 

Now,  our  apostle  had  evidently  seen  such  a  triumph, 
or  read  of  it,  and  he  takes  this  as  a  representation  of 
what  Christ  did  on  the  cross.  He  says,  "  Jesus  made 
a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it." 
Have  you  ever  thought  that  the  cross  could  be  the  scene 
of  a  triumph?  Most  of  the  old  commentators  can 


CHRIST  19 


scarcely  conceive  it  to  be  true.  They  say,  "  This  must 
certainly  refer  to  Christ's  resurrection  and  ascension." 
But,  nevertheless,  so  saith  the  Scripture,  even  on  the 
cross  Christ  enjoyed  a  triumph.  Yes!  while  those  hands 
were  bleeding,  the  acclamations  of  angels  were  being 
poured  upon  his  head.  Yes,  while  those  feet  were  being 
rent  with  the  nails,  the  noblest  spirits  in  the  world  were 
crowding  round  him  with  admiration.  And  when  upon 
that  blood-stained  cross  he  died  in  agonies  unutterable, 
there  was  heard  a  shout  such  as  never  was  heard  before 
for  the  ransomed  in  heaven,  and  all  the  angels  of  God 
with  loudest  harmony  chanted  his  praise.  Then  was 
sung,  in  fullest  chorus,  the  song  of  Moses,  the  servant 
of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  for  he  had  indeed 
cut  Rahab  and  sorely  wounded  the  dragon.  Sing  unto 
the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously.  The  Lord 
shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord 
of  lords. 

Christ  the  Bond  of  Union.—  I  have  often  noticed  that  as 
soon  as  we  begin  to  discourse  upon  the  atoning  death 
of  our  divine  Lord,  we  are  at  home  with  one  another. 
There  may  be  brethren  present  from  various  churches, 
and  they  may  not  be  well  at  ease  when  we  handle  other 
subjects,  but  when  we  come  to  the  precious  blood  we 
come  to  the  heart  of  the  matter,  and  are  all  at  one. 
This  is  one  of  the  secret  signs  of  our  spiritual  free 
masonry.  I  have  had  my  heart  warmed  and  cheered 
against  my  own  will  sometimes  by  devout  writers,  whose 
doctrinal  theories  I  do  not  believe,  and  whose  church  I 
could  not  join,  and  yet  when  they  write  about  my  Lord 
they  win  my  heart.  "  Aliquid  Christi,"  as  one  old  di 
vine  used  to  say:  the  something  of  Christ  in  them  awak 
ens  our  affections  and  draws  us  nigh.  Even  books 
which  are  corrupt  with  sacramentarianism  have  oc 
casionally  such  a  sweet  savor  of  Christ  in  them  that  we 


20       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

cannot  utterly  cast  them  away,  but  feel  bound  very 
carefully  to  pare  the  apple,  and  cut  out  the  rotten 
places,  and  remove  the  objectionable  core,  for  the  sake 
of  the  sweet  morsels  flavored  with  the  love  of  Christ. 
As  the  sweet  honey-bearing  flowers  attract  the  bees,  so 
does  the  name  of  Jesus  draw  all  his  saints  to  him,  and 
so  to  each  other.  Give  me  your  hand,  my  brother,  if 
you  also  know  my  Lord  we  belong  to  the  same  family, 
the  infallible  mark  of  the  redeemed  is  upon  us  both. 

Christ  our  Priest.—  If  her  Majesty  should  give  me  the 
title-deeds  of  an  estate,  signing  the  transfer  with  her 
own  hand  and  seal,  I  should  smile  at  the  lackey  who 
should  kindly  offer  to  add  his  authority  to  her  Majes 
ty's  act  and  deed.  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is  there  is 
power,  and  this  is  preeminently  true  where  the  word  of 
the  King  of  kings  is  concerned.  I  have  believed  in 
Jesus  Christ  as  he  is  set  forth  on  the  authority  of  God 
himself,  and  who  are  you,  Sir  Priest,  to  come  between 
me  and  God? 

The  Soul's  Food  and  Drink.—  Consider,  too,  that  if  Christ 
be  both  meat  and  drink,  what  need  we  have  of  him! 
because  there  is  no  need  in  the  world,  I  suppose,  that  is 
greater  than  the  need  of  meat  and  drink.  You  hear  the 
shout  of  "  Fire ! "  in  the  street,  and  it  startles  you ;  but 
those  who  have  ever  heard  the  cry  of  "  Bread  I"  in  a 
bread  riot,  say  that  the  alarm  of  "  Fire ! "  is  noth 
ing  to  it.  There  is  something  so  sharp,  so  awful, 
so  determined,  so  ferocious,  so  like  the  yell  of  wild 
beasts,  about  men  and  women  that  scream  for  bread, 
that  it  is  the  most  awful  of  sounds.  And  "  Drink ! " 
What  a  word  that  must  be  for  a  number  of  poor  wretches 
shut  up  as  they  were  in  the  Black  Hole  of  Calcutta, 
raving  through  those  little  windows  at  the  guard  outside 
for  drink ;  and  stretching  out  their  hands  and  beseeching 
them  to  turn  their  carbines  upon  them,  and  shoot  them, 


CHRIST  at 

rather  than  let  them  die  there  a  lingering  death  of  suffo 
cation  and  thirst!  How  when  a  little  water  was  passed 
in  they  fought  and  struggled  for  it,  if  so  be  a  man 
might  but  get  a  drop,  or  suck  a  handkerchief  that  had 
been  dipped  into  it,  and  linger  on  a  little  longer.  Now, 
nobody  can  have  a  greater  need  than  an  actual  want  of 
bread  and  want  of  water;  but  that  is  what  you  want, 
my  dear  friends  who  are  without  Christ;  your  soul 
wants  bread  and  water.  Think  not  that  you  are  rich 
and  increased  in  goods  if  you  have  not  Christ,  for  in 
truth  you  are  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable.  If  you 
do  not  trust  him,  love  him,  serve  him,  your  poor  soul 
has  not  even  a  drop  to  drink. 

Wear  Christ's  Uniform.— You  know  how  the  recruiting 
sergeant  makes  a  soldier:  not  by  asking  the  man  to  give 
him  something,  but  by  getting  him  to  take  the  Queen's 
shilling.  Take  Christ  —  that  is  God's  enlisting  money  — 
and  you  are  enlisted.  Do  not  bring  any  thing,  but  take 
the  water  of  life  freely.  If  you  will  trust  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  take  him  to  be  your  salvation,  you  are  then 
enlisted  as  a  soldier  of  Jesus.  Oh!  may  you  have  grace 
to  do  that!  But  recollect,  all  soldiers  have  to  fight. 
One  of  the  first  things  you  will  have  to  do,  if  you  be 
come  a  Christian,  is  to  carry  a  cross.  Ah!  you  do  not 
like  it.  "  His  yoke  is  easy,  and  his  burden  is  light ; n 
take  it  upon  you:  and  yet  to  carnal  shoulders  the  cross 
is  very  galling,  and  nothing  but  grace  can  make  it  light. 
You  will  have  to  give  up  your  sins;  you  will  have  to 
give  up  your  empty  pleasures;  you  will  have  henceforth 
to  bear  witness  for  Christ  before  a  crooked  and  perverse 
generation.  Do  not  think  to  be  Christ's  soldier,  and  yet 
not  wear  his  livery.  No,  you  must  put  on  his  regi 
mentals  ;  you  must  wear  his  crest  —  his  crest  is  the  cross ; 
you  must  take  his  shield,  the  shield  of  faith;  and  his 
sword,  which  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  the  word  of 


22       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

God,  and  resting  alone  on  him,  depending  alone  upon 
his  merit,  you  shall  certainly  win  the  victory. 

Christ  in  the  Dying  Hour. —  There  is  a  young  girl  jn 
heaven  now,  once  a  member  of  this  church.  I  went  with 
one  of  my  beloved  deacons  to  see  her  when  she  was  very 
near  her  departure.  She  was  in  the  last  stage  of  con 
sumption.  Fair  and  sweetly  beautiful  she  looked,  and 
I  think  I  never  heard  such  syllables  as  those  which  fell 
from  that  girl's  lips.  She  had  had  disappointments, 
and  trials,  and  troubles,  but  all  these  she  had  not  a  word 
to  say  about,  except  that  she  blessed  God  for  them; 
they  had  brought  her  nearer  to  the  Savior.  And  when 
we  asked  her  whether  she  was  not  afraid  of  dying,  "  No," 
she  said,  "  the  only  thing  I  fear  is  this,  1  am  afraid  of 
living,  lest  my  patience  should  wear  out.  I  have  not 
said  an  impatient  word  yet,  sir;  I  hope  I  shall  not.  It 
is  sad  to  be  so  very  weak,  but  I  think  if  I  had  my  choice, 
I  would  rather  be  here  than  be  in  health,  for  it  is  very 
precious  to  me;  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and 
I  am  waiting  for  the  moment  when  he  shall  send  his 
chariot  of  fire  to  take  me  up  to  him."  I  put  the  ques 
tion,  "  Have  you  not  any  doubts  ?  "  "  No,  none,  sir ; 
why  should  I?  I  clasp  my  arms  around  the  neck  of 
Christ."  "And  have  not  you  any  fear  about  your 
sins?"  "No,  sir,  they  are  all  forgiven;  I  trust  the 
Savior's  precious  blood."  "  And  do  you  think  that 
you  will  be  as  brave  as  this  when  you  come  actually  to 
die?"  "Not  if  he  leaves  me,  sir,  but  he  will  never 
leave  me,  for  he  has  said,  *  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor 
forsake  thee/" 

Sanctuary  in  Christ.— I  saw  the  other  day  a  remark 
able  picture,  which  I  shall  use  as  an  illustration  of  the 
way  of  salvation  by  faith  in  Jesus.  An  offender  had 
committed  a  crime  for  which  he  must  die,  but  it  was  in 
the  olden  time  when  churches  were  considered  to  be 


CHRIST  23 


sanctuaries  in  which  criminals  might  hide  themselves 
and  so  escape.  See  the  transgressor  —  he  rushes  tow 
ards  the  church,  the  guards  pursue  him  with  their  drawn 
swords,  all  athirst  for  his  blood ;  they  pursue  him  even  to  • 
the  church  door.  He  rushes  up  the  steps,  and  just  as  they 
are  about  to  overtake  him  and  hew  him  in  pieces  on 
the  threshold  of  the  church,  out  comes  the  bishop,  and 
holding  up  the  crucifix,  he  cries, . "  Back,  back !  stain 
not  the  precincts  of  God's  house  with  blood !  stand  back !  " 
and  the  guards  at  once  respect  the  emblem  and  stand 
back,  while  the  poor  fugitive  hides  himself  behind  the 
robes  of  the  priest.  It  is  even  so  with  Christ.  The 
guilty  sinner  flies  to  the  cross  —  flies  straight  away  to 
Jesus,  and  though  Justice  pursues  him,  Christ  lifts  up 
his  wounded  hands  and  cries  to  Justice,  "  Stand  back ! 
stand  back!  I  shelter  this  sinner;  in  the  secret  place  of 
my  tabernacle  do  I  hide  him;  I  will  not  suffer  him  to 
perish,  for  he  puts  his  trust  in  ,me." 

Christ  in  the  Heart  a  Disinfectant.— Myrrh,  again  was 
used  as  a  disinfectant.  When  the  fever  is  abroad,  we 
know  people  who  wear  little  bags  of  camphor  about 
their  necks.  They  may  be  very  good;  I  do  not  know. 
But  the  Orientals  believed  that,  in  times  of  pest  and 
plague,  a  little  bag  of  myrrh  worn  between  the  breasts 
would  be  of  essential  service  to  whoever  might  carry  it. 
And  there  doubtless  is  some  power  in  myrrh  to  preserve 
from  infectious  disease.  Well,  brethren,  certain  I  am 
it  is  so  with  Christ.  You  have  to  go  into  the  world, 
which  is  like  a  great  lazar-house;  but  if  you  carry  Christ 
with  you,  you  will  never  catch  the  world's  disease.  A 
man  may  be  worth  never  so  much  money  —  he  will  never 
get  worldly  if  he  keepeth  Christ  on  his  heart.  A  man 
may  have  to  tug  and  toil  for  his  livelihood,  and  be  very 
poor  —  he  will  never  be  discontented  and  murmuring 
if  he  lives  close  to  Christ.  Oh  you  who  have  to  handle 


24       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

the  world,  Bee  to  it  that  you  handle  the  Master  mor* 
than  the  world.  Some  of  you  have  to  work  with  drunken 
and  swearing  men;  others  are  cast  into  the  midst  of 
frivolities;  oh,  take  my  Master  with  you!  and  sin's 
plagues  can  have  no  influence  upon  your  moral  nature. 

For  Christ's  Sake.—  I  met,  in  one  of  Samuel  Rutherford's 
letters,  an  extraordinary  expression,  where  he  speaks 
of  the  coals  of  divine  wrath  all  falling  upon  the  head 
of  Christ,  so  that  not  one  might  fall  upon  his  people. 
"  And  yet,"  saith  he,  "  if  one  of  those  coals  should  drop 
from  his  head  upon  mine,  and  did  utterly  consume  me, 
yet  if  I  felt  it  was  a  part  of  the  coals  that  fell  on 
him,  and  I  was  bearing  it  for  his  sake,  and  in  communion 
with  him,  I  would  choose  it  for  my  heaven."  That  is  a 
strong  thing  to  say,  that  to  suffer  with  Christ  would  be  his 
heaven,  if  he  assuredly  knew  that  it  was  for  and  with 
Christ  that  he  was  suffering.  Oh!  there  is  indeed  a 
heavenliness  about  suffering  for  Jesus.  His  cross  hath 
such  a  majesty  and  mystery  of  delight  in  it,  that,  the 
more  heavy  it  becometh,  the  more  lightly  doth  it  sit 
upon  the  believer's  shoulders. 

Christ  Always  New.—  To-day,  stepping  in  to  see  a  gentle 
man,  I  observed  a  table  which  had  upon  it  a  great  va 
riety  of  objects.  I  wondered  what  they  were,  and  took 
the  liberty  of  asking  him.  He  told  me  that  he  had 
some  beautiful  stereoscopic  views  there  which  had  been 
taken  at  an  immense  expense  in  Egypt,  in  the  Holy 
Land,  and  in  all  parts  of  the  world;  and  he  showed  me 
one  or  two  Scriptural  subjects  which  very  much  inter 
ested  me.  They  were  certainly  preeminently  excellent 
as  works  of  art.  He  said,  "  There,  sir,  I  never  get 
tired  of  looking  at  those  things.  I  could  look  at  them 
constantly,  and  never  get  tired  of  them."  "  Well,"  I 
said,  "I  quite  understand  that;  they  are  excellent;  for 


CHRIST  25 

really  there  is  the  study  of  half  an  hour  in  this  on« 
picture;  and  then  one  might  begin  again,  it  is  so  full  of 
beauty,  and  it  seems  so  true  to  the  original."  But  I 
thought  to  myself,  "  Excellent  as  they  are,  I  think,  if 
I  call  to  see  my  friend  in  a  year's  time  he  will  tell  me 
that  he  has  had  to  buy  a  fresh  lot  of  views,  for  he  has 
been  looking  at  these  so  often,  that  he  has  become  alto 
gether  tired  of  them.  They  would  have  no  freshness 
to  him,  because  he  had  seen  them  so  many  times.  But 
mark;  the  reason  why  he  could  look  at  them  so  often  was 
because  they  were  so  excellent.  If  they  had  been  bad 
views,  if  there  had  not  been  great  skill  and  great  art 
bestowed  upon  them,  he  would  soon  have  become  tired 
of  looking  at  them.  There  are  some  views  in  nature 
which  a  man  might  look  at  a  hundred  times,  and  yet 
always  wonder  at  them;  but  the  reason  is,  because  they 
are  so  beautiful.  There  are  other  things  which  might 
strike  one's  eye  at  first,  but  which  when  they  are  looked 
into  would  lose  their  freshness,  because  there  would  be 
no  real  ground  for  admiration,  because  there  was  no 
excellency.  But  Christ  Jesus  will  always  have  the  dew 
of  his  youth,  because  he  is  always  so  excellent. 

Bleating  of  the  Sheep."—  If  you  learn  of  Jesus  you  will 
have  rest  from  the  fear  of  men.  I  recollect,  before  I 
came  to  London,  being  at  a  prayer-meeting  where  a  very 
quaint  brother  prayed  for  me  that  I  might  be  delivered 
from  the  "  bleating  of  the  sheep."  I  understood  it  after 
awhile,  he  meant  that  I  might  live  above  the  fear  of 
man,  that  when  such  a  person  said  "  How  much  we  have 
been  edified  to-day,"  I  might  not  be  puffed  up;  or  if 
another  said,  "  How  dull  the  discourse  was  to-day,"  I 
might  not  be  depressed.  You  will  be  delivered  from 
"the  bleating  of  the  sheep"  when  you  have  the  spirit 
of  the  Good  Shepherd. 


26       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Yoked  with  Christ.— When  bullocks  are  yoked,  there  are 
generally  two.  I  have  watched  them  in  Northern  Italy, 
and  noticed  that  when  two  are  yoked  together,  and 
they  are  perfectly  agreed,  the  yoke  is  always  easy  to 
both  of  them.  If  one  were  determined  to  lie  down  and 
the  other  to  stand  up,  the  yoke  would  be  very  uncom 
fortable;  but  when  they  are  both  of  one  mind  you  will 
see  them  look  at  each  other  with  those  large,  lustrous, 
brown  eyes  of  theirs  so  lovingly,  and  with  a  look  they 
read  each  other's  minds,  so  that  when  one  wants  to  lie 
down,  down  they  go,  or  when  one  wishes  to  go  forward, 
forward  they  both  go,  keeping  step.  In  this  way  the 
yoke  is  easy.  Now  I  think  the  Savior  says  to  us,  "  I 
am  bearing  one  end  of  the  yoke  on  my  shoulder;  come, 
my  disciple,  place  your  neck  under  the  other  side  of  it, 
and  then  learn  of  me.  Keep  step  with  me,  be  as  I  am, 
do  as  I  do.  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart;  your  heart 
must  be  like  mine,  and  then  we  will  work  together  in 
blessed  fellowship,  and  you  will  find  that  working  with 
me  is  a  happy  thing ;  for  my  yoke  is  easy  to  me,  and  will 
be  to  you.  Come,  then,  true  yoke-fellow,  come  and  be 
yoked  with  me,  take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me/' 

Christ  Grows  on  the  Growing  Christian. —  Like  the  trav 
eler  ascending  the  Alps  to  reach  the  summit  of  Mont 
Blanc;  at  first  he  observes  that  lord  of  the  hills  as  one 
horn  among  many,  and  often  in  the  twistings  of  his 
upward  path  he  sees  other  peaks  which  appear  more 
elevated  than  that  monarch  of  mountains;  but  when  at 
last  he  is  near  the  summit,  he  sees  all  the  rest  of  the 
hills  beneath  his  feet,  and  like  a  mighty  wedge  of  ala 
baster  Mount  Blanc  pierces  the  very  clouds.  So,  as 
we  grow  in  grace,  other  things  sink  and  Jesus  rises. 
They  must  decrease,  but  Christ  must  increase;  until  he 
alone  fills  the  full  horizon  of  your  soul,  and  rises  clear 


CHRIST  27 


and  bright  and  glorious  up  into  the  very  heaven  of  God. 

0  that  we  may  thus  see  "  Jesus  only ! " 

Running  Into  Christ's  Arms.—  It  was  a  brave  saying  of 
Martin  Luther's,  when  he  said,  "  I  would  run  into  Christ's 
arms  even  if  he  had  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand."  Now, 
he  has  not  a  drawn  sword,  but  he  has  his  wounds  hi  his 
hands.  Run  into  his  arms,  poor  sinner.  "  Oh,"  you 
say,  "  May  I  come  ?  "  How  can  you  ask  the  question  ? 
you  are  commanded  to  come.  The  great  command  of 
the  gospel  is,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus."  Those  who 
disobey  this  command  disobey  God.  It  is  as  much  a 
command  of  God  that  man  should  believe  on  Christ,  as 
that  we  should  love  our  neighbor. 

Not  Works  but  Christ.—  Remember  what  that  eminent 
Scotch  divine  said,  when  he  was  dying.  Some  one  said 
to 'him,  "What  are  you  doing  now?"  Said  he,  "I  am 
just  gathering  all  my  good  works  up  together,  and  I 
am  throwing  them  all  overboard;  and  I  am  lashing  my 
self  to  the  plank  of  free  grace,  and  I  hope  to  swim  to 
glory  on  it."  So  do  you  do;  every  day  keep  your  eye 
only  on  Christ;  and  so  long  as  your  eye  is  single,  your 
whole  body  must  and  shall  be  full  of  light.  But  if 
you  once  look  crosseyed,  first  to  yourself  and  then  to 
Christ,  your  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  darkness. 

A  True  Friend.—  Young  lady,  you  speak  of  a  dear  friend 
whom  you  acquired  last  night  in  a  ball-room.  Do  not, 

1  beseech  you,  misuse  the  word;  he  is  not  a  friend  if  he 
was    acquired   merely   there;    friends   are   better    things 
than  those   which   grow   in   the   hot-house   of   pleasure. 
Friendship    is   a   more   lasting   plant   than    those.     You 
have  a  friend,  have  you?    Yes;  and  he  keeps  a  pair 
of  horses,  and  has  a  good  establishment.    Ah!  but  your 
best  way  to  prove  your  friend  is  to  know  that  he  will 
be  your  friend  when  you  have  not  so  much  as  a  mean 


28       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

cottage,  and  when,  houseless  and  without  clothing,  you 
are  driven  to  beg  your  bread.  Thus  you  would  make 
true  proof  of  a  friend.  Give  me  a  friend  who  was  born 
in  the  winter  time,  whose  cradle  was  rocked  in  the  storm ; 
he  will  last.  Our  fair  weather  friends  shall  flfee  away 
from  us.  I  had  rather  have  a  robin  for  a  friend  than 
a  swallow;  for  a  swallow  abides  with  us  only  in  the 
summer  time,  but  a  robin  cometh  to  us  in  the  winter. 
Those  are  tight  friends  that  will  come  the  nearest  to 
us  when  we  are  in  the  most  distress;  but  those  are  not 
friends  who  speed  themselves  away  when  ill  times  come. 
Believer,  hast  thou  reason  to  fear  that  Christ  will  leave 
you  now?  Has  he  not  been  with  you  in  the  house  of 
mourning1?  You  found  your  friend  where  men  find 
pearls,  "  in  caverns  deep,  where  darkness  dwells ;  "  you 
found  Jesus  in  your  hour  of  trouble.  It  was  on  the 
bed  of  sickness  that  you  first  learned  the  value  of  his 
name;  it  was  in  the  hour  of  mental  anguish  that  you 
first  did  lay  hold  of  the  hem  of  his  garment;  and  since 
then,  your  nearest  and  sweetest  intercourse  has  been 
held  with  him  in  the  hours  of  darkness. 

The  Elder  Brother.— It  is  saying  a  great  thing  to  affirm 
that  "  there  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a 
brother ; "  for  the  love  of  brotherhood  has  produced 
most  valiant  deeds.  We  have  read  stories  of  what 
brotherhood  could  do,  which,  we  think,  could  hardly  be 
excelled  in  the  annals  of  friendship.  Timoleon,  with  his 
shield,  stood  over  the  body  of  his  slain  brother,  to  de 
fend  him  from  the  insults  of  the  foe.  It  was  reckoned 
a  brave  deed  of  brotherhood  that  he  should  dare  the 
spears  of  an  army  in  defense  of  his  brother's  corpse. 
And  many  such  instances  have  there  been,  in  ancient 
and  modern  warfare,  of  the  attachment  of  brethren. 
There  is  a  story  told  of  a  Highland  regiment,  who,  while 
marching  through  the  Highlands,  lost  their  way;  they 


CHRIST  ag 

were  overtaken  by  one  of  the  terrible  storms  which  will 
sometimes  come  upon  travelers  unawares,  and  blinded 
by  the  snow,  they  lost  their  way  upon  the  mountains. 
Well  nigh  frozen  to  death,  it  was  with  difficulty  they 
could  continue  their  march.  One  man  after  another 
dropped  into  the  snow  and  disappeared.  There  were 
two  brothers,  however,  of  the  name  of  Forsythe;  on« 
of  them  fell  prostrate  on  the  earth,  and  would  have 
lain  there  to  die,  but  his  brother,  tho  barely  able  to 
drag  his  own  limbs  across  the  white  desert,  took  him 
on  his  back,  and  carried  him  along,  and  as  others  fell, 
one  by  one,  this  brave,  true-hearted  brother  carried  his 
loved  on  his  back  until  at  last  he  himself  fell  down  over 
come  with  fatigue,  and  died.  His  brother,  however,  had 
received  such  warmth  from  his  body  that  he  was  enabled 
to  reach  the  end  of  his  journey  in  safety,  and  so  lived. 
Here  we  have  an  instance  of  one  brother  sacrificing  his 
life  for  another.  I  hope  there  are  some  brothers  here 
who  would  be  prepared  to  do  the  same  if  they  should 
ever  be  brought  into  the  same  difficulty.  It  is  saying 
a  great  thing,  to  declare  that  "  there  is  a  friend  that 
sticketh  closer  than  a  brother." 

Christ's  Tender  Care. —  A  queer  thing  I  once  read  in  an 
old  book  about  God's  children  and  people  being  a  part 
of  Christ  and  in  union  with  him.  The  writer  says  — 
"  A  father  sitteth  in  his  room,  and  there  cometh  in  a 
stranger:  the  stranger  taketh  up  a  child  on  his  knee, 
and  the  child  hath  a  sore  finger:  so  he  saith,  'My  child, 
you  have  a  sore  finger ;  >  '  Yes ! '  l  Well,  let  me  take  it 
off,  and  give  thee  a  golden  one ! '  The  child  looketh  at 
him  and  saith,  '  I  will  not  go  to  that  man  any  more,  for 
he  talks  of  taking  off  my  finger:  I  love  my  own  finger, 
and  I  will  not  have  a  golden  one  instead  of  it.'  So 
the  saint  saith,  '  I  am  one  of  the  members  of  Christ,  but 


SO       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

I  am  like  a  sore  finger,  and  he  will  take  me  off  and  put 
a  golden  one  on.'  '  No/  said  Christ,  'No,  no;  I  can  not 
have  any  of  my  members  taken  away;  if  the  finger  be 
a  sore  one,  I  will  bind  it  up ;  I  will  strengthen  it/  " 
The  Savior. —  I  had  a  friend,  who,  standing  by  the  side 
of  a  piece  of  frozen  water,  saw  a  young  lad  in  it,  and 
sprang  upon  the  ice  in  order  to  save  him.  After  clutch 
ing  the  boy,  he  held  him  in  his  hands  and  cried  out, 
"  Here  he  is !  Here  he  is !  I  have  saved  him."  But, 
just  as  they  caught  hold  of  the  boy,  he  sank  himself, 
and  his  body  was  not  found  for  some  time  afterwards, 
when  he  was  quite  dead.  Oh!  it  is  so  with  Jesus.  My 
soul  was  drowning.  From  heaven's  high  portals  he  saw 
me  sinking  in  the  depths  of  hell;  he,  in  his  supreme 
mercy,  plunged  in: 

"He  SANK  beneath  his  heavy  woes, 

To  raise  me  to  a  crown; 
There's  ne'er  a  gift  his  hand  bestows, 
But  cost  his  heart  a  groan." 

Ah!  we  may  indeed  regret  our  sin,  since  it  slew  Jesus. 
Christ  Seeking  After  Sinners.— A  friend  of  mine,  who 
has  been  a  clergyman  in  Ireland  related  it  to  me  himself 
as  a  veritable  narrative.  A  clergyman  of  an  Irish 
parish  said,  that  "he  went  round  to  visit  all  his  parish 
ioners,  but,"  said  he,  "there  was  one  poor  woman  in 
the  parish  who  had  been  an  abandoned  character,  and 
I  dared  not  go  to  visit  her,  because  I  thought  it  would 
ill  become  my  position,  so  I  passed  by.  Ah!  brother," 
he  said,  "  I  know  it  was  an  evil  pride,  or  else  I  should 
have  gone  after  the  chief  of  sinners,  for  the  care  of 
her  soul  was  in  some  measure  committed  to  my  hands." 
One  day  he  saw  her  in  church,  and  he  thought  he  heard 
her  repeating  the  responses,  and  fancied  he  saw  the 


CHRIST  31 

tears  rolling  down  her  cheek.  0  how  his  bowels  yearned 
for  her  soul!  He  longed  to  speak  with  her,  but  he 
dared  not.  She  came  there  month  after  month,  a  con 
stant  worshiper,  and  yet  he  passed  by  her  door  and  did 
not  visit  her.  At  last  one  day  she  came  to  the  door,  and 
said,  "  Sir,  I  want  you  ; "  he  then  went  in,  and  she  put 
out  her  hand,  and  taking  hold  of  his,  said,  "  0,  sir !  if 
your  Master  had  been  in  this  village  half  as  long  as  you 
have,  I  am  sure  he  would  have  been  to  see  me,  for  I  am 
the  worst  sinner  in  the  parish,  and  therefore  I  want  his 
help  the  most;  but  tho  you  have  not  been  to  see  me, 
I  know  who  has  said:  *  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I  am  chief.7 " 

Christ  Pulling  at  Our  Hearts.—  Remember  that  pretty  par 
able  given  by  one  of  our  ministers,  of  the  boy's  kite. 
He  made  it  fly  aloft:  it  rose  up  so  high  that  he  could  - 
no  longer  see  it.  Still  he  said  he  had  a  kite,  and  he 
held  fast  by  it.  "  Boy,  how  do  you  know  you  have  a 
kite?"  "I  can  feel  it  pull,"  said  he.  This  morning 
we  feel  our  Jesus  pull.  He  draws  us  with  a  far  greater 
force  than  a  mere  string.  He  is  gone  into  heaven,  and 
he  draws  us  after  him.  0  Lord,  draw  us  with  greater 
power  than  ever. 

Christ  a  Victor.— I  know  of  no  better  theme  to  stir  the 
pulses  of  my  soul  with  holy  exultation  than  the  thought 
that  Jesus  is  victor.  I  have  heard  of  wounded  men 
crushed  amid  a  heap  of  bleeding  bodies  lying  on  the 
battle-field,  and  rousing  all  the  life  that  remained  in 
them  when  they  saw  the  great  Napoleon  come  riding 
over  the  plain.  With  their  legs  gone,  they  raised  them 
selves  upon  their  arms  once  more  to  salute  their  captain. 
Poor  souls!  to  be  thus  enthusiastic  for  one  who  shed 
their  blood  like  water;  far  more  wise  is  our  enthusiasm 
for  him  who  shed  his  blood  for  us.  If  I  knew  that  I 


32       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

must  die  in  a  ditch,  and  be  forgotten  or  slandered  and 
abhorred  of  men,  I  would  yet  rejoice  and  cry  "Ho- 
sanna  "  at  the  prospect  of  my  Lord's  sure  victory.  Yea 
I  will  salute  him  now  with  my  most  hearty  praises,  and 
be  glad,  because  I  know  that  he  is  even  now  King  of 
kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  Hallelujah!  He  of  whom 
they  said,  "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him,"  is  now  head 
over  all. 

Christ  Ever  the  Same.— Men  in  the  days  of  Toplady 
looked  back  to  the  days  of  Whitfield;  men  in  the  days 
of  Whitfield  looked  back  to  the  days  of  Bunyan;  men 
in  the  days  of  Bunyan  wept  because  of  the  days  of 
Wycliffe,  and  Calvin,  and  Luther;  and  men  then  wept 
for  the  days  of  Augustine  and  Chrysostom.  Men  in 
those  days  wept  for  the  days  of  the  Apostles;  and 
doubtless  men  in  the  days  of  the  Apostles  wept  for  tht 
days  of  Jesus  Christ;  and  no  doubt  some  in  the  days 
of  Jesus  Christ  were  so  blind  as  to  wish  to  return  to  the 
days  of  prophecy,  and  though  more  of  the  days  of  Elijah 
than  they  did  of  the  most  glorious  day  of  Christ.  Some 
men  look  more  to  the  past  than  the  present.  Rest  as 
sured,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  to-day  as  he  was  yes 
terday,  and  he  will  be  the  same  for  ever. 

Christ  Seeking  the  Lost.— "I  am  lost,"  said  Mr.  White- 
field's  brother  to  the  Countess  of  Huntington.  "  I  am 
delighted  to  hear  it,"  said  the  Countess.  "  Oh,"  cried  he, 
"what  a  dreadful  thing  to  say!"  "Nay,"  said  she, 
" '  for  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that 
which  was  lost ; '  therefore  I  know  he  is  come  to  save 
you.''  0  sinner,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  despair. 
The  more  broken  thou  art,  the  more  ruined  thou  art, 
the  more  vile  thou  art  in  thine  own  esteem,  so  much 
the  more  room  is  there  for  the  display  of  infinite  mercy 
and  power. 


CHRIST  33 


The  Humiliation  of  Christ.— Never  was  there  a  poorer 
man  than  Christ;  he  was  the  prince  of  poverty.  He  was 
the  reverse  of  Croasus  —  he  might  be  on  the  top  of  the 
hill  of  riches,  Christ  stood  in  the  lowest  vale  of  poverty. 
Look  at  his  dress,  it  is  woven  from  the  top  throughout, 
the  garment  of  the  poor !  As  for  his  food,  he  oftentimes 
did  hunger;  and  always  was  dependent  upon  the  charity 
of  others  for  the  relief  of  his  wants!  He  who  scattered 
the  harvest  o'er  the  broad  acres  of  the  world,  had  not 
sometimes  wherewithal  to  stay  the  pangs  of  hunger? 
He  who  digged  the  springs  of  the  ocean,  sat  upon  a  well 
and  said  to  a  Samaritan  woman,  "  Give  me  to  drink ! " 
He  rode  in  no  chariot,  he  walked  his  weary  way,  foot 
sore,  o'er  the  flints  of  Galilee !  He  had  not  where  to  lay 
his  head.  He  looked  upon  the  fox  as  it  hurried  to  its 
burrow,  and  the  fowl  as  it  went  to  its  resting-place,  and 
he  said,  "  Foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air 
have  nests;  but  I,  the  Son  of  man,  have  not  where  to 
lay  my  head."  He  who  had  once  been  waited  on  by 
angels,  becomes  the  servant  of  servants,  takes  a  towel, 
girds  himself,  and  washes  his  disciples'  feet!  He  who 
was  once  honored  with  the  hallelujahs  of  ages,  is  now 
spit  upon  and  despised!  He  who  was  loved  by  his 
Father,  and  had  abundance  of  the  wealth  of  affection, 
could  say,  "He  that  eateth  bread  with  me. hath  lifted 
up  his  heel  against  me."  Oh,  for  words  to  picture  the 
humiliation  of  Christ! 

No  Caste  to  Christ.— I  recollect  in  Martin  Luther's  life 
that  he  saw,  in  one  of  the  Romish  churches,  a  picture 
of  the  Pope,  and  the  cardinals,  and  bishops,  and  priests, 
and  monks,  and  friars,  all  on  board  a  ship.  They  were 
all  safe,  every  one  of  them.  As  for  the  laity,  poor 
wretches,  they  were  struggling  in  the  sea,  and  many 
of  them  drowning.  Only  those  were  saved  to  whom  the 
good  men  in  the  ship  were  so  kind  as  to  hand  out  a 


34      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

rope  or  a  plank.  That  is  not  our  Lord's  teaching:  his 
blood  is  shed  "  for  many,"  and  not  for  the  few.  He 
is  not  the  Christ  of  a  caste,  or  a  class,  but  the  Christ  of 
all  conditions  of  men. 

Christ  Our  Only  Resting-PIace.—  I  spoke  to  a  friend  this 
week  who  is  sore  sick,  and  I  said,  "  You  are  resting  in 
Christ,  my  brother,"  He  replied^  "  I  have  nothing  else 
to  rest  in."  I  said,  "  Your  hope  is  in  the  atoning  sacri 
fice  of  Christ,"  and  he  answered,  "What  other  hope 
could  I  have?"  While  we  have  fifty  ways  of  salvation 
we  shall  be  lost;  but  when  we  see  that  "other  founda 
tion  can  no  man  lay  than  that  which  is  laid,  even  Jesus 
Christ  the  righteous,"  then  we  shall  build  upon  it  and  be 
safe. 

Christ  the  True  Physician. —  Have  you  been  to  Doctor 
Ceremony?  He  is,  at  this  time,  the  fashionable  doc 
tor.  Has  he  told  you  that  you  must  attend  to  forms 
and  rules?  Has  he  prescribed  you  so  many  prayers, 
and  so  many  services?  Ah!  many  go  to  him,  and  they 
persevere  in  a  round  of  religious  observances,  but  these 
yield  no  lasting  ease  to  the  conscience.  Have  you  tried 
Doctor  Morality?  He  has  a  large  practice,  and  is  a  fine 
old  Jewish  physician.  "  Be  good  in  outward  character," 
says  he,  "  and  it  will  work  inwardly,  and  cleanse  the 
heart ! "  A  great  many  persons  are  supposed  to  have 
been  cured  by  him  and  by  his  assistant,  Doctor  Civility, 
who  is  nearly  as  clever  as  his  master:  but  I  have  it  on 
good  evidence  that  neither  of  them  apart,  nor  even  the 
two  together,  could  ever  deal  with  an  inward  disease. 
Do  what  you  may,  your  own  doings  will  not  stanch  the 
wounds  of  a  bleeding  heart.  Doctor  Mortification  has 
also  a  select  practice;  but  men  are  not  saved  by  denying 
themselves  until  they  first  deny  their  self -righteousness. 
Doctor  Excitement  has  many  patients,  but  his  cures 
seldom  outlive  the  set  of  sun.  Doctor  Feeling  is  much 


CHRIST  35 

sought  after  by  tender  spirits;  these  try  to  feel  sorrow 
and  remorse;  but,  indeed,  the  way  of  cure  does  not  lie 
in  that  quarter.  Let  everything  be  done  that  can  be 
done  apart  from  our  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
sick  soul  will  be  nothing  bettered.  You  may  try  human 
remedies  for  the  space  of  a  lifetime,  but  sin  will  remain 
in  power,  guilt  will  cling  to  the  conscience,  and  the  heart 
will  abide  as  hard  as  ever. 

Jesus  Belongs  to  AH  Humanity.—  I  admire  the  Welch  sis 
ter  who  was  of  opinion  that  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be 
Welch.  When  they  asked  her  how  she  proved  it,  she 
said  that  he  always  spoke  to  her  heart  in  Welch.  Doubt 
less  it  was  so,  and  I  can,  with  equal  warmth,  declare  that 
he  always  speaks  to  me  in  English.  Brethren  from  Ger 
many,  France,  Sweden,  Italy  —  you  all  claim  that  he 
speaks  to  you  in  your  own  tongue. 

Christ's  Joy  in  Soul-Saving. —  Some  of  you  have  been  sal 
mon  fishing  in  the  Scotch  rivers;  you  have  fished  on  and 
on  until  you  have  hooked  a  huge  fish,  and  by  the  time 
you  have  landed  him,  on  taking  out  your  watch,  you  dis 
cover  that  it  is  long  past  your  dinner  hour,  and  you  are 
surprised  that  you  had  not  noticed  that  you  were  almost 
faint.  Your  excitement  kept  you  going:  only  when  it 
was  over  did  you  begin  to  hunger.  Thus  the  Master 
was  so  taken  up  with  soul-saving  that  he  had  meat  to 
eat  that  others  knew  not  of. 

Christ's  Ownership  in  His  People. —  If  I  possess  a  love- 
token  that  some  dear  one  has  given  me,  I  may  rightly 
desire  to  have  it  with  me.  Nobody  can  have  such  a 
right  to  your  wedding-ring,  good  sister,  as  you  have 
yourself;  and  are  not  Christ's  saints,  as  it  were,  a  sig 
net  upon  his  finger,  a  token  which  his  Father  gave  him 
of  his  good  pleasure  in  him?  Should  they  not  be  with 
Jesus  where  he  is,  since  they  are  his  crown  jewels  and 
his  glory?  We  in  our  creature  love  lift  up  our  hands 


36   SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

and  cry,  "My  Lord,  my  Master,  let  me  have  this  dear 
one  with  me  a  little  longer.  I  need  the  companionship 
of  one  so  sweet,  or  life  will  be  misery  to  me."  But  if 
Jesus  looks  us  in  the  face,  and  says,  "  Is  thy  right  better 
than  mine  ?  "  we  draw  back  at  once.  He  has  a  greater 
part  in  his  saints  than  we  can  have. 

Christ  the  Outcast's  Savior. —  One  said  to  me  the  other 
day,  talking  of  her  sin,  and  of  her  repentance,  "  Yet,  sir, 
I  am  an  outcast."  That  word  pierced  my  heart  like  a 
dagger.  I  said,  "Yes,  but  the  Church  of  Christ  was 
made  on  purpose  to  be  a  home  for  outcasts:  here  is  a 
new  household  for  you,  new  brothers  and  sisters  for 
you,  a  new  future  for  you;  for  now  you  are  one  of  the 
solitary  ones  whom  the  Lord  in  His  infinite  wisdom,  will 
set  in  families." 

Overpowering  Love  of  Christ. — "  They  shall  fear  and 
tremble  for  all  the  goodness  and  for  all  the  prosperity 
that  I  procure  unto  it."  The  words  are  true  to  the 
letter.  Take  a  case:  Peter  went  a  fishing;  and  if  he 
had  caught  a  few  fish,  his  boat  would  have  floated  high 
on  the  lake;  but  when  the  Master  came  into  the  boat 
and  told  him  where  to  throw  the  net  so  that  he  pulled 
up  a  multitude  of  fish,  then  the  little  barque  began  to 
sink.  Down,  down,  it  went,  and  poor  Peter  went  down 
with  it,  till  he  fell  at  Jesus'  feet  and  cried,  "Depart 
from  me;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord."  He  was  con 
fused  and  overwhelmed,  or  he  would  never  have  asked 
the  blessed  Master  to  leave  him:  Christ's  goodness  had 
fairly  beaten  him  till  he  was  afraid  of  his  Benefactor. 
Know  ye  not  what  it  is  to  be  weighted  down  with  infin 
ite  goodness,  oppressed  with  mercy,  swept  away  by  an 
avalanche  of  love.  I,  at  least,  know  what  it  means,  and 
I  know  of  no  experience  which  has  made  me  so  little  in 
mine  own  eyes. 


CHRIST  37 


Christ  as  Engraver.-  - 1  was  surprised  when  I  was  told,  the 
other  day,  by  a  friend,  who  was  a  maker  of  steel-plate 
engravings,  how  much  of  labor  had  to  be  put  into  a 
finely-executed  engraving.  Think  of  the  power  that  has 
cut  lines  of  beauty  in  such  steel  as  we  are!  Think  of 
the  patience  that  lent  its  arm,  and  its  eye,  and  its  heart, 
and  its  infinite  mind,  to  the  carrying  on  of  the  supreme 
work  of  producing  the  image  of  Christ  in  those  who  were 
born  in  sin!  Think  of  the  skill  which  makes  heirs  of 
God  out  of  heirs  of  wrath ! 

The  Lost  Child. —  If  you  have  ever  been  in  a  house  with 
a  mother  and  father,  and  daughters  and  sons,  when  a 
little  child  has  been  lost,  you  will  never  forget  the  agi 
tation  of  each  member  of  the  household.  See  the  father 
as  he  goes  to  the  police-station,  and  calls  at  every  likely 
house,  for  he  must  find  his  child  or  break  his  heart.  See 
the  deep  oppression  and  bitter  anguish  of  the  mother; 
she  is  like  one  distracted  till  she  has  news  of  her  darling. 
You  now  begin  to  understand  what  Jesus  feels  for  one 
whom  he  loves,  who  is  graven  on  the  palms  of  his 
hands,  whom  he  looked  upon  in  the  glass  of  his  fore 
knowledge,  when  he  was  bleeding  his  life  away  upon  the 
tree;  he  hath  no  rest  in  his  spirit  till  his  beloved  is 
found.  He  hath  compassion  like  a  God,  and  that  doth 
transcend  all  the  compassion  of  parents  or  of  brothers, 
—  the  compassion  of  an  infinite  heart  brimming  over  with 
an  ocean  of  love.  This  one  thought  moves  the  pity  of 
the  Lord  —  "  if  he  lose  one  of  them." 

The  Seeking  Shepherd.— -A  son  is  taken  ill  far  away 
from  home.  He  is  laid  sick  with  a  fever,  and  a  telegram 
is  sent  home.  His  mother  says  she  must  go  and  nurse 
him;  she  is  wretched  till  she  can  set  out  upon  the 
journey.  It  is  a  dreary  place  where  her  boy  lies,  but 
for  the  moment  it  is  the  dearest  spot  on  earth  to  her. 
She  joys  to  leave  the  comforts  of  her  home  to  tarry 


38      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

among  strangers  for  the  love  of  her  boy.  She  feels 
an  intense  joy  in  sacrificing  herself;  she  refuses  to 
retire  from  the  bedside,  she  will  not  leave  her  charge; 
she  watches  day  and  night,  and  only  from  utter  exhaus 
tion  does  she  fall  asleep.  You  could  not  have  kept  her 
in  England,  she  would  have  been  too  wretched.  It  was 
a  great,  deep,  solemn  pleasure  for  her  to  be  where  she 
could  minister  to  her  own  beloved.  Soul,  remember 
you  have  given  Jesus  great  joy  in  his  saving  you.  He 
was  forever  with  the  Father,  eternally  happy,  infinitely 
glorious,  as  God  over  all;  but  yet  he  must  needs  come 
hither  out  of  boundless  love,  take  upon  himself  our  na 
ture,  and  suffer  in  our  stead  to  bring  us  back  to  holi 
ness  and  God.  "  He  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders  rejoicing." 
That  day  the  shepherd  knew  but  one  joy.  He  had  found 
his  sheep,  and  the  very  pressure  of  it  upon  his  shoulders 
made  his  heart  light,  for  he  knew  by  that  sign  that  the 
object  of  his  care  was  safe  beyond  all  question. 

The  True  Shepherd.— "  The  sheep  follow  him,  for  they 
know  his  voice;  and  a  stranger  will  they  not  follow,  for 
they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers."  I  remember 
hearing  a  brother  tell  how  he  disproved  the  notion  that 
sheep  only  know  the  shepherd  by  his  dress.  When  in 
Palestine  he  asked  a  shepherd  to  allow  him  to  put  on 
his  clothes.  Then  he  began  to  call  the  sheep,  but  never 
a  one  would  come,  not  even  a  lamb.  The  most  sheep 
ish  of  the  flock  had  sense  enough  left  to  know  that  he 
was  not  the  shepherd,  and  even  the  youngest  kept  aloof, 
heedless  of  the  stranger's  voice.  He  might  have  called 
till  he  was  hoarse,  but  they  would  not  come.  So  God's 
people  know  their  Lord,  and  they  know  the  kind  of  food 
which  he  gives  them. 

Christ  the  Plant  of  Renown. —  Did  you  ever  hear  the  leg 
end  of  a  man  whose  garden  produced  nothing  else  but 
weeds,  till  at  last  he  met  with  a  strange  foreign  flower 


CHRIST  39 


of  singular  vitality.  The  story  is  that  he  sowed  a  hand 
ful  of  this  seed  in  his  overgrown  garden,  and  left  it  to 
work  its  own  sweet  way.  He  slept  and  rose,  and  knew 
not  how  the  seed  was  growing  till  on  a  day  he  opened 
the  gate  and  saw  a  sight  which  much  astounded  him. 
He  knew  that  the  seed  would  produce  a  dainty  flower 
and  he  looked  for  it;  but  he  had  little  dreamed  that  the 
plant  would  cover  the  whole  garden.  So  it  was:  the 
flower  had  exterminated  every  weed,  till  as  he  looked 
from  one  end  to  the  other  from  wall  to  wall  he  could 
see  nothing  but  the  fair  colors  of  that  rare  plant,  and 
smell  nothing  but  its  delicious  perfume.  Christ  is  that 
plant  of  renown.  If  he  be  sown  in  the  soil  of  your 
soul,  he  will  gradually  eat  out  the  roots  of  all  ill  weeds 
and  poisonous  plants,  till  over  all  your  nature  there 
shall  be  Christ  in  you. 

Christ  as  King. —  Christ  in  us  is  Christ  reigning.  It  re 
minds  me  of  Mr.  Bunyan's  picture  of  Mansoul,  when 
the  Prince  Immanuel  laid  siege  to  it,  and  Diabolus  from 
within  the  city  strove  to  keep  him  out.  It  was  c,  hard 
time  for  Mansoul  then;  but  when  at  last  the  battering 
rams  had  broken  down  the  gates,  and  the  silver  trum 
pets  sounded,  and  the  prince's  captains  entered  the 
breach,  then  on  a  day  the  prinea  himself  did  ride  down 
the  city's  streets,  while  liberated  citizens  welcomed  him 
with  all  their  hearts,  hung  out  all  their  streamers,  and 
made  the  church  towers  rock  again  as  the  bells  rang  out 
merry  peals,  for  the  king  himself  was  come.  Up  to  the 
castle  of  the  heart  he  rode  in  triumph,  and  took  his  royal 
throne  to  be  henceforth  the  sole  lord  and  king  of  the 
city.  Christ  in  you  is  a  right  royal  word.  Christ 
swaying  his  scepter  from  the  center  of  your  being  over 
every  power  and  faculty,  desire  and  resolve,  bringing 
every  thought  into  captivity  to  himself,  oh,  this  is  glory 
begun,  and  the  sure  pledge  of  heaven.  Oh  for  more 


40     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

of  the  imperial  sovereignty  of  Jesus;  it  is  our  liberty 
to  be  absolutely  under  his  sway. 

Christ  the  Sinner's  Only  Physician.—  Suppose  that  a  man 
has  heard  of  a  great  physician  who  understands  his  com 
plaint.  Ha  has  travelled  a  great  many  miles  to  see  this 
celebrated  doctor;  but  when  he  gets  to  the  door  they  tell 
him  that  he  is  out.  "  Well,"  says  he,  "  then  I  must  wait 
till  he  is  in."  "You  need  not  wait,"  they  reply,  "his 
assistant  is  at  home."  The  suffering  man,  who  has 
been  often  disappointed,  answers,  "  I  do  not  care  about 
his  assistant,  I  want  to  see  the  man  himself:  mine  is  a 
desperate  case,  but  I  have  heard  that  this  physician  has 
cured  the  like;  I  must,  therefore,  see  him.  No  assistants 
for  me."  "Well,"  say  they,  "he  is  out;  but  there  are 
his  books ;  you  can  see  his  books."  "  Thank  you,"  he 
says,  "I  cannot  be  content  with  his  books,  I  want  the 
living  man  and  nothing  less.  It  is  to  him  that  I  must 
speak,  and  from  him  I  will  receive  instructions."  "Do 
you  see  that  cabinet?  "  "  Yes."  "  It  is  full  of  his  med 
icines."  The  sick  man  answers,  "I  dare  say  they  are 
very  good,  but  they  are  of  no  use  to  me  without  the 
doctor:  I  want  their  owner  to  prescribe  for  me,  or  I 
shall  die  of  my  disease."  "  But  see,"  cries  one,  "  here 
is  a  person  who  has  been  cured  by  him,  a  man  of  great 
experience,  who  has  been  present  at  many  remarkable 
operations.  Go  into  the  inquiry-room  with  him,  and 
he  will  tell  you  all  about  the  mode  of  cure."  The  af 
flicted  man  answers,  "  I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  but  all 
your  talk  only  makes  me  long  the  more  to  see  the  doc 
tor.  I  came  to  see  him,  and  I  am  not  going  to  be  put 
off  with  anything  else.  I  must  see  the  man  himself, 
for  myself.  He  has  made  my  disease  a  specialty;  he 
knows  how  to  handle  my  case,  and  I  will  stop  till  I  see 
him." 
Now,  dear  friends,  if  you  are  seeking  Christ,  imitate 


CHRIST  41 


this  sick  man,  or  else  you  may  be  sure  you  will  miss  the 
mark  altogether. 

Christ  Inspires  Enthusiasm. —  When  great  commanders  are 
known  to  have  come  into  a  camp  what  a  thrill  of  joy 
it  causes  among  their  trusty  warriors.  When  the  soldiers 
have  been  much  dejected  it  has  been  whispered  in  their 
tents  — 

"  The  king  has  come  to  marshal  us, 
All  in  his  armor  dressed," 

and  from  that  moment  every  man  has  cheered  up.  At 
the  sight  of  the  king  as  he  comes  riding  into  the  camp 
the  host  raises  a  great  shout.  What  means  it?  It  is 
a  shout  of  loyal  love  —  they  are  glad  to  welcome  their 
leader.  So  is  it  with  us  when  we  sing  — 

"The   King   himself  comes   near," 

we  are  all  as  glad  as  glad  can  be.  Those  who  cannot 
come  out  to  see  their  prince,  because  they  are  lying  on 
their  sick  beds  in  hospital,  clap  their  hands,  while  even 
the  little  children  in  their  mothers'  arms  join  in  the 
general  joy.  "  The  king  is  come,"  say  they,  and  his 
presence  kindles  their  enthusiasm  till  they  make  the 
hills  ring  again.  You  know  how  the  stern  Ironsides 
felt  when  Cromwell  came  along;  every  man  was  a  hero 
when  he  led  the  way.  They  were  ready  for  any  ad 
venture,  no  matter  how  difficult,  as  long  as  their  great 
chief  was  there.  That  enthusiasm  which  was  inspired 
by  Alexander,  and  by  Napoleon,  and  by  other  great 
commanders,  is  the  earthly  image  of  the  spiritual  fervor 
felt  by  the  church  when  the  Lord  Jesus  vouchsafes  to  be 
in  the  midst  of  it. 

Christ's  Delight  in  His  People.— When  Cyrus  took  the 
Greek  ambassador  through  his  garden,  he  challenged 
him  to  admire  its  charms.  The  Spartan  approved  all 


43       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

he  saw,  but  still  his  admiration  was  cool  and  critical. 
"  This  garden,"  said  its  master,  "  yields  me  more  pleasure 
and  satisfaction  than  you  can  imagine  or  I  can  express.'1 
"  And  why  ?  "  asked  the  visitor.  "  Because,"  replied  Cy 
rus,  "I  planted  every  tree  in  it  myself.  I  planned  all 
the  paths,  and  all  the  flowers  have  I  reared.  No  hand 
but  mine  has  dug  the  soil,  tended  the  plants,  pruned  the 
trees,  or  done  aught  beside  but  my  own."  His  toil  and 
his  trouble  thus  endeared  the  place  to  the  king.  So, 
truly,  Christ  can  say  when  he  looks  upon  his  people, 
"  There  is  a  fruitful  bough  there :  I  pruned  that.  He 
was  sick,  long  laid  aside  from  business,  he  feared  his 
family  would  be  starved:  I  was  pruning  him  then;  but 
I  love  the  fruit  that  is  on  him  because  I  know  how  it 
came  there.  That  plant  yonder  which  is  blooming  now 
and  shedding  such  a  sweet  perfume  of  love,  well  do  I 
recollect  when  it  was  drooping  and  ready  to  die.  I  came 
and  watered  it.  She,  timid  disciple,  would  say,  l  Blessed 
be  the  gentle  hand  that  shed  the  dew  and  poured  nour 
ishment  on  my  poor,  parched,  and  withered  root ! " 
Yes,  the  Savior  gives  us  "  grace  for  grace  "  that  we  may 
produce  grace.  I  leave  the  thought  with  you  for  medi 
tation,  and  the  issues  for  your  edification,  only  praying 
earnestly  that  his  Holy  Spirit  may  work  in  you  "  grace 
for  grace." 

Christ  Sufficient  for  AH  Kinds  of  Sinners.— A  worthy, 
consistent,  industrious  woman  was  married  to  a  low, 
worthless,  dissipated  husband.  Both  of  them,  however, 
were  alike  ignorant  of  the  gospel.  They  came  together 
to  the  house  of  prayer;  they  heard  together  the  tidings 
of  mercy;  they  each  believed,  and  each  of  them  received 
the  Savior,  and  they  both  were  saved  the  same  way; 
they  both  found  mercy  on  the  same  terms.  To  the  rich, 
free,  sovereign  grace  of  God  they  vied  with  one  another 
in  ascribing  the  praise. 


CHRIST  43 


Christ  as  a  Ferry-Man. —  A  negro  was  once  sent  by  his 
master  on  an  errand  that  did  not  suit  him;  he  did  not 
want  to  go.  So  when  he  came  to  a  river  he  turned  back, 
and  said,  "  Master,  I  came  to  a  river,  and  I  could  not 
swim  across  it."  "Well,  but  was  there  not  a  ferry 
boat?"  "Yes,  there  was  a  ferry-boat,  but  the  man 
was  on  the  other  side."  "  Well,"  said  the  master,  "  did 
you  call  to  the  ferry-man  to  come  and  take  you  across?  " 
No,  he  did  not  think  of  doing  that,  for,  as  he  did  not  wish 
to  go  over,  he  was  glad  to  find  an  excuse.  Now,  it  is 
true,  sinner,  that  you  cannot  save  yourself,  but  there  is 
One  who  can.  There  is  a  ferry-boat  and  there  is  a 
Ferry -man.  Cry  to  him !  Cry  to  him,—  "  Master,  across 
this  river  be  pleased  to  take  me;  I  cannot  swim  it,  but 
thou  canst  bear  me  over  it.  Oh !  do  for  me  what  I  can 
not  do  for  myself!  Make  me  to  be  accepted  in  the  Be 
loved  !  "  If  you  seek  the  Lord  he  will  be  found  of  you. 

Christ  the  Door. —  I  read  a  story  the  other  day  of  some 
Russians  crossing  wide  plains  studded  over  here  and  there 
with  forests.  The  villages  were  ten  or  a  dozen  miles 
from  each  other,  the  wolves  were  out,  the  horses  were 
rushing  forward  madly,  the  travelers  could  hear  the 
baying  of  the  wolves  behind  them;  and,  tho  the 
horses  tore  along  with  all  speed,  yet  the  wolves  were  fast 
behind,  and  they  only  escaped,  as  we  say,  "by  the  skin 
of  their  teeth,"  managing  just  to  get  inside  some  hut 
that  stood  in  the  road,  and  to  shut-to  the  door.  Then 
they  could  hear  the  wolves  leap  on  the  roof;  they 
could  hear  them  dash  against  the  sides  of  the  hut; 
they  could  hear  them  gnawing  at  the  door,  and  howling, 
and  making  all  sorts  of  dismal  noises;  but  the  travelers 
were  safe,  because  they  had  entered  in  by  the  door,  and 
the  door  was  shut.  Now,  when  a  man  is  in  Christ,  he 
can  hear,  as  it  were,  the  devils  howling  like  wolves,  all 
fierce  and  hungry  for  him ;  and  his  own  sins,  like  wolves^ 


44       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

are  seeking  to  drag  him  down  to  destruction.  But  ht 
has  got  in  to  Christ,  and  that  is  such  a  shelter  that  all 
the  devils  hi  the  world,  if  they  were  to  come  at  once, 
could  not  start  a  single  beam  of  that  eternal  refuge:  it 
must  stand  fast,  tho  the  earth  and  heaven  should 
pass  away.  Now,  to  every  man  and  woman  Christ  says 
that  if  they  have  entered  in  by  the  door,  they  shall  be 
saved. 

Suffering  for  Christ.—  There  was  a  certain  king  whose  son 
was  sent  upon  an  errand  to  a  far  country,  and  when  he 
came  into  that  country,  altho  he  was  the  lawful  prince 
of  it,  he  found  that  the  citizens  would  not  acknowledge 
him.  They  mocked  at  him,  jested  at  him,  and  took  him 
and  set  him  in  the  pillory,  and  there  they  scoffed  at  him 
and  pelted  him  with  filth.  Now,  there  was  one  in  that 
country  who  knew  the  prince,  and  Le  clone  stood  up  for 
him  when  all  the  mob  was  in  tumult  raring  against  him. 
And  when  they  set  him  on  high  as  an  object  of  scorn, 
this  man  stood  side  by  side  with  him  to  wipe  the  filth 
from  that  dear  royal  face;  and  when  from  cruel  hands 
missiles  in  scorn  were  thrown,  this  mm  took  his  full 
share ;  and  whenever  he  could  lie  thrust  Limself  before  the 
prince  to  ward  off  the  blows  from  him  if  possible,  and 
to  bear  the  scorn  instead  of  him.  Now  it  came  to  pass 
that  after  awhile  the  prince  went  on  his  way,  and  in  due 
season  the  man  who  had  been  the  prince's  friend  was 
called  to  the  king's  palace.  And  on  a  day  when  all  the 
princes  of  the  court  were  round  about,  and  the  peers 
and  nobles  of  the  land  were  sitting  in  their  places,  the 
king  came  to  his  throne  and  he  called  for  that  man,  and 
he  said,  "Make  way,  princes  and  nobles!  Make  way! 
Here  is  a  man  more  noble  than  you  all,  for  he  stood 
boldly  forth  with  my  son  when  he  was  scorned  and 
scoffed  at!  Make  way,  I  say,  each  one  of  you,  for  he 
shall  sit  at  my  right  hand  with  my  own  son.  As  he 


CHRIST  45 


took  a  share  of  his  scorn,  he  shall  now  take  a  share  of 
his  honor."  And  there  sat  princes  and  nobles  who 
wished  that  they  had  been  there,  ay !  envied  the  man  who 
had  been  privileged  to  endure  scorn  and  scoffing  for  the 
prince's  sake!  You  need  not  that  I  interpret  the  par 
able.  May  you  make  angels  envious  of  you,  if  envy  can 
ever  pierce  their  holy  minds.  You  can  submit  for 
Christ's  sake  to  sufferings  which  it  is  not  possible  for 
seraphim  or  cherubim  to  endure. 

Christ  the  Root.—  I  like  that  story  of  the  Sandwich  Island 
ers  who  had  been  converted  through  some  of  our  mis 
sionaries,  and  the  Gospel  had  been  preached  to  them  for 
years.  At  last,  two  or  three  gentlemen  in  long  black 
gowns  landed  there,  and  the  people  asked  them  what 
they  had  come  for.  They  said  they  were  come  to  in 
struct  them  in  the  true  faith,  and  to  teach  them.  Well, 
they  said,  they  should  be  glad  to  hear  it.  If  their  teach 
ing  was  true,  and  like  the  Scriptures,  they  would  listen 
to  them.  By  and  by,  a  little  diagram  was  exhibited 
to  the  natives  after  the  similitude  of  a  tree.  This  tree 
had  many  branches.  The  twigs  which  were  farthest  of.! 
were  the  different  saints,  the  believers,  those  who  do  good 
works;  then  the  limbs,  which  were  a  little  larger,  were 
the  priests;  the  bigger  boughs  were  bishops;  the  biggest 
boughs  were  the  cardinals;  and,  at  last,  these  all  joined 
on  to  the  trunk,  which  was  the  Pope,  and  that  went  all 
the  way  down  to  the  bottom,  till  it  came  to  Peter,  who 
was  the  root,  deriving  his  authority  immediately  from 
Christ.  So  the  natives  asked  about  all  these  twigs,  and 
branches,  and  specially  about  certain  rotten  branches 
that  were  tumbling  off  into  a  fire.  What  were  they? 
They  were  Luther,  and  Calvin,  and  other  heretics  who 
had  been  cut  off  from  the  true  tree  of  the  church. 
"  Well,"  said  one  of  the  islanders,  "  and  pray  what  is 
the  root  of  the  tree?"  Of  course?  that  was  allowed  to 


46       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

be  Jesus  Christ.  So  they  clapped  their  hands  at  once 
for  joy,  and  said,  "  Never  mind  about  the  branches,  and 
stems,  and  twigs;  we  have  never  heard  of  them,  but 
we  have  got  the  root,  and  that  will  do  to  grow  on."  In 
like  manner,  brethren,  we  can  say  to-night,  if  we  have 
got  Christ,  we  have  got  "  the  root  out  of  the  dry  ground." 
We  have  got  the  root  of  the  matter,  the  basis,  the  sum, 
the  substance  of  it. 

"  Let  others  trust  what  forms  they  please, 
Their  hopes  we'll  not  contest." 

Christ  Grows  on  His  Disciples. —  So,  when  we  were  car 
nal,  and  did  not  know  King  Jesus,  we  esteemed  him  to 
be  very  much  like  anybody  else,  but  now  we  begin  to 
know  him,  we  find  out  that  he  is  much  greater,  infinitely 
greater  than  we  thought  he  was.  And  as  we  grow  in 
grace,  we  find  him  to  be  more  glorious  still.  A  little 
star  to  our  view  at  first,  he  has  grown  in  our  estimation 
into  a  sun  now,  a  blazing  sun,  by  whose  beams  our  soul 
is  refreshed.  Ah!  but  when  we  get  near  to  him,  what 
will  he  be*?  Imagine  yourself  borne  up  on  an  angel's 
wing  to  take  a  journey  to  a  star.  Traveling  at  an  in 
conceivable  rate  you  open  your  eyes  on  a  sudden  and  say 
—  "  How  wonderful !  Why,  that  which  was  a  star  just 
now  has  become  as  large  to  my  vision,  as  the  sun  at 
noon-day."  "  Stop,"  says  the  angel ;  "  you  shall  see 
greater  things  than  these,"  and,  as  you  speed  on,  the  disc 
of  that  orb  increases,  till  it  is  equal  to  a  hundred  suns; 
and  now  you  say,  "  But  what  f "  Am  I  not  near  it 
now?"  "No,"  says  the  angel,  "that  enormous  globe  is 
still  far,  far  away,"  and  when  you  come  to  it,  you  would 
find  it  to  be  such  a  wondrous  world,  that  arithmetic  could 
not  compute  its  size;  scarcely  could  imagination  belt  it 
with  the  zone  of  fancy.  Now,  such  is  Jesus  Christ.  I 
said  he  grows  upon  his  people  here,  but  what  must 


CHRIST  47 


it  be  to  see  him  there,  where  the  veil  is  lifted,  and  we  be 
hold  him  face  to  face? 

Christ  the  Pole  Star.— There  are  some  of  the  stars  that 
are  extremely  useful  to  sailors.  I  scarcely  know  how  else 
the  great  wide  sea  would  be  navigated,  especially  if  it 
were  not  for  the  Polar  Star.  Jesus  is  the  Polar  Star  to 
us.  How  the  poor  negro  in  the  olden  times,  when  the 
curse  of  slavery  had  not  been  taken  away,  must  have 
blessed  God  for  that  pole  star  —  so  easy  to  find  out. 
Any  child  with  but  a  moment's  teaching  will  soon  know 
how  to  discover  it  in  the  midst  of  its  fellows  at  night, 
and  when  the  negro  had  once  learned  to  distinguish  the 
star  that  shone  over  the  land  of  freedom,  how  he  followed 
it  through  the  great  dismal  swamps,  or  along  the  plains 
which  were  more  dreadful  still;  how  he  could  ford  the 
streams,  and  climb  the  mountains,  always  cheered  by  the 
sight  of  that  pole  star.  Such  is  Jesus  Christ  to  the 
seeker.  He  leads  to  liberty;  he  conducts  to  peace.  Oh! 
I  wish  you  would  follow  him,  some  of  you  who  are  go 
ing  about  a  thousand  ways  to  find  peace  where  you  will 
never  find  it.  There  is  never  a  Sunday  but  I  try  to 
speak,  sometimes  in  gentler  tones,  and  at  other  seasons 
with  thundering  notes,  the  simple  truth  that  Jesus  Christ 
came  into  the  world  to  save  shiners.  I  do  try  to  make 
it  plain  to  you  that  it  is  not  your  prayers  and  tears,  your 
doings,  your  willings,  your  anything,  that  can  save  you, 
but  that  all  your  help  is  laid  upon  one  that  is  mighty, 
and  that  you  must  look  alone  to  him.  Yet,  sinners,  you 
are  still  looking  to  yourselves.  You  rake  the  dung  hills 
of  your  human  nature  to  find  the  pearl  of  great  price 
which  is  not  there.  You  will  look  beneath  the  ice  of 
your  natural  depravity  to  find  the  flame  of  comfort 
which  is  not  there.  You  might  as  well  seek  in  hell  itself 
to  find  heaven  as  look  to  your  own  works  and  merits  to 
find  some  ground  of  trust.  Down  with  them!  Down 


48      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

with  them,  every  one  of  them !  Away  with  all  these  con 
fidences  of  yours,  for 

"None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus, 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 

Just  reverse  that  helm;  and  shift  that  sail,  and  tack 
about!  Follow  not  the  wrecker's  beacon  on  yonder 
shore  luring  you  to  the  rocks  of  self-delusion,  but  where 
that  pole  star  guides,  thither  let  your  vessel  drift,  and 
pray  for  the  favoring  gales  of  the  blessed  Spirit  to  guide 
you  rightly  to  the  port  of  peace. 

Christ  Our  Banner.—  The  banner  was  ever  a  source  of 
consolation  to  the  wounded.  There  he  lies,  the  good 
knight;  right  well  has  he  fought  without  fear  and  with 
out  reproach;  but  a  chance  arrow  pierced  the  joints  of 
his  harness,  and  his  life  is  oozing  out  from  the  ghastly 
wound.  There  is  no  one  there  to  unbuckle  his  helmet 
or  give  him  a  draught  of  cooling  water;  his  frame  is 
locked  up  in  that  hard  case  of  steel,  and  tho  he  feels  the 
smart  he  cannot  gain  the  remedy,  He  hears  the  cries,  the 
mingled  cries,  the  hoarse  shouts  of  men  that  rush  in 
fury  against  their  fellows :  and  he  opens  his  eyes  —  as 
yet  he  has  not  fainted  with  his  bleeding.  Where,  think 
you,  does  he  look?  He  turns  himself  round.  What  is 
he  looking  for?  For  friend?  For  comrade?  No. 
Should  they  come  to  him  he  would  say,  "  Just  lift  me 
up,  and  let  me  sit  against  that  tree  awhile,  and  bleed 
here;  but  go  you  to  the  fight."  Where,  where  is  that 
•  restless  eye  searching,  and  what  is  the  object  for  which 
it  is  looking?  Yes,  he  has  it;  and  the  face  of  the  dying 
man  is  brightened.  He  sees  the  banner  still  waving,  and 
with  his  last  breath  he  cries,  "  On !  on !  on ! "  and  falls 
asleep  content,  because  the  banner  is  safe.  It  has  not 
been  cast  down.  Tho  he  has  fallen,  yet  the  banner  is  se 
cure.  Even  so  every  true  soldier  of  the  cross  rejoices  in 


CHRIST  49 


its  triumph.  We  fall,  but  Christ  does  not.  We  die, 
but  the  cause  prospers.  As  I  have  told  you  before, 
when  my  heart  was  most  sad  —  sad  as  if  never  was  before 
nor  since  —  that  sweet  text,  "  Him  hath  God  the  Father 
exalted,  and  given  him  a  name  that  is  above  every  name," 
quite  cheered  my  soul,  and  set  me  again  in  peace  and 
comfort. 

Christ  the  Center  of  Attack.—  Whenever  the  old  Knights  of 
the  Red  Cross  fought  the  Saracens  they  always  endeav 
ored  to  make  their  steel  ring  upon  the  helmet  of  men 
whose  hand  held  the  crescent,  the  standard  of  Moham 
med;  ever  the  fight  was  bloodiest  around  the  standard.  * 
Sometimes,  when  the  battle  was  over,  if  you  walked  the 
field  you  would  see  it  strewn  with  legs  and  arms  and 
mangled  bodies  everywhere.  In  one  place  there  would 
be  a  heap  where  they  were  piled  one  upon  another,  a 
great  mountain  of  flesh  and  armor,  broken  bones  and 
smashed  skulls,  and  you  would  ask,  "  What  is  this?  How 
came  they  here?  How  trampled  they  so  one  upon 
another,  and  fought  in  pools  of  human  blood?"  The 
answer  would  be,  "  ;Twas  there  the  standard-bearer  stood, 
and  first  the  adversary  made  a  dash  and  stole  the  ban 
ner,  and  then  fifty  knights  vowed  to  redeem  it,  and 
they  dashed  against  their  foes  and  took  it  by  storm,  and 
then  again  hand  to  hand  they  fought  with  the  banner 
between  them,  first  in  one  hand  and  then  in  another, 
changing  ownership  each  hour.  Well,  dear  friends, 
we  must  remember  that  Christ  Jesus  has  always  been  the 
object  of  attack. 

Christ  our  Guide.— When  Mr.  Andrew  Fuller  was  going 
to  preach  before  an  association,  he  rode  to  the  meeting 
on  his  horse.  There  had  been  a  good  deal  of  rain,  and 
the  rivers  were  very  much  swollen.  He  got  to  one  river 
which  he  had  to  cross.  He  looked  at  it,  and  he  was  half 
afraid  of  the  strong  current,  as  he  did  not  know  the 


50      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

depth.  A  fanner,  who  happened  to  be  standing  by, 
said  —"It  is  all  right,  Mr.  Fuller;  you  will  get  through 
it  all  right,  sir;  the  horse  will  keep  its  feet."  Mr.  Fuller 
went  in,  and  the  water  got  up  to  the  girth,  and  then 
up  to  the  saddle,  and  he  began  to  get  uncomfortably  wet. 
Mr.  Fuller  thought  he  had  better  turn  round,  and  he 
was  going  to  do  so,  when  the  same  farmer  shouted  — 
"  Go  on,  Mr.  Fuller ;  go  on ;  I  know  it  is  all  right ; " 
and  Mr.  Fuller  said,  "  Then  I  will  go  on ;  I  will  go  by 
faith."  Now,  sinner,  it  is  very  like  that  with  you.  You 
think  that  your  sins  are  too  deep,  that  Christ  will  never 
be  able  to  carry  you  over  them ;  but,  I  say  to  you  —  It 
is  all  right,  sinner;  trust  Jesus,  and  he  will  carry  you 
thro  hell  itself,  if  it  were  needful  and  possible.  If  you 
had  all  the  sins  of  all  the  men  that  have  ever  lived,  and 
they  were  all  yours,  if  you  could  trust  him,  Jesus  Christ 
would  carry  you  through  the  current  of  all  that  sin.  It 
is  all  right,  man!  Only  trust  Christ.  The  river  may 
be  deep,  but  Christ's  love  is  deeper  still.  It  is  all  right, 
man!  Do  not  let  the  devil  make  you  doubt  my  Lord 
and  Master.  He  is  a  liar  from  the  beginning,  and  the 
father  of  lies,  but  my  Master  is  faithful  and  true.  Rest 
on  him  and  it  is  all  right.  Herein  lies  the  supreme  con 
solation  of  this  earthly  life. 

Loyalty  to  Christ.—  Dr.  Payson  had  once  been  out  to  tea 
with  one  of  his  people,  who  had  been  particularly  hos 
pitable  to  him,  and  when  he  was  going,  the  doctor  said : — 
"  Well,  now,  Madam,  you  have  treated  me  exceedingly 
well,  but  how  do  you  treat  my  Master  ? "  That  is  a 
question  I  should  like  to  put  to  some  of  you.  How  do 
you  treat  my  Master?  Why,  you  treat  him  as  if  he 
were  not  Christ,  as  if  you  did  not  want  him.  But,  you 
do  need  him.  May  you  find  him  soon,  for  when  you  come 
to  die,  you  will  want  him  then,  and  perhaps  then  you 
may  not  find  him. 


CHRIST  51 


Christ  Trustworthy.— There  came  to  me  the  other  day  a 
young  man  who  wished  to  speak  with  me  about  his  soul 
troubles,  and  he  began  thus,  "  Dear  sir,  I  cannot  trust 
Christ."  To  which  I  answered,  "Have  you  found  out 
something  fresh  in  his  character?  Has  he  ceased  to  be 
trustworthy?  Pray  let  me  know  all  about  it,  for  it  is  a 
serious  matter  to  me;  I  have  trusted  him  with  everything 
I  have  for  time  and  for  eternity,  and  if  he  is  not  fit  to 
be  trusted  I  am  in  a  terrible  case."  He  looked  at  me, 
and  he  said,  "I  will  not  say  that  again,  sir;  I  see  I 
have  made  a  mistake.  Truly  the  Lord  Jesus  is  in  every 
way  trustworthy."  "Well,  then,"  I  said,  "Why  can 
not  you  trust  him?"  I  left  him  with  that  unanswerable 
question.  A  man  is  certainly  able  to  trust  one  whom 
he  regards  as  trustworthy.  My  young  friend  saw  that 
at  once,  and  asked  me  further :  "  But  may  I  trust  Christ 
to  save  me?  Am  I  permitted  to  trust  my  soul  with 
him?"  I  said  to  him,  "Is  not  this  the  command  of  the 
gospel:  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved?  And  are  you  not  warned  that  if  you 
do  not  believe  in  him  you  will  be  damned?  How  can 
we  doubt  that  we  are  permitted  to  do  that  which  is  com 
manded  us  of  the  Lord?  I  am  to  preach  the  gospel 
to  every  creature,  and  this  is  the  gospel:— "Believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved ! "  He 
said,  "  So,  then,  if  I  trust  Christ,  he  will  save  me?"  and 
I  replied,  "  Certainly  he  will ;  he  is  the  Savior  of  all 
them  that  put  their  trust  in  him.  He  says,  '  Him  that 
cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out/  It  is  written, 
1  He  that  believeth  on  him  hath  everlasting  life ; '  he 
that  trusts  in  Jesus  is  saved."  He  thanked  me,  and 
saying  that  he  had  found  out  the  secret,  he  went  on  his 
way  rejoicing.  I  told  him  the  gospel;  he  received  it;  and 
he  entered  into  rest. 


52       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Christ  Bringing  Men  Back.— Ah!  we  cannot  always  tell 
when  we  are  driving  poor  souls  away  from  Christ 
Often,  when  we  think  we  are  wooing  we  are  driving 
them  away;  when  we  would  be  winning  to  the  Savior, 
some  harsh  expression  of  ours  frightens  sinners  away 
from  him.  Ah!  poor  soul,  hast  thou  been  driven  awayf 
Dost  thou  understand  and  sympathize  with  what  I  have 
said?  Before  I  knew  the  Lord,  I  could  declare  that  I 
was  driven  away.  Once,  under  a  powerful  sermon,  my 
heart  shook  within  me,  and  was  dissolved  in  the  midst 
of  my  bowels;  I  thought  I  would  seek  the  Lord,  and  I 
bowed  my  knee  and  wrestled,  and  poured  out  my  heart 
before  him.  I  ventured  within  his  sanctuary  to  hear  his 
word,  hoping  that  in  some  favored  hour  he  would  send 
a  precious  promise  to  my  consolation;  but,  ah!  that 
wretched  afternoon  I  heard  a  sermon  wherein  Christ  was 
not;  I  had  no  longer  any  hope.  I  would  have  sipped 
at  that  fountain,  but  I  was  driven  away;  I  felt  that  I 
would  have  believed  in  Christ,  and  I  longed  and  sighed 
for  him.  But,  ah !  that  dreadful  sermon  and  those  dread 
ful  things  that  were  uttered;  my  poor  soul  knew  not 
what  was  truth,  or  what  was  error;  but  I  thought  the 
man  was  surely  preaching  the  truth,  and  I  was  driven 
back.  I  dared  not  go,  I  could  not  believe,  I  could  not 
lay  hold  on  Christ;  I  was  shut  out,  if  no  one  else  was. 
Ts  there  some  one  here  who  has  been  driven  away?  I  may 
have  done  it,  and  I  will  weep  before  God  in  secret  on 
account  of  it.  But  let  me  cheer  you.  Hear  this :  "  I 
will  bring  again  that  which  was  driven  away."  As  surely 
as  you  ever  did  come  once  you  will  be  brought  back 
again;  that  heavenly  hour  shall  once  more  return;  that 
blessed  day  shall  dawn  afresh;  Christ  shall  appear,  and 
his  love  and  mercy  shall  be  bestowed  on  you.  He  has 
drawn  you  once  and  he  will  draw  you  again,  for  God 
never  fails.  He  may,  for  wise  ends  and  purposes,  suf- 


CHRIST  53 


fer  you  to  be  driven  away  once;  but  he  will  ultimately 
bring  you  to  himself,  for  he  has  said,  "  I  will  bring 
again  that  which  was  driven  away." 

Immediate  Healing. —  We  love  the  physician  who  heals 
speedily.  If  you  find  a  skillful  physician  who  can  heal 
you  of  a  sad  disease  even  in  years,  you  go  to  him,  and 
are  thankful.  But  suppose  some  wondrous  man  who 
with  a  touch  could  heal  you,  who  with  the  very  glance 
of  his  eyes  could  make  you  well  at  once,  and  stanch  that 
blood  or  stop  that  disease,  or  turn  aside  that  evil  thing 
and  make  you  well,  would  you  not  go  to  him,  and  feel 
that  he  was  a  great  physician  indeed?  So  with  Christ. 
There  shall  be  a  man  standing  there  with  all  his  sins 
upon  his  head,  and  he  may  yet  go  down  these  stairs  just, 
complete  in  Christ,  without  a  sin,  freed  from  its  damning 
power,  delivered  from  all  his  guilt  and  iniquity,  in  one 
single  instant!  It  is  a  marvelous  thing,  beyond  our 
power  and  comprehension.  It  is  done  in  an  instant. 
God  stamps  it;  the  man  is  pardoned.  He  goes  away  in 
that  same  instant  justified,  as  the  publican  did  when  he 
said,  "Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me,  a  sinner,"  and  re 
ceived  the  mercy  for  which  he  sued. 

Christ  the  Only  Ark  of  Safety.—  Some  animals,  like  the 
camelopard,  whose  heads  are  higher  than  other  animals, 
might  have  to  bow  their  necks  to  go  in  by  the  same 
entrance  as  the  waddling  ducks,  who  naturally  stoop, 
even  as  they  enter  a  ba"rn;  and  so,  some  of  the  lofty 
ones  of  this  world  must  bend  down  their  stiff  necks,  and 
bow  their  proud  heads,  if  they  would  enter  into  the 
church  by  Christ.  Thus,  again,  the  swift  horse  and  the 
slow-paced  snail  must  enter  by  one  door;  so,  too,  the 
scribes  and  pharisees  must  come  in  the  same  way  as  the 
publicans  and  harlots,  or  be  for  ever  excluded. 

All  the  beasts  God  had  chosen  went  in  by  the  one  door 
and  if  any  had  stood  without,  and  said,  "We  shall  not 


54      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

oome  in  that  way,"  they  would  have  been  standing  with 
out  till  the  flood  overtook  and  destroyed  them;  for  there 
was  only  one  door.  There  is  only  one  way  of  salvation, 
and  there  is  only  one  means  of  getting  into  it.  "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  but 
"  he  that  believeth  not,"  whoever  he  be,  must  "  be 
damned."  There  is  no  hope  of  any  other  way  of  salva 
tion.  He  that  cometh  in  by  the  door  shall  be  saved; 
and  Jesus  saith,  "  I  am  the  door." 

CHRISTIANS 

Prosperity  Dangerous.—  Ships  never  strike  on  rocks  out 
in  the  great  deeps.  Children,  perhaps,  may  fancy  that 
a  shallow  sea  is  the  safest,  but  an  old/ sailor  knows  bet 
ter.  While  he  is  off  the  Irish  coast  the  captain  has  to 
keep  a  good  look  out,  but  while  he  is  crossing  the  At 
lantic  he  is  in  far  less  danger.  There  he  has  plenty  of 
sea-room,  and  there  is  no  fear  of  quicksands  or  of  shoals. 
When  the  sailor  enters  the  Thames  he  encounters  first 
one  sand  bank  and  then  another,  and  he  is  in  danger,  but 
out  in  the  deep  water,  where  he  finds  no  bottom,  he  is 
but  little  afraid.  So,  mark  you,  in  the  judgments  of  God. 
When  he  is  dealing  out  affliction  to  us  it  is  the  safest 
possible  sailing  that  a  Christian  can  have.  "  What," 
says  one,  "trial  safe?"  Yes,  very  safe.  The  safest 
part  of  a  Christain's  life  is  the  time  of  his  trial.  "  What, 
when  a  man  is  down  do  you  say  he  is  safe  ?  "  Yes,  for 
then  he  need  fear  no  fall;  when  he  is  low  he  need  fear 
no  pride;  when  he  is  humbled  under  God's  hand  then 
he  is  less  likely  to  be  carried  away  with  every  wind  of 
temptation.  Smooth  water  on  the  way  to  heaven  is  al 
ways  a  sign  that  the  soul  should  keep  wide  awake,  for 
danger  is  near.  One  comes  at  last  to  feel  a  solemn 
dread  creeping  over  one  in  times  of  prosperity.  "  Thou 
shalt  fear  and  tremble  because  of  all  the  good  that  God 


CHRISTIANS  55 


shall  make  to  pass  before  thee,"  fearing  not  BO  much 
lest  the  good  should  depart  as  lest  we  should  make  an 
ill  use  of  it,  and  should  have  a  canker  of  sloth,  or  self- 
confidence,  or  worldliness  growing  up  in  our  spirits.  We 
have  seen  many  professed  Christians  make  shipwreck,  in 
some  few  instances  it  has  been  attributable  to  overwhelm 
ing  sorrow,  but  in  ten  cases  to  the  one  it  has  been  at 
tributable  to  prosperity. 

The  Idle  Christian  a  Hindrance. —  Many  church  members 
think  that  if  they  do  nothing  wrong,  and  make  no 
trouble,  then  they  are  all  right.  Not  at  all,  sir;  not  at 
all.  Here  is  a  chariot,  and  we  are  all  engaged  to  drag 
it.  Some  of  you  do  not  put  out  your  hands  to  pull; 
well,  then,  the  rest  of  us  have  to  labor  so  much  the  more ; 
and  the  worst  of  it  is  we  have  to  draw  you  also.  While 
you  do  not  add  to  the  strength  which  draws,  you  in 
crease  the  weight  that  is  to  be  drawn.  It  is  all  very  well 
for  you  to  say,  "  But  I  do  not  hinder ;  "  you  do  hinder, 
you  cannot  help  hindering.  If  a  man's  leg  does  not  help 
him  in  walking,  it  certainly  hinders  him. 

The  Righteous  Safe. —  A  certain  carping  infidel,  after  hav 
ing  argued  with  a  poor  countryman  who  knew  the  faith, 
but  who  knew  little  else,  said  to  him,  "  Well,  Hodge,  you 
really  are  so  stupid  that  there  is  no  use  of  arguing  with 
you,  I  cannot  get  you  out  of  this  absurd  religion  of 
yours."  "  Ah !  well,"  said  Hodge,  "  I  dare  say  I  am 
stupid,  master,  but  do  you  know  we  poor  people  like 
to  have  two  strings  to  our  bow  ? "  "  Well,"  said  the 
critic,  "what  do  you  mean  by  that?"  "Master,  Til 
show  you.  Suppose  it  should  all  turn  out  as  you  say; 
suppose  there  is  no  God,  and  there  is  no  hereafter,  don't 
you  see  I  am  as  well  off  as  you  are?  Certainly,  it  will 
not  be  any  worse  for  me  than  it  will  be  for  you,  if  we 
both  of  us  get  annihilated.  But  don't  you  see  if  it  should 
happen  to  be  true  as  I  believe,  what  will  become  of 


56       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

you!  "  Clearly  in  either  case  it  must  be  right  with  the 
righteous;  for  if  he  should  have  ignorantly  received  a 
cunningly  devised  fable,  yet,  seeing  according  to  his  own 
experience,  it  makes  him  a  better  and  a  happier  man,  so 
far  so  good  —  he  is  no  loser  here ;  and  he  will  be  cer 
tainly  at  the  last  in  no  worse  a  position  than  the  man 
who  rejected  the  holy  and  comfortable  influences  of  what 
he  styled  a  deception.  While,  if  the  religion  of  Jesus 
should  be  true  —  ah !  ghastly  IF  for  you  who  doubt  it?  — 
if  it  should  all  be  true,  ah !  then  your  weeping  and  your 
wailing  at  the  discovery  will  be  a  terrible  contrast  to  the 
joy  and  glory  which  God  has  reserved  for  them  that  love 
him.  Upon  the  very  lowest  possible  ground  it  will  be  well 
with  the  righteous,  as  well  at  any  rate  as  with  the  best 
of  other  men. 

Impressions  Easily  Wear  Away. —  I  stood  once  by  the  side 
of  a  poor  boy,  whom  I  had  taught  as  a  Sunday-school 
teacher;  he  had  received  very  little  good  training  at 
home,  and  tho  he  was  but  a  lad  of  seventeen,  he  became 
a  drunkard  and  drank  himself  to  death  at  one  debauch. 
I  saw  him,  and  talked  to  him,  and  tried  to  point  him 
to  the  Savior,  and  heard  at  last  the  death-throttle  in  his 
throat,  and  as  I  went  down  stairs  I  thought  everybody 
a  fool  for  doing  anything  except  preparing  to  die.  I 
began  to  look  upon  the  men  who  drove  the  carts  in  the 
streets  the  men  who  were  busy  at  their  shops,  and  those 
who  were  selling  their  wares,  as  being  all  foolish  for 
doing  anything  except  their  eternal  business,  and  myself 
most  of  all  foolish  for  not  pointing  dying  sinners  to  a 
living  Christ,  and  inviting  them  to  trust  in  his  precious 
blood.  And  yet,  in  an  hour  all  things  took  their  usual 
shape,  and  I  began  to  think  that  I  was  not  dying  after 
all,  and  I  could  go  away  and  be,  I  fear,  as  heartless  as 
before. 


CHRISTIANS  57 


Perseverance. —  How  do  I  know  the  winner  at  the  foot 
race?  There  are  the  spectators,  and  there  are  the  run 
ners.  What  strong  men !  what  magnificent  muscles !  what 
thews  and  sinews!  Yonder  is  the  goal;  and  there  it  is 
that  I  must  judge  who  is  the  winner:  not  here,  at  the 
starting-point;  for  "They  which  run  in  a  race  run  all, 
but  one  receiveth  the  prize."  I  may  select  this  one,  or 
that  other  person,  as  likely  to  win,  but  I  cannot  be  abso 
lutely  sure  until  the  race  is  over.  There  they  fly!  See 
how  they  press  forward,  with  straining  muscles!  But 
one  has  tripped,  another  faints,  a  third  is  out  of  breath, 
and  others  are  far  behind.  One  only  wins  —  and  who 
is  he?  Why,  he  who  continued  to  the  end.  So  I  may 
gather  from  the  analogy,  which  Paul  constantly  allows 
us,  from  the  ancient  games,  that  only  he  who  continueth 
till  he  reaches  the  goal  may  be  accounted  a  Christian  at 
all.  A  ship  starts  on  a  voyage  to  Australia:  if  it  stops 
at  Madeira,  or  returns  after  reaching  the  Cape,  would 
you  consider  that  it  ought  to  be  called  an  emigrant  ship 
for  New  South  Wales?  It  must  go  the  whole  voyage, 
or  it  does  not  deserve  the  name.  A  man  has  begun  to 
build  a  house,  and  has  erected  one  side  of  it:  do  you 
consider  him  a  builder  if  he  stops  there,  and  fails  to 
cover  it  in  or  to  finish  the  other  walls?  Do  we  give 
men  praise  for  being  warriors  because  they  know  how 
to  make  one  desperate  charge,  but  lose  the  campaign? 
Have  we  not,  of  late,  smiled  at  the  boasting  despatches 
of  commanders,  in  fights  where  both  combatants  fought 
with  valor,  and  yet  neither  of  them  had  the  common 
sense  to  push  on  to  reap  the  victory?  What  was  the 
very  strength  of  Wellington,  but  that,  when  a  triumph 
had  been  achieved,  he  knew  how  to  reap  the  harvest 
which  had  been  sown  in  blood?  And  he  only  is  a  true 
conqueror,  and  shall  be  crowned  at  the  last,  who  con 
tinueth  till  war's  trumpet  is  blown  no  more.  It  is 


58       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

with  a  Christian  as  it  was  with  the  great  Napoleon: 
he  said,  "  Conquest  has  made  me  what  I  am,  and  con 
quest  must  maintain  me."  So,  under  God,  conquest  has 
made  you  what  you  are,  and  conquest  must  sustain 
you.  Your  motto  must  be,  "  Excelsior ; "  or,  if  it  be 
not,  you  have  not  learned  the  noble  spirit  of  God's 
princes. 

Did  Not  Really  Wish  to  Die. —  A  missionary  told  me  the 
story  of  an  old  negro  woman  in  Jamaica  who  used  to  be 
continually  singing,  "  Angel  Gabriel,  come  and  take  Aunty 
Betsy  home  to  glory,"  but  when  some  wicked  wag  knocked 
at  the  door  at  the  dead  of  night,  and  told  her  the  angel 
Gabriel  was  come  for  Aunty  Betsy,  she  said,  "  She  lives 
next  door."  I  am  afraid  it  may  possibly  be  so  with  us, 
that  though  we  think  we  wish  the  waves  of  Jordan  to 
divide  that  we  may  be  landed  on  the  other  shore,  we  linger 
on  the  bank  shivering  still. 

The  Christian's  Secret.— I  have  looked  at  this  rest  after 
rest  as  being  a  treasure  concealed  in  a  precious  box.  The 
Lord  Jesus  give  to  his  people  a  priceless  casket,  called 
the  gift  of  rest;  it  is  set  with  brilliants  and  inlaid  with 
gems,  and  the  substance  thereof  is  of  wrought  gold ;  who 
soever  possesses  it  feels  and  knows  that  his  warfare  is 
accomplished  and  his  sin  is  pardoned.  After  awhile  the 
happy  owner  begins  to  examine  his  treasure.  It  is  all 
his  own,  but  he  has  not  yet  seen  it  all,  for  one  day  he 
detects  a  secret  drawer,  he  touches  a  hidden  spring,  and 
lo!  before  him  lies  a  priceless  Koh-i-noor  surpassing  all 
the  rest.  It  had  been  given  him  it  is  certain,  but  he  had 
not  seen  it  at  first,  and  therefore  he  finds  it.  Jesus  Christ 
gives  us  in  the  gift  of  himself  all  the  rest  we  can  enjoy, 
even  heaven's  rest  lies  in  him;  but  after  we  have  received 
him  we  have  to  learn  his  value,  and  find  out  by  the  teach 
ing  of  his  Spirit  the  fulness  of  the  rest  which  he  bestows. 


CHRISTIANS  39 


Vagrant  Thoughts. —  I  remember  a  certain  narrow  and 
crooked  lane  in  a  certain  country  town,  along  which  I 
was  walking  one  day,  while  I  was  seeking  the  Savior.  On 
a  sudden  the  most  fearful  oaths  that  any  of  you  can 
conceive  rushed  through  my  mind.  I  put  my  hand  to  my 
mouth  to  prevent  the  utterance.  I  had  not,  that  I  know 
of,  ever  heard  these  words;  and  I  am  certain  that  I  had 
never  used  in  my  life,  from  my  youth  up,  so  much  as  one 
of  them,  for  I  had  never  been  profane.  But  these  things 
sorely  beset  me;  for  half  an  hour  together  the  most  fear 
ful  imprecations  would  dash  through  my  brain.  Oh,  how 
I  groaned  and  cried  before  God.  That  temptation  passed 
away ;  but  ere  many  days  it  was  renewed  again ;  and  when 
I  was  in  prayer,  or  when  I  was  reading  the  Bible,  these 
blasphemous  thoughts  would  pour  in  upon  me  more  than 
at  any  other  time.  I  consulted  with  an  aged  godly  man 
about  it.  He  said  to  me,  "  Oh,  all  this  many  of  the  peo 
ple  of  God  have  proved  before  you.  "  But,"  said  he, 
"do  you  hate  these  thoughts'?"  "I  do,"  I  truly  said. 
"  Then,"  said  he,  "  they  are  not  yours ;  serve  them  as  the 
old  parishes  used  to  do  with  vagrants  —  whip  them  and 
send  them  on  to  their  own  parish.  Groan  over  them,  re 
pent  of  them,  and  send  them  on  to  the  devil,  the  father, 
to  whom  they  belong  —  for  they  are  not  yours."  Do  you 
not  recollect  how  John  Bunyan  hits  off  the  picture?  He 
says,  when  Christian  was  going  through  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  "  There  stepped  up  one  to  him,  and 
whispered  blasphemous  thoughts  into  his  ear,  so  that  poor 
Christian  thought  they  were  his  own  thoughts;  but  they 
were  not  his  thoughts  at  all,  but  the  injections  of  a  blas 
phemous  spirit."  So  when  you  are  about  to  lay  hold  on 
Christ,  Satan  will  ply  all  his  engines  and  try  to  destroy 
you.  He  cannot  bear  to  lose  one  of  his  slaves;  he  will 
invent  a  fresh  temptation  for  each  believer,  so  that  he  muy 
not  put  his  trust  in  Christ." 


60       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Persecution  the  Fertilizer  of  Religion.—  George  Whitefield 
said,  when  he  preached  on  Kennington  Common,  where 
they  threw  dead  cats  and  rotten  eggs  at  him,  "  This  is 
only  the  manure  of  Methodism,  the  best  thing  in  the  world 
to  make  it  grow ;  throw  away  as  fast  as  you  please."  And 
when  a  stone  cut  him  on  the  forehead,  he  seemed  to  preach 
the  better  for  a  little  blood-letting. 

Sham  Religion.—  It  was  but  a  little  while  ago  that  I  had  in 
my  house  a  gentleman,  an  excellent  man,  and  I  believe  a 
true  child  of  God,  who  told  me  he  had  been  brought  seri 
ously  under  impression,  on  account  of  sin,  through  hear 
ing  a  sermon  of  late.  "  But,"  said  he,  "  I  was  baptized 
in  my  childhood.  When  I  was  but  young,  there  was  a 
revival  in  our  village,  in  New  England.  Mine  was  the 
hardest  heart  in  our  village;  but  I  was  found  out  at  last. 
There  was  scarcely  a  girl  or  boy  that  did  not  join  the 
church,  and  I  was  at  last  brought  under  deep  impression. 
I  used  to  weep  before  God,  and  pray  to  him.  I  went  to 
the  minister  and  told  him  I  was  converted,  deceived  him, 
and  was  baptized."  And  then  he  went  on  to  tell  me  that 
he  had  dived  into  the  blackest  crimes,  and  gone  far  away, 
even  from  the  profession  of  religion;  that  after  going 
to  college  he  had  been  struck  off  the  church-roll  on  ac 
count  of  wickedness,  and  that  up  to  this  time  he  had  been 
an  infidel,  and  had  not  so  much  as  thought  of  the  things 
of  the  kingdom.  Take  heed,  many  of  you,  that  you  do 
not  get  a  sham  religion.  Many  jump  into  godliness  as 
they  would  into  a  bath;  but  they  are  very  glad  to  jump 
out  of  it  again,  when  they  find  the  world  pays  them 
better. 

Indifference  to  Slander.—  It  often  happens,  when  the  devil 
cannot  ruin  a  man  by  getting  him  to  commit  a  sin,  he 
attempts  to  slander  him ;  he  sends  a  hawk  after  him,  and 
tries  to  bring  him  down  by  slandering  his  good  name.  I 
will  give  you  a  piece  of  advice,  I  know  a  good,  minister, 


CHRISTIANS  61 


now  in  venerable  old  age,  who  was  once  most  villainously 
lied  against  and  slandered  by  a  man  who  had  hated  him 
only  for  the  truth's  sake.  The  good  man  was  grieved; 
he  threatened  the  slanderer  with  a  lawsuit,  unless  he 
apologized.  He  did  apologize.  The  slander  was  printed 
in  the  papers  in  a  public  apology;  and  you  know  what 
was  the  consequence.  The  slander  was  more  believed 
than  if  he  had  said  nothing  about  it.  And  I  have  learned 
this  lesson  —  to  do  with  the  slanderous  hawk  what  the 
little  birds  do,  just  fly  up.  The  hawk  can  not  do  them 
any  hurt  while  they  can  keep  above  him  —  it  is  only  when 
they  come  down  that  he  can  injure  them.  It  is  only 
when  by  mounting  he  gets  above  the  birds,  that  the  hawk 
comes  sweeping  down  upon  them,  and  destroys  them. 
If  any  slander  you,  do  not  come  down  to  them;  let  them 
slander  on. 

A  Christian  Home.—  A  religious  house  is  the  best  proof  of 
true  piety.  It  is  not  my  chapel,  it  is  my  house  —  it  is 
not  my  minister,  it  is  my  home-companion  who  can  best 
judge  me ;  it  is  the  servant,  the  child,  the  wife,  the  friend, 
that  can  discern  most  of  my  real  character.  A  good 
man  will  improve  his  household.  Rowland  Hill  once 
said,  he  would  not  believe  a  man  to  be  a  true  Christian 
if  his  wife,  his  children,  the  servants,  and  even  the  dog 
and  cat,  were  not  the  better  for  it.  That  is  being  re 
ligious.  If  your  household  is  not  the  better  for  your 
Christianity  —  if  men  cannot  say,  "  This  is  a  better  house 
than  others,"  then  be  not  deceived  —  ye  have  nothing  of 
the  grace  of  God.  Let  not  your  servant,  on  leaving  your 
employ,  say,  "Well,  this  is  a  queer  sort  of  a  religious 
family;  there  was  no  prayer  in  the  morning,  I  began  the 
day  with  my  drudgery;  there  was  no  prayer  at  night,  I 
was  kept  at  home  all  the  Sabbath-day.  Once  a  fort 
night,  perhaps,  I  was  allowed  to  go  out  in  the  after 
noon,  when  there  was  nowhere  to  go  where  I  could  hear 


62       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

a  gospel  sermon.  My  master  and  mistress  went  to  a 
place  where  of  course  they  heard  the  blessed  gospel  of 
God  —  that  was  all  for  them ;  as  for  me,  I  might  have 
the  dregs  and  leavings  of  some  overworked  curate  in  the 
afternoon."  Surely,  Christian  men  will  not  act  in  that 
way.  No!  Carry  out  your  godliness  in  the  heart  of 
your  own  family. 

A  Worldly  Christian.—  No  man  can  serve  God  and  mam 
mon  because  there  is  not  enough  life  in  the  heart  to  serve 
the  two.  Alas!  many  people  try  this,  and  they  fail  both 
ways.  I  have  known  a  man  who  has  tried  to  let  some 
of  his  heart  run  into  the  world,  and  another  part  he 
allowed  to  drip  into  the  church,  and  the  effect  has  been 
this:  When  he  came  into  the  church  he  was  suspected 
of  hypocrisy.  "  Why,"  they  said,  "  if  he  were  truly  with 
us,  could  he  have  done  yesterday  what  he  did,  and  then 
come  and  profess  so  much  to-day  ?  "  The  church  looks 
upon  him  as  a  suspicious  one :  or  if  he  deceive  them  they 
feel  he  is  not  of  much  use  to  them,  because  they  have  not 
got  all  his  heart.  What  is  the  effect  of  his  conduct  in 
the  world?  Why,  his  religion  is  a  fetter  to  him  there. 
The  world  will  not  have  him,  and  the  church  will  not 
have  him;  he  wants  to  go  between  the  two,  and  both 
despise  him.  I  never  saw  anybody  try  to  walk  on  both 
sides  of  the  street  but  a  drunken  man:  be  tried  it,  and 
it  was  very  awkward  work  indeed;  but  I  have  seen  many 
people  in  a  moral  point  of  view  try  to  walk  on  both  sides 
of  the  street,  and  I  thought  there  was  some  kitid  of  in 
toxication  in  them,  or  else  they  would  have  given  it  up 
as  a  very  foolish  thing.  Now,  if  I  thought  thh  world 
and  the  pleasures  thereof  worth  my  seeking,  I  wouM  just 
seek  them  and  go  after  them,  and  I  would  not  pietend 
to  be  religious;  but  if  Christ  be  Christ,  and  if  God  b<9 
God,  let  us  give  our  whole  hearts  to  him,  and  not  go 
shares  with  the  world. 


CHRISTIANS  63 


The  Christian's  Victory.—  Victory !  There  is  something 
beautiful  in  that  word.  The  death  of  Sir  John  Moore, 
in  the  Peninsular  war,  was  very  touching:  he  fell  in  the 
arms  of  triumph;  and  sad  as  was  his  fate,  I  doubt  not 
that  his  eye  was  lit  up  with  luster  by  the  shout  of  victory. 
So  also,  I  suppose,  that  Wolfe  spoke  a  truth,  when  he 
said,  "  I  die  happy  "—  having  just  before  heard  the  shout, 
"  they  run,  they  run."  I  know  victory,  even  in  that  bad 
sense  —  for  I  look  not  upon  earthly  victories  as  of  any 
value  —  must  have  cheered  the  warrior.  But,  ah !  how 
cheered  the  saint,  when  he  knows  that  victory  is  his!  I 
shall  fight  during  all  my  life,  but  I  shall  write  "  vici " 
on  my  shield.  I  shall  be  "  more  than  conqueror  through 
him  that  loved  me."  Each  feeble  saint  shall  win  the 
day;  each  man  upon  his  crutches;  each  lame  one;  each 
one  full  of  infirmity,  sorrow,  sickness,  and  weakness, 
shall  gain  the  victory.  "  They  shall  come  with  singing 
into  Sion;  as  well  the  blind,  and  lame,  and  halt,  and  the 
woman  with  child,  together."  So  saith  the  Scripture. 
Not  one  shall  be  left  out ;  but  he  shall  "  bring  forth  judg 
ment  unto  victory."  Victory!  victory!  victory!  This  is 
the  lot  of  each  Christian:  he  shall  triumph  through  his 
dear  Redeemer's  name. 

Unwilling  Doubts  not  Sins.—  You  that  are  vexed  at  your 
own  doubts  are  not  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
Lord  utterly  rejects  you.  He  discriminates  between  the 
folly  of  a  child  and  the  wickedness  of  a  rebel :  he  knows 
what  is  in  your  heart,  and  knows  that  you  are  his.  You 
are  like  a  ship  that  is  well  anchored,  and  tho  the  tide  ia 
rushing  in,  and  makes  your  vessel  roll  from  side  to  side, 
so  that  you  yourself  stagger,  yet  the  vessel  is  not  loosed 
from  its  moorings,  neither  are  you  in  any  danger.  Your 
faith  is  fixed  on  Christ,  and  this  anchor  holds  you;  tho 
you  are  tossed  about  a  little,  you  will  suffer  no  ship 
wreck  because  of  sin,  but  much  sea-sickness  because  of 
folly. 


64       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Making  Idols  of  Children. —  A  mother  who  had  lost  her 
babe  fretted  and  rebelled  about  it.  She  happened  to  be 
in  a  meeting  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  there  was 
nothing  spoken  that  morning  except  this  word  by  one 
female  Friend,  who  was  moved,  I  doubt  not,  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  to  say,  "  Verily,  I  perceive  that  children  are 
idols."  She  did  not  know  the  condition  of  that  mourn 
er's  mind,  but  it  was  the  right  word,  and  she  to  whom 
God  applied  it  knew  how  true  it  was.  She  submitted 
her  rebellious  will,  and  then,  as  if  it  were  magic,  was 
at  once  comforted. 

Attractive  Christians.—  They  used  in  the  old  times  to  catch 
pigeons  and  send  them  out  with  sweet  unguents  on  their 
wings:  other  pigeons  followed  them  into  the  dovecote  for 
the  sake  of  their  perfume,  and  so  were  captured.  I 
would  that  every  one  of  us  had  the  heavenly  anointing 
on  our  wings,  the  divine  perfumes  of  peace,  and  joy, 
and  rest;  for  then  others  would  be  fascinated  to  Jesus, 
allured  to  heaven. 

Changeable  Christians.— I  knew  a  Christian  man  right 
well  to  whom  I  was  accustomed  to  use  one  salutation 
whenever  I  saw  him.  He  was  a  good  man,  but  change 
able.  I  said  to  him,  "  Good  morning,  friend !  what  are 
you  now  ? "  He  was  once  a  valiant  Arminian,  setting 
young  people  right  as  to  the  errors  of  my  Calvinistic 
teaching.  A  short  time  after,  he  became  exceedingly 
Calvinistic  himself,  and  wanted  to  screw  me  up  several 
degrees;  but  I  declined  to  yield.  Anon  he  became  a 
Baptist,  and  agreed  with  me  on  all  points,  so  far  as  I 
know.  This  was  not  good  enough,  and  therefore  he  be 
came  a  Plymouth  Brother:  and  after  that  he  went  to 
the  Church  from  which  he  originally  set  out.  When  I 
next  met  him  I  said,  "  Good  morning,  brother,  what  are 
you  now?"  He  replied,  "That  is  too  bad,  Mr.  Spur- 


CHRISTIANS  65 


geon;  you  asked  me  the  same  question  last  time."  I 
replied,  "Did  I?  But  what  are  you  now?  Will  the 
same  answer  do  t "  I  knew  it  would  not.  I  would 
earnestly  say  to  all  such  brethren,  "Be  sober."  It  can 
not  be  wise  to  stagger  all  over  the  road  in  this  fashion. 
Make  sure  of  your  footing  when  you  stand ;  make  doubly 
sure  of  it  before  you  shift. 

Folly  of  "  the  Blues."—  A  sick  and  suffering  brother  re 
buked  me  the  other  day  for  being  cast  down.  He  said 
to  me,  "  We  ought  never  to  show  the  white  feather :  but 
I  think  you  do  sometimes."  I  asked  him  what  he  meant, 
and  he  replied,  "  You  sometimes  seem  to  grow  despond 
ing  and  low.  Now  I  am  near  to  die,  but  I  have  no 
clouds  and  no  fears."  I  rejoiced  to  see  him  so  joyous, 
and  I  answered,  "  That  is  right,  my  brother,  blame  me 
as  much  as  you  please  for  my  unbelief,  I  richly  deserve 
it."  "Why,"  he  said,  "you  are  the  father  of  many  of 
us.  Did  you  not  bring  me  and  my  friend  over  yonder 
to  Christ*  If  you  get  low  in  spirit  after  so  much  bless 
ing,  you  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  yourself."  I  could  say 
no  other  than,  "  I  am  ashamed  of  myself,  and  I  desire 
to  be  more  confident  in  the  future."  Brethren,  we  must 
hope,  and  not  fear. 

Sent  of  God. —  Strengthen  your  soul  upon  the  persuasion 
that  God  has  sent  you,  and  then  go  forward.  If  God 
has  sent  you,  who  can  stand  against  you?  A  Queen's 
messenger  claims  that  we  clear  the  road  for  him.  An 
officer  who  bears  the  Queen's  authority  is  authorized  to 
lay  all  persons  under  orders  to  speed  him.  He  who 
rides  on  royal  business  has  precedence  over  all  others. 
Get  to  feel,  Christian  friend,  that  Jesus  has  sent  you, 
and  herein  will  lie  food  for  your  courage.  Know  that 
you  have  a  mission,  and  go  at  it;  and  let  it  be  unsafe 
for  any  one  to  stand  in  your  way.  Let  opposers  know 
that  somebody  will  have  to  clear  out;  for  if  God  sent 


66       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

you,  in  that  sending  there  is  a  force  and  an  energy  which 
nothing  can  safely  resist.  Do  not  make  a  noise.  For 
bear  all  blustering;  but  quietly  set  yourself  to  work.  If 
God  has  sent  you,  you  will  be  like  the  greater  Sent  One, 
of  whom  we  read,  "  He  shall  not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor 
cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets,"  but  at  the 
same  time  "  he  shall  not  fail,  nor  be  discouraged." 
The  Martyr's  Victory.—  There  is  a  martyr  in  prison :  the 
chains  are  on  his  wrists,  and  yet  he  sings.  It  has  been 
announced  to  him  that  to-morrow  is  his  burning  day. 
He  claps  his  hands  right  merrily,  and  smiles  while  he 
says,  "  It  will  be  sharp  work  tomorrow,  I  shall  breakfast 
below  on  fiery  tribulations,  but  afterward  I  will  sup  with 
Christ.  Tomorrow  is  my  wedding  day,  the  day  for  which 
I  have  long  panted,  when  I  shall  sign  the  testimony  of 
my  life  by  a  glorious  death."  The  time  is  come;  the  men 
with  the  halberts  precede  him  through  the  streets.  Mark 
the  serenity  of  the  martyr's  countenance.  He  turns  to 
some  who  look  upon  him,  and  exclaims,  "  I  value  these 
iron  chains  far  more  than  if  they  had  been  of  gold;  it  is 
a  sweet  thing  to  die  for  Christ."  There  are  a  few  of 
the  boldest  of  the  saints  gathered  round  the  stake,  and 
as  he  unrobes  himself,  ere  he  stands  upon  the  fagots  to 
receive  his  doom,  he  tells  them  that  it  is  a  joyous  thing 
to  be  a  soldier  of  Christ,  to  be  allowed  to  give  his  body 
to  be  burned;  and  he  shakes  hands  with  them,  and  bids 
them  "  Good-by  "  with  merry  cheer.  One  would  think  he 
were  going  to  a  bridal,  rather  than  to  be  burned.  He 
steps  upon  the  fagots;  the  chain  is  put  about  his  mid 
dle;  and  after  a  brief  word  of  prayer,  as  soon  as  the 
fire  begins  to  ascend,  he  speaks  to  the  people  with  man 
ful  boldness.  But  hark!  he  sings  whilst  the  fagots  are 
crackling  and  the  smoke  is  blowing  upward.  He  sings, 
and  when  his  nether  parts  are  burned,  he  still  goes  on 
chanting  sweetly  some  psalm  of  old.  "  God  is  our  refuge 


CHRISTIANS  67 


and  strength,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble;  therefore 
will  we  not  fear,  though  the  earth  be  removed  and  the 
mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea." 

Run  When  You  Cannot  Fly. —  Now,  you  are  not  com 
manded  in  the  text  to  be  always  in  such  a  high,  exalted, 
rapturous  state  of  mind  as  that.  "  Rejoice  evermore," 
but  you  cannot  always  rejoice  at  that  rate.  I  have  said 
that  you  cannot,  and  I  mean  it  literally.  There  is  a 
physical  impossibility  in  it.  The  strain  upon  the  mind 
would  be  much  too  great.  We  could  not  live  in  such  a 
condition  of  excitement  and  tension.  Sometimes  we  can 
swim  in  the  deep  waters;  but  who  can  always  swim? 
We  can  take  to  ourselves  the  wings  of  eagles,  and  soar 
beyond  the  stars;  but  we  are  not  condors,  and  cannot 
always  fly:  we  are  more  like  the  sparrows  which  find  a 
house  near  the  altar  of  God.  When  we  cannot  mount  as 
on  wings,  we  think  it  quite  sufficient  if  we  can  run  with 
out  weariness,  and  walk  without  fainting. 

God's  Special  Care.— I  think  that  many  of  you  may  say, 
"  Though  I  am  least  of  all  his  saints,  yet  in  some  respects 
the  Lord  hath  specially  blessed  me  hitherto."  I  believe 
that  every  flower  in  a  garden,  which  is  tended  by  a  wise 
gardener,  could  tell  of  some  particular  care  that  the  gar 
dener  takes  of  it.  He  does  for  the  dahlia  what  he  does 
not  for  the  sunflower;  somewhat  is  wanted  by  the  rose 
that  is  not  required  by  the  lily;  and  the  geranium  calls 
for  an  attention  which  is  not  given  to  the  honeysuckle. 
Each  flower  wins  from  the  gardener  a  special  culture. 
The  vine  has  a  dressing  all  its  own,  and  the  apple-tree 
a  pruning  peculiar  to  itself. 

Gloomy  Days  Our  Own  Fault. —  We  have  a  deep  river  of 
delights  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  yet  we  are  content  to 
paddle  about  its  shores.  We  are  only  up  to  our  ankles, 
the  most  of  us,  whereas  the  waters  are  "waters  to  swim 
in."  A  great  sun  of  everlasting  love  shines  upon  the 


68       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

globe  of  our  life  with  tropical  force,  but  we  get  away 
to  the  North  Pole  of  doubt  and  fear,  and  then  com 
plain  that  the  sun  has  such  little  heat,  or  that  he  is  so 
long  below  the  horizon.  He  who  will  not  go  to  the  fire 
ought  not  to  complain  that  the  room  is  cold. 
Present  Victory.—  We  have  seen  the  artist  make  with  his 
pencil,  or  with  his  charcoal,  a  bare  outline  of  his  pic 
ture.  It  is  nothing  more,  but  still  one  could  guess  what 
the  finished  picture  will  be  from  the  sketch  before  you. 
One  acquainted  with  the  artist  could  see  upon  the  canvas 
all  the  splendor  of  color  peeping  through  the  dark  lines 
of  the  pencil.  Now,  I  want  you  to-day  to  see  "  the  pat 
terns  of  things  in  the  heavens."  We  have  much  of 
heaven  here;  at  any  rate,  we  have  the  Lamb  who  is  the 
glory  of  the  eternal  city;  we  have  the  presence  of  him 
that  sits  upon  the  throne  among  us  CTCU  now;  we  have 
if  not  the  perfect  holiness  of  heaven,  yet  a  justification 
quite  as  complete  as  that  of  the  glorified;  we  have  the 
"  white  robes,"  for  "  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  "  has  washed 
them  even  now ;  and  if  we  have  not  yet  the  palm  branches 
of  final  victdry,  yet  thanks  be  to  God,  we  are  led  in 
triumph  in  every  place,  and  even  now  "this  is  the  vic 
tory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  There 
fore — 

"  I  would  begin  the  music  here, 
And  so  my  soul  should  rise; 
Oh,  for  some  heavenly  notes  to  bear 
My  passions  to  the  skies." 

The  Common  Christian  Soldier.— In  a  great  battle  the 
general's  name  is  mentioned;  but  what  could  he  have 
done  without  the  common  soldiers'?  Wellington  will  al 
ways  be  associated  with  Waterloo;  but,  after  all,  it  was 
a  soldiers7  battle.  What  could  the  commander  have  done 
if  those  in  the  ranks  had  failed  him?  The  commander- 


CHRISTIANS  69 


in-chief  might  very  well  have  touched  his  hat  to  the  least 
subaltern  or  to  the  humblest  private,  and  have  said,  "  I 
thank  you,  comrade.  Without  you  we  could  not  have 
conquered."  The  chief  troubles  of  the  great  day  of 
Waterloo  arose  from  certain  very  doubtful  allies,  who 
wavered  in  the  hour  of  battle  —  those  were  the  general's 
weakness;  but  his  hope  and  strength  lay  in  those  regi 
ments  which  were  as  an  iron  wall  against  the  enemy. 
Even  thus  the  faithful  are  our  joy  and  crown;  but  the 
unstable  are  our  sorrow  and  weakness.  Every  minister 
ing  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  in  much  the  same 
condition  as  Paul;  true,  We  are  of  a  lower  grade,  and 
our  work  is  on  a  smaller  scale;  but  our  needs  are  just 
as  great.  We  have  not  all  the  grace  which  Paul  pos 
sessed;  but  for  that  very  reason  we  make  the  more  pa 
thetic  an  appeal  to  you,  our  friends  and  fellow-helpers, 
while  we  use  the  apostle's  language,  and  cry,  "  We  be 
seech  you,  brethren,  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake, 
and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that  ye  strive  together 
with  us  in  your  prayers  to  God  for  us." 

The  Man  Holding  the  Rope.—  It  is  like  one  who  is  willing 
to  go  into  a  far  country,  bearing  his  life  in  his  hands; 
but  he  plaintively  exclaims,  "  You  won't  forget  me,  will 
you?  Tho  you  stay  at  home,  you  will  think  of  me!" 
It  reminds  us  of  Carey,  who  says,  when  he  goes  to 
India,  "  I  will  go  down  into  the  pit,  but  brother  Fuller 
and  the  rest  of  you  must  contribute  something  —  you 
must  hold  the  rope." 

An  Impregnable  Fortress.—  But  David  felt  also  great 
safety  from  his  enemies.  When  he  climbed  the  rock, 
and  crept  into  his  cavern,  he  knew  that  his  enemies 
could  not  follow  him.  Had  Saul  come  with  all  Israel 
at  his  back,  David's  band  could  have  kept  armies  at  bay. 
He  must  often  have  felt  like  the  eagle  when  it  has 
flashed  upward  to  its  nest  on  the  craggy  rock  and  from 


70       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

thence  looks  down  upon  the  hunters.  He  is  almost  out 
of  sight,  but  he  can  see  all  the  movements  of  the  foe. 
However  long  the  range  of  the  rifle,  the  noble  bird  knows 
no  fear,  for  he  is  beyond  range.  I  think  I  see  him  sit 
ting  there  quietly  eyeing  the  enemy,  of  whom  he  knows 
no  dread.  Thus  may  a  child  of  God  defy  the  great  ad 
versary.  "Let  us  sing,"  said  Luther,  "the  forty -sixth 
Psalm,  and  defy  the  devil."  The  devil's  restless  nature 
is  fretted  by  the  serenity  of  the  firm  believer  in  God; 
and  let  him  be  fretted.  His  utmost  rage  is  insufficient 
to  hurt  a  single  hair  of  the  head  of  a  believer.  No 
adversary  can  carry  by  storm  our  impregnable  strong 
hold.  Tyre  stood  a  siege  of  thirteen  years,  but  our  fort 
ress  has  been  beleaguered  throughout  the  ages  and  never 
captured. 

A  Son's  Boldness. —  Religious  people  sometimes  start  back 
from  the  prayers  of  a  true  saint,  and  say,  "  He  is  too 
familiar."  Of  course  a  child  is  too  familiar  for  the 
imitation  of  a  stranger;  but  have  you  ever  blamed  a 
child  for  clambering  his  father's  knee?  And  yet  you 
would  not  think  of  copying  him.  Boy,  dost  thou 
know  what  thou  art  at?  Thou  art  playing  with  a 
learned  judge,  before  whom  prisoners  tremble,  and 
courts  are  hushed.  Even  wise  counselors  speak  to 
him  as  "  My  Lord."  That  urchin  does  not  say  "  My 
lord."  Look!  He  is  plucking  him  by  the  beard;  he  is 
kissing  his  cheek.  What  presumption!  No!  he  is  the 
judge's  child ;  he  who  is  judge  to  others  is  "  father " 
to  him.  So  the  saints  of  God  say,  "  Our  Father,  which 
art  in  heaven,"  ever  reverentially,  but  yet  with  sweet 
familiarity.  They  are  at  home  with  him.  Beloved,  may 
you  know  what  that  means  by  the  teachings  of  the  Spirit 
of  sonship  for  only  he  can  teach  us  the  blessed  freedom 
of  being  at  home  with  God. 


CHRISTIANS  71 


The  Marks  of  Discipleship.—  Somebody,  years  ago,  ut 
tered  an  atrocious  lie  against  me  —  an  abominable  slan 
der.  I  was  very  low  and  heavy  of  spirit  at  the  tune; 
but  when  I  read  it  I  clapped  my  hands  for  joy,  for  I 
felt,  "  Now  I  have  one  of  the  marks  and  seals  of  a 
child  of  God,  for  it  is  written,  '  Blessed  are  ye,  when  men 
shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say  all 
manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  my  sake.7 "  The 
love  of  the  Lord's  brethren  and  the  hatred  of  the  Lord's 
enemies  are  two  things  to  be  desired. 

"The  Christian's  Walk."— Oh,  that  our  way  may  be 
strewn  with  gracious  acts,  as  when  a  cloud  passes  over 
a  thirsty  land,  and  blesses  it  with  silver  showers!  I 
have  known  in  a  certain  village  a  spot  called  "  The  Poet's 
Walk,"  and  another  called  "The  Lovers'  Walk."  Oh, 
that  ours  may  be  tl  The  Christian's  walk ! "  May  the 
good  Lord  perfect  us  in  every  good  work  to  do  his  will, 
working  in  us  that  which  is  profitable  and  well-pleasing 
in  his  sight! 

Quarrelling  With  God.—  I  was  greatly  struck  with  a  story 
a  dear  sister  told  me  yesterday.  She  was  very  nearly 
being  removed  from  the  church:  she  had  quarreled  with 
the  Lord  for  taking  away  her  husband,  and  she  would 
not  go  to  any  place  of  worship,  she  felt  so  angry  about 
her  loss.  But  her  little  child  came  to  her  one  morning, 
and  said,  "  Mother,  do  you  think  Jonah  was  right  when 
he  said,  *  I  do  well  to  be  angry,  even  unto  death '  "? " 
She  replied,  "  0  child,  do  not  talk  to  me,"  and  put  the 
little  one  away,  but  she  felt  the  rebuke,  and  it  brought 
her  back  to  God,  and  back  to  her  church  again,  humbly 
rejoicing  in  him  who  had  used  this  instrumentality  to 
set  her  right  with  her  Lord. 

Christian  Fragrance.—  You  know  the  Persian  story  of  the 
scented  clay.  One  said  to  it,  "  Clay,  whence  hast  thou 
thy  delicious  perfume  ?  "  It  answered :  "  I  was  afore 
time  nothing  but  a  piece  of  common  clay,  but  I  lay 


72       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

long  in  the  sweet  society  of  a  rose  till  I  drank  in  its 
fragrance  and  became  perfumed  myself."  Oh,  if  you 
dwell  much  with  God  in  seasons  of  retirement,  and  abide 
with  him  in  all  the  affairs  of  life,  you  will  be  changed 
into  his  image.  As  surely  as  the  type  will  make  its  im 
press  upon  the  paper,  and  the  seal  will  stamp  itself  upon 
the  wax,  so  will  the  Lord  impress  himself  upon  you,  and 
stamp  his  image  upon  you  if  you  dwell  in  him. 

The  Christian's  Apparel.—  The  glory  of  God !  How  shall 
I  describe  it!  I  must  set  before  you  a  strange  Scrip 
tural  picture.  Mordecai  must  be  made  glorious  for  his 
fidelity  to  his  king,  and  singular  is  the  honor  which  his 
monarch  ordains  for  him.  This  was  the  royal  order. 
"  Let  the  royal  apparel  be  brought  which  the  king  useth 
to  wear,  and  the  horse  that  the  king  rideth  upon,  and 
the  crown  royal  which  is  set  upon  his  head:  and  let  this 
apparel  and  horse  be  delivered  to  the  hand  of  one  of 
the  king's  most  noble  princes,  that  they  may  array  the 
man  withal  whom  the  king  delighteth  to  honor,  and  bring 
him  on  horseback  through  the  street  of  the  city,  and 
proclaim  before  him,  Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man 
whom  the  king  delighteth  to  honor."  Can  you  not 
imagine  the  surprise  of  the  Jew  when  robe  and  ring 
were  put  upon  him,  and  when  he  found  himself  placed 
upon  the  king's  horse.  This  may  serve  as  a  figure  of 
that  which  will  happen  to  us:  we  shall  be  glorified  with 
the  glory  of  God.  The  best  robe,  the  best  of  heaven's 
array,  shall  be  appointed  unto  us,  and  we  shall  dwell  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever. 

The  Rooted  Christian  —  I  saw  one  day  a  number  of  beech 
trees  which  had  formed  a  wood:  they  had  all  fallen  to 
the  ground  through  a  storm.  The  fact  was  they  leaned 
upon  one  another  to  a  great  extent,  and  the  thickness 
of  the  wood  prevented  each  tree  from  getting  a  firm  hold 
of  the  soil.  They  kept  each  other  up  and  also  con- 


CHRISTIANS  73 


strained  each  other  to  grow  up  tall  and  thin,  to  the 
neglect  of  root-growth.  When  the  tempest  forced  down 
the  first  few  trees,  the  others  readily  followed,  one  after 
the  other.  Close  to  that  same  spot  I  saw  another  tree  in 
the  open,  bravely  defying  the  blast,  in  solitary  strength. 
The  hurricane  had  beaten  upon  it  but  it  had  endured  all 
its  force  unsheltered.  That  lone,  brave  tree  seemed  to 
be  better  rooted  than  before  the  storm.  I  thought,  "  Is 
it  not  so  with  professors  ?  "  They  often  hold  together, 
and  help  each  other  to  grow  up,  but  if  they  have  not 
firm  personal  roothold,  when  a  storm  arises  they  fall  in 
rows.  A  minister  dies,  or  certain  leaders  are  taken  away, 
and  over  go  the  members  by  departure  from  the  faith 
and  from  holiness.  I  would  have  you  be  self-contained, 
growing  each  man  into  Christ  for  himself,  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love  and  faith  and  every  holy  grace.  Then 
when  the  worst  storm  that  ever  blew  on  mortal  man  shall 
come,  it  will  be  said  of  your  faith,  "It  could  not 
shake  it." 

Faith  Which  Cannot  be  Shaken.— We  read  that  when 
the  flood  beat  upon  the  wise  man's  house  "it  could  not 
shake  it."  That  is  very  beautiful.  Not  only  could  it 
not  carry  it  away,  but  "it  could  not  shake  it."  I  see 
the  man :  he  lost  his  money  and  became  poor,  but  he  did 
not  give  up  his  faith :  "  It  could  not  shake  it."  He 
was  ridiculed  and  slandered,  and  many  of  his  former 
friends  gave  him  the  cold  shoulder ;  but  "  It  could  not 
shake  it."  He  went  to  Jesus  under  his  great  trial  and 
he  was  sustained :  "  It  could  not  shake  it."  He  was  very 
sick  and  his  spirit  was  depressed  within  him,  but  still 
he  held  his  confidence  in  Christ :  "  It  could  not  shake  it." 
He  was  near  to  die ;  he  knew  that  he  must  soon  depart  out 
of  this  world,  but  all  the  pains  of  death  and  the  certainty 
of  dissolution  could  not  shake  him.  He  died  as  he  lived, 
firm  as  a  rock,  rejoicing  as  much  as  ever,  nay,  rejoicing 


74       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

more,  because  he  was  nearer  to  the  kingdom  and  to  the 
fruition  of  all  his  hopes.  "It  could  not  shake  it."  It 
is  a  grand  thing  to  have  a  faith  which  cannot  be  shaken. 

Sham  Christians.—  The  character  of  Talkative  in  Pilgrim's 
Progress  is  ably  drawn.  I  have  met  the  gentleman  many 
times,  and  can  bear  witness  that  John  Bunyan  was  a 
photographer  before  photography  was  invented.  Chris 
tian  said  of  him  "  He  talketh  of  prayer,  of  repentance, 
of  faith,  and  of  the  new  birth;  but  he  knows  but  only 
to  talk  of  them.  I  have  been  in  his  family,  and  his 
house  is  as  empty  of  religion  as  the  white  of  an  egg  is 
of  savor."  We  have  too  many  such  persons  around  us 
who  are,  as  to  what  they  say,  everything  that  is  to  be 
desired,  and  yet,  by  what  they  are  proven  to  be,  mere 
shams.  As  tradesmen  place  dummies  in  their  shops, 
papered  and  labelled  to  look  like  goods,  while  yet  they 
are  nothing  of  the  sort,  so  are  these  men  marked  and 
labelled  as  Christians,  but  the  grace  of  God  is  not  in 
them. 

The  Hidden  Fountain.— -  You  have  seen  a  noble  fountain 
in  a  continental  city  adorning  a  public  square.  See  how 
the  water  leaps  into  the  air;  and  then  it  falls  into  a 
circular  basin  which  fills  and  pours  out  its  fulness  into 
another  lower  down,  and  this  again  floods  a  third.  Hear 
the  merry  plash  as  the  waters  fall  in  showers  and  cata 
racts  from  basin  to  basin!  If  you  stand  at  the  lower 
basin  and  look  upon  it  and  say,  "  Herein  is  water ; " 
that  is  true,  and  will  be  true  of  the  next  higher  one, 
and  so  forth;  but  if  you  would  express  the  truth  as  to 
where  the  water  really  is,  you  may  have  to  look  far 
away,  perhaps  upon  a  mountain's  side,  for  there  is  a 
vast  reservoir  from  which  pipes  are  laid  to  bring  these 
waters  and  force  them  to  their  height  that  they  may 
descend  so  beautifully.  Thus  the  love  we  have  to  our 
fellow-creatures  drops  from  us  like  the  descending  silvery 


CHRISTIANS  75 


cataract  from  the  full  basin,  but  the  first  source  of  it 
is  the  immeasurable  love  of  God  which  is  hidden  away 
in  his  very  essence,  which  never  changes,  and  never  can 
be  diminished.  Herein  is  love!  If  you  and  I  desire  to 
love  our  fellow  Christians  and  to  love  the  fallen  race  of 
man,  we  must  be  joined  on  to  the  aqueduct  which  con 
ducts  love  from  this  eternal  source,  or  else  we  shall  socn 
fail  in  love. 

The  Christian  Can  Afford  to  be  Poor.—"  I  can  afford  to 
be  poor,"  said  Dr.  Gill,  when  one  of  his  subscribers 
threatened  to  give  up  his  seat,  and  would  not  attend,  if 
the  doctor  preached  such-and-such  a  doctrine.  So  says 
the  Christian,  "  I  can  afford  to  be  poor ;  I  can  afford  to 
be  despised;  I  have  in  heaven  a  better  and  more  en 
during  substance."  So,  by  the  use  of  this  blessed  hel 
met,  he  is  protected  from  the  threatenings  of  the  wicked 
world.  ^ 

The  Christian  Defying  Satan.—  Martin  Luther,  you  know, 
often  used  to  defy  Satan  to  battle.  I  care  not  to  do 
that ;  but  he  used  to  say,  in  his  queer,  quaint  way,  "  I 
often  laugh  at  Satan,  and  there  is  nothing  makes  him 
so  angry  as  when  I  attack  him  to  his  face,  and  tell  him 
that  through  God  I  am  more  than  a  match  for  him; 
tell  him  to  do  his  worst,  and  yet  I  will  beat  him,  and 
tell  him  to  put  forth  his  fury,  and  yet  I  will  overcome 
him."  This  would  be  presumption  if  in  our  own 
strength.  It  is  only  faith  in  the  providence  of  God  that 
can  enable  us  to  say  so.  He  that  has  made  God  his 
refuge  need  fear  no  storm;  but  just  as  sometimes  in 
Christmas  weather  the  wind  and  snow  and  storm  outside 
make  the  family  fire  seem  warmer,  and  the  family  circle 
seem  happier,  so  the  trials  and  temptations  of  Satan  do 
sometimes  seem  to  add  to  the  very  peace  and  happiness 
of  the  true  believer  while  he  sits  wrapped  up  in  the  man 
tle  of  godly  confidence. 


76       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 


CHRISTIANITY 

Persecution  Futile  Against  Christianity.—  God  has  chosen 
the  weak  things  to  confound  the  yfciglity.  "  Oh ! "  said 
Cassar,  "we  will  soon  root  up  this  Christianity; — off 
with  their  heads ! "  The  different  governors  hastened 
one  after  another  of  the  disciples  to  death,  but  the  more 
they  persecuted  them  the  more  they  multiplied.  The  pro 
consuls  had  orders  to  destroy  Christians;  the  more  they 
hunted  them  the  more  Christians  there  were,  until  at 
last  men  pressed  to  the  judgment-seat  and  asked  to  be 
permitted  to  die  for  Christ.  They  invented  torments; 
they  dragged  the  saints  at  the  heels  of  wild  horses;  they 
laid  them  upon  red-hot  gridirons;  they  pulled  off  the 
skin  from  their  flesh  piece  by  piece;  they  were  sawn 
asunder;  they  were  wrapped  up  in  skins  and  daubed 
with  pitch,  and  set  in  Nero's  gardens  at  night  to  burn; 
they  were  left  to  rot  in  dungeons;  they  were  made  a 
spectacle  to  all  men  in  the  amphitheatre ;  the  bears  hugged 
them  to  death,  the  lions  tore  them  to  pieces,  the  wild 
bulls  tossed  them  upon  their  horns  —  and  yet  Christianity 
spread.  All  the  swords  of  the  legionaries  which  had  put 
to  rout  the  armies  of  all  nations,  and  had  overcome  the 
invincible  Gaul  and  the  savage  Briton,  could  not  with 
stand  the  feebleness  of  Christianity;  for  the  weakness  of 
God  is  mightier  than  men. 

The  Democracy  of  Christianity.— A  diamond  is  a  dia 
mond,  whatever  its  size  may  be,  and  so  little  faith  and 
great  faith  are  of  the  same  essence.  Whether  it  be  a 
grain  of  mustard-seed  or  a  mountain-moving  faith,  it  is 
still  faith  of  the  operation  of  God,  faith  in  the  same  ob 
ject,  and  faith  working  to  the  same  end.  Hence  John, 
speaking  to  his  converts,  prays,  "  That  you  may  have  fel 
lowship  with  us:  and  truly  our  fellowship  with  the  Fath- 


CHURCH  77 


er,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  If  them  art  a  believer, 
thou  hast  a  right  to  the  same  fellowship  with  God  as 
the  apostle  had,  thou  hast  the  same  perfect  cleansing  by 
the  precious  blood,  thou  hast  the  same  adoption,  the 
same  regeneration,  thou  standest  in  the  same  place  of 
love  and  acceptance,  thou  shalt  be  blessed  with  the  same 
blessings  on  earth,  and  thou  shalt  enter  into  the  same 
joy  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

CHURCH 

The  Power  of  a  Live  Church.— A  healthy  church  kills 
error,  and  tears  in  pieces  evil.  Not  so  very  long  ago 
our  nation  tolerated  slavery  in  our  colonies.  Philan 
thropists  endeavored  to  destroy  slavery;  but  when  was 
it  utterly  abolished1?  It  was  when  Wilberforce  roused 
the  church  of  God,  and  when  the  church  of  God  ad 
dressed  herself  to  the  conflict,  then  she  tore  the  evil 
thing  to  pieces.  I  have  been  amused  with  what  Wilber 
force  said  the  day  after  they  passed  the  Act  of  Emanci 
pation.  He  merrily  said  to  a  friend  when  it  was  all 
done,  "  Is  there  not  something  else  we  can  abolish  ? " 
That  was  said  playfully,  but  it  shows  the  spirit  of  the 
church  of  God.  She  lives  in  conflict  and  victory;  her 
mission  is  to  destroy  everything  that  is  bad  in  the  land. 
See  the  fierce  devil  of  intemperance  how  it  devours  men  1 
Earnest  friends  have  been  laboring  against  it,  and  they 
have  done  something  for  which  we  are  grateful,  but  if 
ever  intemperance  is  put  down,  it  will  be  when  the  entire 
church  of  God  shall  arouse  herself  to  protest  against 
it.  When  the  strong  lion  rises  up  the  giant  of  drunken 
ness  shall  fall  before  him.  "  He  shall  not  lie  down 
until  he  eat  of  the  prey,  and  drink  the  blood  of  the 
slain."  I  augur  for  the  world  the  best  results  from  a 
fully  aroused  church.  If  God  be  in  her  there  is  no  evil 
which  she  cannot  overcome, 


78       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

The  Layman's  Privilege.—  There  is  a  poor  prisoner  in  a 
cell.  His  hair  is  all  matted,  over  his  eyes.  A  few  weeks 
ago  the  judge  put  on  the  black  cap,  and  commanded 
that  he  should  be  taken  to  the  place  from  whence  he 
came,  and  hung  by  the  neck  until  dead.  The  poor  wretch 
has  his  heart  broken  within  him,  whilst  he  thinks  of  the 
pinion,  of  the  gallows,  and  of  the  drop,  and  of  after- 
death.  0 !  who  can  tell  how  his  heart  is  rent  and  racked, 
whilst  he  thinks  of  leaving  all,  and  going  he  knoweth 
not  where!  There  is  a  man  there,  sound  asleep  upon  a 
bed.  He  has  been  asleep  there  these  two  days,  and  under 
his  pillow  he  has  that  prisoner's  free  pardon.  I  would 
horsewhip  that  scoundrel,  horsewhip  him  soundly,  for 
making  that  poor  man  have  two  days  of  extra  misery. 
Why,  if  I  had  had  that  man's  pardon,  I  would  have  been 
there,  if  I  rode  on  the  wings  of  lightning  to  get  at  him, 
and  I  should  have  thought  the  fastest  train  that  ever 
run  but  slow,  if  I  had  so  sweet  a  message  to  carry,  and 
such  a  poor  heavy  heart  to  carry  it  to.  But  that  man, 
that  brute,  is  sound  asleep,  with  a  free  pardon  under 
his  pillow,  whilst  that  poor  wretch's  heart  is  breaking 
with  dismay!  Ah!  do  not  be  too  hard  with  him:  he  is 
here  today.  Side  by  side  with  you  this  morning  there 
is  sitting  a  poor  penitent  sinner;  God  has  pardoned  him, 
and  intends  that  you  should  tell  him  that  good  news. 
He  sat  by  your  side  last  Sunday,  and  he  wept  all  the 
sermon  through,  for  he  felt  his  guilt.  If  you  had  spoken 
to  him  then,  who  can  tell?  He  might  have  had  comfort; 
but  there  he  is  now  —  you  do  not  tell  him  the  good  news. 
Do  you  leave  that  to  me  do  do?  Ah!  sirs,  but  you  can 
not  serve  God  by  proxy;  what  the  minister  does  is 
nought  to  you;  you  have  your  own  personal  duty  to  do, 
and  God  has  given  you  a  precious  promise.  It  is  now  on 
your  heart.  Will  you  not  turn  round  to  your  next  neigh 
bor,  and  tell  him  that  promise?  0!  there  is  many  an 


CHURCH  79 

aching  heart  that  aches  because  of  our  idleness  in  telling 
the  good  news  of  this  salvation. 

A  Sleeping  Church. —  There  is  a  fortress,  yonder,  far  away 
in  India.  A  troop  of  those  abominable  Sepoys  have  sur 
rounded  it.  Bloodthirsty  hell-hounds,  if  they  once  gain 
admission,  they  will  rend  the  mother  and  her  children, 
and  cut  the  strong  man  in  pieces.  They  are  at  the  gates : 
Their  cannon  are  loaded,  their  bayonets  thirst  for  blood, 
and  their  swords  are  hungry  to  slay.  Go  through  the 
fortress,  and  the  people  are  all  asleep.  There  is  the 
warder  on  the  tower,  nodding  on  his  bayonet.  There 
is  the  captain  in  his  tent,  with  his  pen  in  his  hand,  and 
his  dispatches  before  him,  asleep  at  the  table.  There 
are  soldiers  lying  down  in  their  tents,  ready  for  the 
war,  but  all  slumbering.  There  is  not  a  man  to  be  seen 
keeping  watch,  there  is  not  a  sentry  there.  All  are 
asleep.  Why,  my  friends,  you  would  say,  "  Whatever  is 
the  matter  here?  What  can  it  be?  Has  some  great 
wizard  been  waving  his  wand,  and  put  a  spell  upon 
them  all?  Or  are  they  all  mad?  Have  their  minds 
fled?  Sure,  to  be  asleep  in  wartime  is  indeed  outrage 
ous.  Here!  take  down  that  trumpet;  go  close  up  to  the 
captain's  ear,  and  blow  a  blast,  and  see  if  it  does  not 
awake  him  in  a  moment.  Just  take  away  that  bayonet 
from  the  soldier  that  is  asleep  on  the  walls,  and  give  him 
a  sharp  prick  with  it,  and  see  if  he  does  not  awake."  But 
surely,  surely,  nobody  can  have  patience  with  people 
asleep,  when  the  enemy  surround  the  walls  and  are 
thundering  at  the  gates. 

Now,  Christians,  this  is  your  case.  Your  life  is  a  life 
of  warfare;  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil;  that 
hellish  trinity,  and  your  poor  flesh  is  a  wretched  mud- 
work  behind  which  to  be  intrenched.  Are  you  asleep? 
Asleep,  when  Satan  has  fire-balls  of  lust  to  hurl  into  the 
windows  of  your  eyes  —  when  he  has-  arrows  of  tempta- 


8o       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

tion  to  shoot  into  your  heart  —  when  he  has  snares  into 
which  to  trap  your  feet?  Asleep,  when  he  has  under 
mined  your  very  existence,  and  when  he  is  about  to 
apply  the  match  with  which  to  destroy  you,  unless  sov 
ereign  grace  prevents?  Oh!  sleep  not,  soldier  of  the 
cross!  To  sleep  in  war-time  is  utterly  inconsistent. 
Great  Spirit  of  God  forbid  that  we  should  slumber. 

CONSCIENCE 

Conscience  Needs  Illumination. —  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say, 
that  we  all  unwittingly  allow  ourselves  in  practices,  which 
clearer  light  would  show  to  be  sins.  Even  the  best  of 
men  have  done  this  in  the  past.  For  instance,  John 
Newton,  in  his  trading  for  slaves  in  his  early  days,  never 
seemed  to  have  felt  that  there  was  any  wrong  in  it;  and 
Whitefield  in  accepting  slaves  for  his  orphanage  in 
Georgia,  never  raised  or  dreamed  of  raising  the  question 
as  to  whether  slavery  was  in  itself  sinful.  Perhaps 
advancing  light  will  show  that  many  of  the  habits  and 
customs  of  our  present  civilization  are  essentially  bad, 
and  our  grandsons  will  wonder  how  we  could  have  acted 
as  we  did.  It  may  need  centuries  before  the  national 
conscience,  or  even  the  common  Christian  conscience,  will 
be  enlightened  up  to  the  true  standard  of  right;  and  the 
individual  man  may  need  many  a  chastisement  and  re 
buke  from  the  Lord  ere  he  has  fully  discerned  between 
good  and  evil. 

A  Fearful  Conscience.—  I  have  heard  of  a  man  who  was 
so  constantly  in  debt,  and  continually  being  arrested  by 
the  bailiffs,  that  once  upon  a  time,  when  going  by  some 
area  railings,  having  caught  his  sleeve  upon  one  of  the 
rails,  he  turned  round  and  said,  "  I  don't  owe  you  any 
thing,  sir."  He  thought  it  was  a  bailiff.  And  so  it  is 
with  unforgiven  sinners,  wherever  they  are,  they  think 
they  are  going  to  be  arrested.  They  can  enjoy  nothing. 


CONVERSATION  81 


Even  their  mirth,  what  is  it,  but  the  color  of  joy,  the 
crackling  of  thorns  under  the  pot?  there  is  no  solid, 
steady  fire.  But  when  once  a  man  is  forgiven,  he  can 
walk  anywhere.  He  says,  "  to  me  it  is  nothing  whether 
I  live  or  die,  whether  ocean  depths  engulf  me,  or  whether 
I  am  buried  beneath  the  avalanche;  with  sin  forgiven,  I 
am  secure.  Death  has  no  sting  to  him.  His  conscience 
is  at  rest. 

True  to  His  Conscience. —  I  know  a  man  whose  master  had 
tried  to  make  him  go  against  his  conscience;  but  he  said, 
"No,  sir."  And  the  master  thought,  "Well,  he  is  a 
very  valuable  servant;  but  I  will  beat  him,  if  I  can." 
So  he  threatened  that  if  he  did  not  do  as  he  wished 
he  would  turn  him  away.  The  man  was  dependent  on 
his  master,  and  he  knew  not  what  he  should  do  for  his 
daily  bread.  So  he  said  to  his  master  honestly  at  once, 
"  Sir,  I  don't  know  of  any  other  situation ;  I  should  be 
very  sorry  to  leave  you,  for  I  have  been  very  comfortable, 
but  if  it  comes  to  that,  sir,  I  would  sooner  starve  than 
submit  my  conscience  to  any  one."  The  man  left,  and 
the  master  had  to  go  after  him  to  bring  him  back  again. 
And  so  it  will  be  in  every  case.  If  Christians  are  but 
faithful,  they  must  win  the  day. 

CONVERSATION 

Vapid  Conversation. —  Brothers,  I  leave  it  to  yourselves  to 
judge  whether  your  communications  with  one  another 
are  always  such  as  they  should  be.  Are  they  always 
worthy  of  you?  What  communications  have  ye  had  this 
morning?  Can  I  make  a  guess?  "Nice  and  fresh  this 
morning."  "  Quite  a  change  in  the  weather."  Is  not 
this  the  style?  How  often  we  instruct  each  other  about 
what  we  all  know!  When  it  rains  so  as  to  soak  our 
garments  we  gravely  tell  each  other  that  it  is  very  wet. 
Yes,  and  if  the  sun  shines  we  are  all  eager  to  communi- 


82       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

oate  the  wonderful  information  that  it  is  warm.  Dear 
me,  what  instructors  of  our  generation  we  are!  Could 
we  not  contrive  to  change  the  subject?  Is  it  because  we 
have  nothing  to  say  of  love,  and  grace,  and  truth  that 
we  meet  and  part  without  learning  or  teaching  any 
thing?  Perhaps  so.  I  wish  we  had  a  little  more  small 
change  of  heavenly  converse:  we  have  our  crowns  and 
sovereigns  for  the  pulpit,  we  need  groats  and  pence  for 
common  talk,  all  stamped  with  the  image  and  super 
scription  of  the  King  of  heaven.  0  Holy  Spirit  enrich 
us  after  this  sort. 

CONVERSION 

Look  and  Live.— We  shall  never  forget  the  day,  some  of 
us,  when  we  left  off  self-righteousness  and  believed  in 
Christ  to  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  The  marvel  was 
done  in  a  minute,  but  the  change  was  so  great  that  we 
can  never  explain  it,  or  cease  to  bless  the  Lord  for  it. 

"Happy  day!     Happy  day! 
When    Jesus   washed   my  sins   away." 

I  recollect  the  morning  when  salvation  came  to  me  as  I 
sat  in  a  little  Primitive  Methodist  chapel  under  the 
gallery,  and  the  preacher  said,  "  That  young  man  looks 
unhappy;"  and  added,  "Young  man,  you  will  never 
find  peace  except  you  look  to  Christ;"  and  he  called 
out  to  me,  "  Look !  "  With  a  voice  of  thunder  he  shouted, 
"  Young  man,  look !  Look  now !  "  I  did  look,  I  turned 
the  eye  of  faith  to  Jesus  at  once.  My  burden  disap 
peared,  and  my  soul  was  merry  as  a  bird  let  loose  from 
her  cage,  even  as  it  is  now  as  often  as  I  remember  the 
blessed  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Christ  at  the  Door. —  I  saw  a  young  woman  from  America 
in  the  vestry  some  little  time  ago  who  came  in  great 
concern  of  soul  to  know  the  way  of  salvation,  and  I  said 


CONVERSION  83 


to  her,  "  Do  you  not  see  it  ?  If  you  trust  Christ,  you 
are  saved."  I  quoted  the  Scriptures  which  teach  this 
great  truth  and  made  them  plain  to  her,  until  the  Holy 
Spirit  opened  her  eyes;  light  came  on  her  face  in  a  mo 
ment,  and  she  said,  "  I  do  see  it.  I  trust  Christ  with  all 
my  heart:  and  I  am  to  believe  that  I  am  saved  because 
I  trust  Jesus,  and  he  has  promised  to  save  believers'? " 
"  Yes,"  I  replied,  "  You  are  getting  on  the  rock  now." 
"  I  feel,"  she  said,  "  a  deep  peace  beginning  in  my  soul, 
but  I  cannot  understand  how  it  can  be,  for  my  grand 
father  belonged  to  the  old  school  Presbyterians,  and  he 
told  me  he  was  six  years  before  he  could  get  peace,  and 
had  to  be  put  into  a  lunatic  asylum,  for  he  was  so  mis 
erable."  Ah,  yes,  I  have  no  doubt  such  cases  have  hap 
pened.  Some  will  go  seventeen  thousand  miles  round 
about  merely  to  go  across  a  street,  but  there  is  no  need 
for  it.  There  it  is  — "  The  word  is  nigh  thee,  on  thy  lips 
and  in  thy  heart.  If  with  thy  heart  thou  wilt  believe  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  with  my  mouth  make  con 
fession  of  him,  thou  shalt  be  saved." 

Man's  Convert,  Not  Christ's.—  You  have  heard  Mr.  HilTs 
story  of  meeting  a  man  in  the  street  one  night,  who 
hiccuped  up  to  him  and  said,  "  How  do  you  do,  Mr. 
Hill  ?  I  am  one  of  your  converts."  "  Yes,"  said  Row 
land,  "  I  should  say  you  are,  but  you  are  none  of  God's, 
or  else  you  would  not  be  drunk."  Converts  of  that  sort 
are  far  too  numerous. 

A  Stranger  Finding  Christ.—-  Some  three  years  ago  I  was 
talking  with  an  aged  minister,  and  he  began  fumbling 
about  hi  his  waistcoat  pocket,  but  he  was  a  long  while 
before  he  found  what  he  wanted,  At  last  he  brought 
out  a  letter  that  was  well  nigh  worn  to  pieces,  and  he 
said,  "  God  Almighty  bless  you !  God  Almighty  bless 
you!"  And  I  said,  "Friend,  what  is  it?"  He  said, 
"I  had  a  son.  I  thought  he  would  be  the  stay  of  my 


84       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

old  age,  but  he  disgraced  himself,  and  he  went  away  from 
me,  and  I  could  not  tell  where  he  went,  only  he  said  he 
was  going  to  America.  He  took  a  ticket  to  sail  for 
America  from  the  London  Docks,  but  he  did  not  go  on 
the  particular  day  that  he  expected."  This  aged  min 
ister  bade  me  read  the  letter,  and  I  read  it,  and  it  was 
like  this :  —  "  Father,  I  am  here  in  America.  I  have  found 
a  situation,  and  God  has  prospered  me.  I  write  to  ask 
your  forgiveness  for  the  thousand  wrongs  that  I  have 
done  you,  and  the  grief  I  have  caused  you,  for,  blessed 
be  God,  I  have  found  the  Savior.  I  have  joined  the 
church  of  God  here,  and  hope  to  spend  my  life  in  God's 
service.  It  happens  thus:  I  did  not  sail  for  America 
the  day  I  expected.  I  went  down  to  the  Tabernacle  to 
see  what  it  was  like,  and  God  met  with  me.  Mr.  Spur- 
geon  said,  '  Perhaps  there  is  a  runaway  son  here.  The 
Lord  call  him  by  his  grace.'  And  he  did."  "  Now," 
said  he,  as  he  folded  up  the  letter  and  put  it  in  his 
pocket,  "  that  son  of  mine  is  dead,  and  he  is  in  heaven, 
and  I  love  you,  and  I  shall  do  so  as  long  as  I  live,  be 
cause  you  were  the  means  of  bringing  him  to  Christ  $  " 
Joy  in  Heaven  Over  a  Child's  Conversion. —  A  poor  neg 
lected  little  boy  in  ragged  clothing  had  run  about  the 
streets  for  many  a  day.  Tutored  in  crime,  he  was  paving 
his  path  to  the  gallows;  but  one  morning  he  passed  by 
a  humble  room,  where  some  men  and  women  were  sitting 
together  teaching  poor  ragged  children.  He  stepped  in 
there,  a  wild  Bedouin  of  the  streets;  they  talked  to  him; 
they  told  him  about  a  soul  and  about  in  eternity  — 
things  he  had  never  heard  before;  they  sppke  of  Jesus, 
and  of  good  tidings  of  great  ioy  to  this  poor  friendless 
lad.  He  went  another  Sabbath,  and  another;  his  wild 
habits  hanging  about  him,  for  he  could  not  get  rid  of 
them.  At  last  it  happened  that  his  teacher  said  to  him, 
one  day,  "  Jesus  Christ  receiveth  sinners"  That  little 


CONVERSION  85 


boy  ran,  but  not  home,  for  it  was  but  a  mockery  to 
call  it  so  —  where  a  drunken  father  and  a  lascivious 
mother  kept  a  hellish  riot  together.  He  ran,  and  under 
some  dry  arch,  or  in  some  wild  unfrequented  corner,  he 
bent  his  little  knees,  and  there  he  cried,  that  poor  crea 
ture  in  his  rags,  "Lord,  save  me,  or  I  perish;"  and  the 
little  Arab  was  on  his  knees  —  the  little  thief  was  saved ! 
He  said  — 

"  Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul,  let  me  to  thy  bosom  fly;  " 

And  up  from  that  old  arch,  from  that  forsaken  hovel, 
there  flew  a  spirit,  glad  to  bear  the  news  to  heaven,  that 
another  heir  of  glory  was  born  to  God. 

A  Strange  Conversion. —  I  knew  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel 
who  was  converted  in  a  theatre.  He  was  listening  to  a 
play,  an  old-fashioned  piece,  that  ended  with  a  sailor's 
drinking  a  glass  of  gin  before  he  was  hung,  and  he  said, 
"  Here's  to  the  prosperity  of  the  British  nation,  and  the 
salvation  of  my  immortal  soul ; "  and  down  went  the 
curtain ;  and  down  went  my  friend  too,  for  he  ran  home 
with  all  his  might.  Those  words,  "  The  salvation  of  my 
immortal  soul,  had  struck  him  to  the  quick ;  and  he  sought 
the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  chamber.  Many  a  day  he  sought 
him,  and  at  last  he  found  him,  to  his  joy  and  confi 
dence. 

Conversion  Necessary. —  Furthermore,  it  is  quite  certain 
that  human  nature  cannot  be  made  better,  for  many  have 
tried  it,  but  they  have  always  failed.  A  man,  trying  to 
improve  human  nature,  is  like  trying  to  change  the  po 
sition  of  a  weathercock,  by  turning  it  round  to  the  east 
when  the  wind  is  blowing  west;  he  has  but  to  take  his 
hand  off  and  it  will  be  back  again  to  its  place.  So  have 
I  seen  a  man  trying  to  restrain  nature  —  he  is  an  angry, 
bad-tempered  man,  and  he  is  trying  to  cure  himself  a 
bit  and  he  does,  but  it  comes  out,  and  if  it  does  not  burn 


86      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

right  out,  and  the  sparks  do  not  fly  abroad,  yet  it  burns 
within  his  bones  till  they  grow  white  with  the  heat  of 
malice  and  there  remains  within  his  heart  a  residuum 
of  the  ashes  of  revenge. 

Transformation  Through  Conversion.-—  I  know  a  village, 
once,  perhaps,  the  most  profane  in  England  —  a  village 
inundated  by  drunkenness  and  debauchery  of  the  worst 
kind,  where  it  was  impossible  almost  for  an  honest 
traveler  to  stop  in  the  public  house  without  being  an 
noyed  by  blasphemy;  a  place  noted  for  incendiaries  and 
robbers.  One  man,  the  ringleader  of  all  listened  to  the 
voice  of  God.  That  man's  heart  was  broken.  The  whole 
gang  came  to  hear  the  gospel  preached,  and  they  sat  and 
seemed  to  reverence  the  preacher  as  if  he  were  a  God 
and  not  a  man.  These  men  became  changed  and  re 
formed;  and  every  one  who  knows  the  place  affirms  that 
such  a  change  had  never  been  wrought  but  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Diamonds  Out  of  Pebble  Stones.—  There  was  a  poor  man 
about  sixty  years  old;  he  had  been  a  rough  sailor,  one 
of  the  worst  men  in  the  village;  it  was  his  custom  to 
drink,  and  he  seemed  to  be  delighted  when  he  was  cursing 
and  swearing.  He  came  into  the  chapel,  however,  one 
Sabbath  day,  when  one  nearly  related  to  me  was  preach 
ing  the  text  concerning  Jesus  weeping  over  Jerusalem. 
And  the  poor  man  thought,  "What!  did  Jesus  Chrsit 
ever  weep  over  such  a  wretch  as  I  am  ? "  He  thought 
he  was  too  bad  for  Christ  to  care  for  him.  At  last  he 
came  to  the  minister,  and  said,  "  Sir,  sixty  years  have 
I  been  sailing  under  the  standard  of  the  devil;  it  is  time 
I  should  have  a  new  owner;  I  want  to  scuttle  the  old 
ship  and  sink  her  altogether!  then  I  shall  have  a  new 
one,  and  I  shall  sail  under  the  colors  of  Prince  Imman- 
uel."  Ever  since  that  moment  that  man  has  been  a 
praying  character,  walking  before  God  in  all  sincerity. 


CONVERSION  87 


Yet,  he  was  the  very  last  man  you  would  have  thought 
of.  Somehow  God  does  choose  the  last  men;  he  does 
not  care  for  the  diamond,  but  he  picks  up  the  pebble 
stones,  for  he  is  able,  out  of  "  stones,  to  raise  up  children 
unto  Abraham."  God  is  more  wise  than  the  chemist:  he 
not  only  refines  gold,  but  he  transmutes  base  metal  into 
precious  jewels;  he  takes  the  filthiest  and  the  vilest,  and 
fashions  them  into  glorious  beings,  makes  them  saints, 
whereas  they  have  been  sinners,  and  sanctifies  them, 
whereas  they  have  been  unholy. 

Changed  by  Conversion. —  You  have  read  of  James  Hal- 
dane.  Once,  when  unconverted,  he  threw  a  ship's  tum 
bler  at  the  head  of  a  person  who  ^insulted  him ;  but  when 
regenerated  on  another  occasion  of  insult,  he  simply 
said,  "  I  would  resent  it,  but  I  have  learned  to  forgive 
injuries  and  overlook  insults."  Men  were  obliged  to 
say  of  him,  "  There  is  something  in  religion  which  can 
bring  such  a  lion  as  that  down,  and  make  him  such  a 
lamb."  Thus  you  will  confirm  the  witness  of  Christ,  if 
you  bear  up  against  persecution. 

An  Infidel's  Conversion. —  I  received  a  long  letter  from  a 
certain  city,  from  one  who  has  been  one  of  the  leaders 
of  the  secular  society  in  that  place.  The  writer  says, 
"  I  purchased  one  of  the  pamphlets  entitled  '  Who  is 
this  Spurgeon?'  and  also  your  portrait  (or  a  portrait 
sold  as  yours)  for  3d.  I  brought  these  home,  and  ex 
hibited  them  in  my  shop  window.  I  was  induced  to  do 
so  from  a  feeling  of  derisive  pleasure.  The  title  of  the 
pamphlet  is,  naturally,  suggestive  of  caricature,  and  it 
was  especially  to  incite  that  impression  that  I  attached 
it  to  your  portrait  and  placed  it  in  my  window.  But  I 
also  had  another  object  in  view.  I  thought  by  its  at 
traction  to  improve  my  trade.  I  am  not  at  all  in  the 
book  or  paper  business,  which  rendered  its  exposure  and 
my  motive  the  more  conspicuous.  I  have  taken  it  down 


88      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

now:  I  am  taken  down,  too.  ...  I  had  bought  one 
of  your  sermons  of  an  old  infidel  a  day  or  two  previous. 
In  that  sermon  I  read  these  words:— (  They  go  on;  that 
step  is  safe  —  they  take  it ;  the  next  is  safe  —  they  take 
it;  their  foot  hangs  over  a  gulf  of  darkness/  I  read  on, 
but  the  word  darkness  staggered  me.  It  was  all  dark 
with  me.  '  True,  the  way  has  been  safe  so  far,  but  I 
am  lost  in  bewilderment.  No,  no,  no,  I  will  not  risk  it.' 
I  left  the  apartment  in  which  I  had  been  musing,  and 
as  I  did  so,  the  three  words,  'Who  can  tell?7  seemed  to 
be  whispered  at  my  heart.  I  determined  not  to  let 
another  Sunday  pass  without  visiting  a  place  of  wor 
ship.  How  soon  my  soul  might  be  required  of  me  I 
knew  not,  but  felt  that  it  would  be  mean,  base,  cowardly, 
not  to  give  it  a  chance.  Ay,  my  associates  may  laugh, 
scoff,  deride,  call  me  coward,  turncoat,  I  will  do  an  act 
of  justice  to  my  soul.  I  went  to  the  chapel;  I  was  just 
stupefied  with  awe.  What  could  I  want  there?  The 
doorkeeper  opened  his  eyes  wider,  and  involuntarily  de 
manded,  'It's  Mr.-  -  isn't  it?'  'Yes,'  I  said,  'it  is.' 
He  conducted  me  to  a  seat,  and  afterward  brought  me  a 
hymn-book.  I  was  fit  to  burst  with  anguish.  '  Now,'  I 
thought,  '  I  am  here,  if  it  be  the  house  of  God,  heaven 
grant  me  an  audience,  and  I  will  make  full  surrender. 
0  God,  show  me  some  token  by  which  I  may  know  that 
thou  art,  and  that  thou  wilt  in  no  wise  cast  out  the  vile 
deserter  who  has  ventured  to  seek  thy  face  and  thy 
pardoning  mercy.'  I  opened  the  hymn-book  to  divert 
my  mind  from  feelings  that  were  rending  me,  and  the 
first  words  that  caught  my  eyes  were, 

"'Dark,  dark  indeed  the  grave  would  be, 
Had  we  no  light,  O    God,  from  thee.' " 

After  giving  some  things  which  he  looks  upon  as  evi 
dences  that  he  is  a  true  convert  of  religion,  he  closes  up 


CONVERSION  8g 


by  saying,  "  0  sir,  tell  this  to  the  poor  wretch  whose 
pride,  like  mine,  has  made  him  league  with  hell;  tell  it 
to  the  hesitating  and  to  the  timid;  tell  it  to  the  cooling 
Christian,  that  God  is  a  very  present  help  to  all  that  are 
in  need. 

A  Notable  Conversion.— The  chaplain  of  a  jail,  a  dear 
friend  of  mine,  once  told  me  a  surprising  case  of  con 
version  in  which  a  knowledge  of  the  covenant  of  grace 
was  the  chief  instrument  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  My  friend 
had  under  his  charge  a  man  most  cunning  and  brutal. 
Hs  was  singularly  repulsive,  even  in  comparison  with 
other  convicts.  He  had  been  renowned  for  his  daring, 
and  for  the  utter  absence  of  all  feeling  when  committing 
acts  of  violence.  I  think  he  had  been  called  "  the  king 
of  the  garotters."  The  chaplain  had  spoken  to  him 
several  times,  but  had  not  succeeded  even  in  getting  an 
answer.  The  man  was  sullenly  set  against  all  instruc 
tion.  At  last  he  expressed  a  desire  for  a  certain  book, 
but  as  it  was  not  in  the  library  the  chaplain  pointed  to 
the  Bible,  which  was  placed  in  his  cell,  and  said,  "  Did 
you  ever  read  that  Book  ? "  He  gave  no  answer,  but 
looked  at  the  good  man  as  if  he  would  kill  him.  The 
question  was  kindly  repeated,  with  the  assurance  that 
he  would  find  it  well  worth  reading.  "  Sir,"  said  the 
convict,  "  you  would  not  ask  me  such  a  question  if  you 
knew  who  I  was.  What  have  I  to  do  with  a  Book  of 
that  sort  ? "  He  was  told  that  his  character  was  well 
known  to  the  chaplain,  and  that  for  this  very  reason  he 
recommended  the  Bible  as  a  Book  which  would  suit  his 
case.  "  It  would  do  me  no  good,"  he  cried,  "  I  am  past 
all  feeling."  Doubling  up  his  first  he  struck  the  iron 
door  of  the  cell,  and  said,  "  My  heart  is  as  hard  as  that 
iron;  there  is  nothing  in  any  book  that  will  ever  touch 
me."  "  Well,"  said  the  chaplain,  "  you  want  a  new 
heart.  Did  you  ever  read  the  covenant  of  grace  ?  "  To 


go       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

which  the  man  answered  sullenly  by  inquiring  what  he 
meant  by  such  talk.  His  friend  replied,  "  Listen  to  these 
words  — '  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new 
spirit  will  I  put  within  you/  "  The  words  struck  the 
man  with  amazement,  as  well  they  might;  he  asked  to 
have  the  passage  found  for  him  in  the  Bible.  He  read 
the  words  again  and  again;  and  when  the  chaplain  came 
back  to  him  next  day,  the  wild  beast  was  tamed.  "  Oh, 
sir,"  he  said,  "I  never  dreamed  of  such  a  promise!  I 
never  believed  it  possible  that  God  would  speak  in  such 
a  way  as  that  to  men.  If  he  gives  me  a  new  heart  it 
will  be  a  miracle  of  mercy;  and  yet  I  think,"  he  said, 
"  he  is  going  to  work  that  miracle  upon  me,  for  the  very 
hope  of  a  new  nature  is  beginning  to  touch  me  as  I 
never  was  touched  before."  That  man  became  gentle  in 
manner,  obedient  to  authority,  and  childlike  in  spirit. 

A  New  Creature.— Is  it  not  said  of  Augustine  that  after 
his  conversion  he  was  met  by  a  fallen  woman  who  had 
known  him  in  his  sin,  and  he  passed  her  by?  She  said, 
"  Austin,  it  is  I ; "  and  he  turned  and  said,  "  But  I  am 
not  Austin.  I  am  not  the  man  you  once  knew,  for  I 
have  become  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus."  That  is 
what  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can  do  for  you.  Do  you  not 
believe  it?  It  is  true,  whether  you  believe  it  or  not. 
Oh  that  you  would  look  to  Jesus  and  begin  to  live!  It 
is  time  a  change  was  made;  is  it  not?  Who  can  change 
you  but  the  Lord  Jesus? 

The  Brand  Plucked  Out  of  the  Fire. —  There  was  one  who 
went  to  hear,  I  believe,  Mr.  Toplady  preach,  the  very 
day  when  he  was  aged  a  hundred.  He  had  been  a  con 
stant  neglecter  of  the  house  of  God,  but  when  he  arrived 
at  the  age  of  a  hundred,  attracted  by  the  fame  of  Mr. 
Toplady,  who  was  an  exceedingly  popular,  as  he  certainly 
was  a  highly  evangelical,  preacher,  and  happened  to  be 
preaching  in  the  town  where  the  man  lived,  he  said  he 


CONVERSION  91 


would  go  on  that  day  to  hear  him,  that  he  might  recol 
lect  his  birthday.  He  went,  and  that  day  God  in  his 
grace  met  with  him.  I  remember,  too,  the  instance  of  a 
man  who  was  converted  by  a  sermon  which  he  heard 
Mr.  Flavel  preach,  and  which  was  blessed  to  him  eighty- 
three  years  after  he  had  heard  it,  when  he  was  at  the 
age  of  ninety-eight.  The  word  came  with  power  to  his 
soul  after  all  that  interval  of  time.  Just  as  he  was  on 
the  borders  of  the  tomb,  he  was  made  to  enter  into  eter 
nal  life.  May  the  God  of  infinite  mercy  give  such  a  bless 
ing  to  aged  ones  here,  and  they  will  be  brands  plucked 
out  of  the  fire. 

Better  Than  He  Expected.— It  does  not  matter  why  the 
people  come  to  hear  the  gospel;  God  can  bless  them  in 
any  case.  If  Christ  is  preached,  men  will  be  saved, 
even  if  they  come  to  disturb.  "  Sir,"  said  one  to  me, 
"  I  had  been  to  bargain  about  a  pair  of  ducks  on  Sunday 
morning,  and  I  passed  by  the  door,  and  I  thought  I 
would  just  look  in.  There  and  then  the  Lord  met  with 
me,  and  those  ducks  were  forgotten,  for  I  found  a 
Savior." 

Came  to  Scoff  but  Remained  to  Pray. —  I  read  in  the  Life 
of  John  Wesley  a  story  of  Methodists  meeting  in  a  barn, 
and  how  certain  of  the  villagers,  who  were  afraid  to 
break  through  the  door,  resolved  to  place  one  inside  who 
would  open  the  door  to  them  during  the  service,  that 
they  might  disturb  the  congregation.  This  person  went 
in  before  service  began,  and  concealed  himself  in  a  sack 
in  a  corner  of  the  barn.  When  the  Methodists  began 
to  sing,  he  liked  the  tune  so  well  that  he  would  not  get 
out  of  the  sack  till  he  had  heard  it  through.  Then  fol 
lowed  a  prayer,  and  during  that  prayer  God  worked  on 
the  man  in  the  sack,  so  that  he  began  to  cry  for  mercy. 
The  good  people  looked  around,  and  were  astonished  to 
find  a  sinner  in  a  sack  seeking  his  Savior.  The  door 


92      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

was  not  opened  to  the  mob  after  all ;  for  he  who  intended 
to  do  so  was  converted. 

Joy  of  Conversion. —  I  remember  hearing  Dr.  Alexander 
Fletcher,  when  speaking  to  children,  tell  them  a  simple 
anecdote  in  order  to  illustrate  the  joy  of  a  man  when 
he  gets  delivered  from  sin.  He  said,  "  I  saw  upon  the 
pavement  three  or  four  little  chimney-sweeps  jumping 
about  and  throwing  up  their  heels  in  great  delight.  And 
I  asked  them,  '  My  boys,  what  are  you  making  all  this 
demonstration  for?  '  '  Ah ! '  said  they,  '  if  you  had  been 
locked  up  for  three  months,  you  would  do  the  same  when 
you  once  got  out  of  prison/  "  I  thought  it  a  good  illus 
tration.  We  can  not  wonder  that  people  are  joyous  arid 
glad  when,  after  being  long  shut  up  in  the  prison  of  the 
law,  all  sad  and  miserable,  they  have  felt  their  bonds 
broken,  seen  the  door  of  the  jail  opened,  and  obtained 
a  legal  discharge.  What  heed  they  about  trials  and 
troubles,  or  anything  else?  They  could  leap  over  the 
mountains:  "By  our  God  we  leap  over  a  wall,"  may 
they  say.  "  A  troop  may  overcome,  but  we  shall  over 
come  at  last."  The  heart  seems  scarcely  big  enough  to 
hold  the  joy,  and  it  bursts  out,  hardly  knowing  what  to 
do  or  say.  Thus  it  is  at  that  wondrous  hour  which 
comes  but  once  in  a  Christian's  life,  when  he  first  feels 
himself  delivered. 

THE  CROSS 

The  Token  of  the  Cross. — I  had  the  pleasure  of  riding 
into  the  Leonine  city  in  Rome  a  short  time  after  the 
Italian  troops  had  taken  possession,  and  I  noticed  that 
every  house  had  marked  up  most  conspicuously  the  arms 
of  the  kingdom  of  Italy  and  the  name  of  Victor  Em 
manuel.  They  were  not  content  to  have  it  over  their 
doors,  but  all  over  the  fronts  of  the  houses  you  read 


THE  CROSS  93 


"Victor  Emmanuel,  King  of  Italy,"  showing  that  they 
were  right  glad  to  escape  from  the  dominion  of  the  Pope, 
and  to  avow  their  allegiance  to  a  constitutional  king. 
Surely  if  for  a  human  monarch  and  the  earthly  freedom 
which  he  brought  men  could  thus  set  up  his  escutcheon 
everywhere,  you  and  I  who  believe  in  Jesus  are  bound 
to  exhibit  the  blood-red  token,  and  to  keep  it  always 
conspicuous. 

Salvation  at  the  Foot  of  the  Cross. —  There  was  a  young 
man  in  Edinburg  who  wished  to  be  a  missionary.  He 
was  a  wise  young  man;  he  thought  —"Well,  if  I  am  to 
be  a  missionary,  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  transport  my 
self  far  away  from  home;  I  may  as  well  be  a  missionary 
in  Edinburg."  There's  a  hint  to  some  of  you  ladies,  who 
give  away  tracts  in  your  district,  and  never  give  your 
servant  Mary  one.  Well,  this  young  man  started,  and 
determined  to  speak  to  the  first  person  he  met.  He  met 
one  of  those  old  fishwives;  those  of  us  who  have  seen 
them  can  never  forget  them;  they  are  extraordinary 
women  indeed.  So  stepping  up  to  her  he  said,  "  Here 
you  are,  coming  with  your  burden  on  your  back;  let 
me  ask  you  if  you  have  got  another  burden,  a  spiritual 
burden !  "  "  What !  "  she  said,  "  do  you  mean  that  bur 
den  in  John  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress?  Because  if 
you  do,  young  man,  I  have  got  rid  of  that  many  years 
ago,  before  you  were  born.  But  I  went  a  better  way  to 
work  than  the  Pilgrim  did.  The  evangelist  that  John 
Bunyan  talks  about  was  one  of  your  parsons  that  do  not 
preach  the  gospel ;  for  he  said,  '  Keep  that  light  in  thine 
eye  and  run  to  the  wicket-gate/  Why,  man  alive!  that 
was  not  the  place  for  him  to  run  to.  He  should  have 
said,  'Do  you  see  that  cross?  Run  there  at  once!  But 
instead  of  that,  he  sent  the  poor  Pilgrim  to  the  wicket- 
gate  first ;  and  much  good  he  got  by  going  there !  He  got 
tumbling  into  the  slough,  and  was  like  to  have  been  killed 


94       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

by  it."  "  But  did  not  you,"  he  asked,  "  go  through  any 
Slough  of  Despond?"  "Yes,  young  man,  I  did;  but 
I  found  it  a  great  deal  easier  going  through  with  my 
burden  off  than  with  it  on  my  back."  The  old  woman 
was  quite  right.  John  Bunyan  put  the  getting  rid  of  the 
burden  too  far  off  from  the  commencement  of  the  Pil 
grimage.  If  he  meant  to  show  what  usually  happens, 
he  was  right ;  but  if  he  meant  to  show  what  ought  to  have 
happened,  he  is  wrong.  We  must  not  say  to  the  sinner, 
"  Now,  sinner,  if  thou  wilt  be  saved  go'  to  the  baptismal 
pool ;  go  to  the  wicket-gate ;  go  to  the  church ;  do  this  or 
that."  No,  the  cross  should  be  right  in  front  of  the 
wicket-gate ;  and  we  should  say  to  the  sinner,  "  Throw 
thyself  there,  and  thou  art  safe;  but  thou  art  not  safe 
till  thou  canst  cast  off  thy  burden,  and  lie  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross,  and  find  peace  in  Jesus. 

The  Cross  a  Stumbling-Block. — Nothing  provokes  the 
devil  like  the  cross.  Modern  theology  has  for  its  main 
object  the  obscuration  of  the  doctrine  of  atonement. 
These  modern  cuttle-fishes  make  the  water  of  life  black 
with  their  ink.  They  make  out  sin  to  be  a  trifle,  and  the 
punishment  of  it  to  be  a  temporary  business;  and  thus 
they  degrade  the  remedy  by  underrating  the  disease. 
We  are  not  ignorant  of  their  devices.  Expect,  my  breth 
ren,  that  the  clouds  of  darkness  will  gather  as  to  a  centre 
around  the  cross,  that  they  may  hide  it  from  the  sinner's 
view.  But,  expect  this  also,  that  there  darkness  shall 
meet  its  erid.  Light  springeth  out  of  that  darkness  — 
the  light  eternal  of  the  undying  Son  of  God,  who  having 
risen  from  the  dead,  liveth  for  ever  to  scatter  the  dark 
ness  of  evil. 

The  Plea  of  the  Cross.— If  I  had  offended  my  father,  I 
should  wish  to  be  at  peace  with  him  directly;  and  if  my 
father  said  to  me,  "  My  son,  I  will  be  reconciled  to  you  if 
you  will  go  and  speak  to  your  brother  about  it,"  well,  I 


DEATH  95 


should  not  think  it  hard,  for  I  love  my  brother  as  well  as 
my  father,  and  I  would  go  to  him  at  once,  and  so  all 
would  be  well.  God  says,  "  Go  to  Jesus ;  I  am  in  him. 
You  can  reach  me  there  —  go  round  by  his  cross ;  you 
will  find  me  reconciled  there.  Away  from  the  cross  I  am 
a  Judge,  and  my  terrors  will  consume  you.  With  the 
cross  between  you  and  me,  I  am  a  Father,  and  you  shall 
behold  my  face  beaming  with  love  to  you." 

DEATH 

Death  the  End  of  Probation.— I  have  sometimes  likened 
the  hour  of  our  death  to  that  celebrated  picture,  which  I 
think  you  have  seen  in  the  National  Gallery,  of  Perseus 
holding  up  the  head  of  Medusa.  That  head  turned  all 
persons  into  stone  who  looked  upon  it.  There  is  a  war 
rior  there  with  a  dart  in  his  hand;  he  stands  stiifened, 
turned  into  stone,  with  the  javelin  even  in  his  fist.  There 
is  another,  with  a  poinard  beneath  his  robe,  about  to 
stab ;  he  is  now  the  statute  of  an  assassin,  motionless  and 
cold.  Another  is  creeping  along  stealthily,  like  a  man 
in  ambuscade,  and  there  he  stands  a  consolidated  rock; 
he  has  looked  only  upon  that  head,  and  he  is  frozen  into 
stone.  Well,  such  is  death.  What  I  am  when  death  is 
held  before  me,  that  I  must  be  forever. 

Dying  Grace. —  I  remember  my  aged  grandfather  once 
preached  a  sermon  which  I  have  not  forgotten.  He  was 
preaching  from  the  text  "  The  God  of  all  grace,"  and  he 
somewhat  interested  the  assembly,  after  describing  the 
different  kinds  of  grace  that  God  gave,  by  saying  at  the 
end  of  each  period,  "  But  there  is  one  kind  of  grace  that 
you  do  not  want."  After  each  sentence  there  came  the 
like,  "  But  there  is  one  kind  of  grace  you  do  not  want." 
And,  then,  he  wound  up  by  saying,  "You  don't  want 
dying  grace  in  living  moments,  but  you  shall  have  dying 


g6       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

grace  when  you  want  it."  Now,  you  are  testing  yourself 
by  a  condition  in  which  you  are  not  placed.  If  you  are 
placed  in  the  condition,  you  shall  have  grace  enough  if 
you  put  your  trust  in  Christ.  In  a  party  of  friends  we 
were  discussing  the  question,  whether  if  the  days  of 
martyrdom  should  come,  we  were  prepared  to  be  burned. 
Well,  now,  I  must  frankly  say,  that  speaking  as  I  feel 
to-day,  I  am  not  prepared  to  be  burned.  But  I  do  be 
lieve  if  there  were  a  stake  in  Smithfield,  and  I  knew  that 
I  were  to  be  burned  there  at  one  o'clock,  that  I  should 
have  grace  enough  to  be  burned  at  one  o'clock ;  but  I 
have  not  yet  got  to  a  quarte*  past  twelve,  and  the  time 
has  not  come  yet.  Do  not  expect  dying  grace,  until  you 
want  it,  and  when  the  time  conies,  you  may  be  sure  you 
will  have  sufficient  grace  to  bear  it.  Cast  out  that  stum 
bling-block,  then.  Rest  thyself  on  Christ,  and  trust  him 
to  help  thee  in  thy  dying  hour. 

Death  Certain.—  "  It  is  appointed  unto  all  men  once  to  die, 
and  after  death  the  judgment."  Run!  run!  but  the  fleet 
pursuer  shall  overtake  thee.  Like  the  stag  before  the 
hounds  we  fly  swifter  than  the  breeze,  but  the  dogs  of 
Death  shall  outstrip  us:  Fever  and  plague,  weakness 
and  decay;  he  hath  but  to  let  slip  these,  and  they  are  on 
us,  and  who  can  resist  their  fury?  There  is  a  black 
camel  upon  which  Death  rides,  say  the  Arabs,  and  that 
must  kneel  at  every  man's  door.  With  impartial  hand  he 
dashes  down  the  palace  of  the  monarch  as  well  as  the 
cabin  of  the  peasant.  At  every  man's  door  there  hangs 
that  black  knocker,  and  Death  hath  but  to  uplift  it  and 
the  dread  sound  is  heard,  and  the  uninvited  guest  sits 
down  to  banquet  on  our  flesh  and  blood.  Die  I  must. 
No  physician  can  stretch  out  my  life  beyond  its  allotted 
term.  I  must  cross  that  river.  I  may  use  a  thousand 
stratagems,  but  I  cannot  escape.  Even  now  I  am  like 
the  deer  surrounded  by  the  hunters  in  a  circle,  a  circle 


DEATH  97 


which  is  narrowing  every  day;  and  soon  must  I  fall  and 
pour  out  my  life  upon  the  ground.  Let  me  never  forget, 
then,  that  while  other  things  are  uncertain,  death  is  sure. 

Death  the  Christian  Awakening. —  Let  us  imitate  Mr. 
Wesley's  calm  anticipation  of  his  end.  A  lady  once 
asked  Mr.  Wesley,  "  Suppose  that  you  knew  you  were  to 
die  at  twelve  o'clock  to-morrow  night,  how  would  you 
spend  the  intervening  time?"  "How,  madam?"  he  re 
plied,  "why  just  as  I  intend  to  spend  it  now.  I  should 
preach  this  evening  at  Gloucester,  and  again  at  five  to 
morrow  morning ;  after  that  I  should  ride  to  Tewkesbury, 
preach  in  the  afternoon,  and  meet  the  society  in  the  even 
ing.  I  should  then  repair  to  friend  Martin's  house,  who 
expects  to  entertain  me;  converse  and  pray  with  the 
family  as  usual;  retire  to  my  room  at  ten  o'clock,  com 
mend  myself  to  my  heavenly  Father,  lie  down  to  rest,  and 
wake  up  in  glory." 

Certainty  of  Death  Should  Humble  Us.— When  Saladin 
lay  a-dying  he  bade  them  take  his  winding  sheet  and 
carry  it  upon  a  lance  through  the  camp,  with  the  procla 
mation,  "  This  is  all  that  remains  of  the  mighty  Saladin, 
the  conqueror  of  nations."  A  lingerer  in  the  graveyard 
will  take  up  your  skull  one  day  and  moralize  upon  it, 
little  knowing  how  wise  a  man  you  were.  None  will  then 
do  you  reverence.  Therefore  be  humble. 

Death  a  Mercy. —  It  were  a  sad  sentence  if  we  were  bound 
over  to  dwell  in  this  poor  world  for  ever.  Who  among 
us  would  wish  to  realize  in  his  own  person  the  fabled  life 
of  the  Wandering  Jew,  or  even  Prester  John?  Who  de 
sires  to  go  up  and  down  among  the  sons  of  men  for  twice 
a  thousand  years?  If  the  Supreme  should  say,  "Live 
here  for  ever,"  it  were  a  malediction  rather  than  a  bene 
diction.  To  grow  ripe  and  to  be  carried  home  like  shocks 
of  corn  in  their  season,  is  not  this  a  fit  and  fair  thing? 
To  labor  through  a  blessed  day,  and  then  at  nightfall  to 


g8       SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

go  home  and  to  receive  the  wages  of  grace  —  is  there 
anything  dark  and  dismal  about  that?  God  forgive  you 
that  you  ever  thought  so!  If  you  are  the  Lord's  own 
child,  I  invite  you  to  look  this  home-going  in  the  face 
until  you  change  your  thought  and  see  no  more  in  it  of 
gloom  and  dread,  but  indeed  a  very  heaven  of  hope  and 
glory. 

Death  Like  Going  to  Bed.— The  child  has  to  go  to  bed,  but 
it  does  not  cry,  if  mother  is  going  upstairs  with  it.  It 
is  quite  dark:  but  what  of  that?  The  mother's  eyes  are 
lamps  to  the  child.  It  is  very  lonely  and  still.  Not  so; 
the  mother's  arms  are  the  child's  company,  and  her  voice 
is  its  music.  0,  Lord,  when  the  hour  comes  for  me  to  go 
to  bed,  I  know  that  thou  wilt  take  me  there,  and  speak 
lovingly  into  my  ear;  therefore  I  cannot  fear,  but  will 
with  faith  and  hope,  even  look  forward  to  that  hour  of 
thy  manifested  love. 

Death  Sets  Us  Free. —  I  am  told  that  persons  who  in  the 
cruel  ages  had  lain  in  prison  for  years  suffered  much 
more  in  the  moment  of  the  knocking  off  of  their  fetters 
than  they  had  endured  for  months  in  wearing  the  hard 
iron;  and  yet  I  suppose  that  no  man  languishing  in  a 
dungeon  would  have  been  unwilling  to  stretch  out  his  arm 
or  leg,  that  the  heavy  chains  might  be  beaten  off  by  the 
smith.  We  should  all  be  content  to  endure  that  little 
inconvenience  to  obtain  lasting  liberty.  Now,  such  is 
death  —  the  knocking  off  of  the  fetters ;  yet  'the  iron  may 
never  seem  to  be  so  truly  iron  as  when  that  last  liberat 
ing  blow  of  grace  is  about  to  fall.  Let  us  not  mind  the 
harsh  grating  of  the  key  as  it  turns  in  the  lock;  if  we 
understand  it  aright  it  will  be  as  music  to  our  ears. 
Imagine  that  your  last  hour  is  come !  The  key  turns  with 
pain  for  a  moment;  but,  lo,  the  bolt  is  shot!  The  iron 
gate  is  open!  The  spirit  is  free!  Glory  be  unto  the 
Lord  for  ever  and  ever! 


DEATH  99 

A  Message  from  the  Grave.—  History  tells  us  of  Peter 
Waldo,  of  Lyons,  who  was  sitting  at  a  banquet  as 
thoughtless  and  careless  as  any  of  the  revellers,  when 
suddenly  one  at  the  table  bowed  his  head  and  died. 
Waldo  was  startled  into  thought,  and  went  home  to  seek 
his  God;  he  searched  the  Scriptures,  and,  according  to 
some,  became  a  great  helper,  if  not  the  second  founder, 
of  the  Waldensian  church,  which  in  the  Alpine  valleys 
kept  the  lamp  of  the  gospel  burning  when  all  around 
was  veiled  in  night.  A  whole  church  of  God  was  thus 
strengthened  and  perpetuated  by  the  hallowed  influence 
of  death  upon  a  single  mind.  I  suppose  it  is  also  true 
that  Luther  in  his  younger  days,  walking  with  his 
friend  Alexis,  saw  him  struck  to  the  ground  by  a  flash 
of  lightning,  and  became  thenceforward  prepared  in 
heart  for  that  deep  work  of  grace  through  which  he 
learned  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  and  rose 
to  be  the  liberator  of  Europe  from  Papal  bondage.  How 
much  every  way  we  owe  to  this  weighty  subject !  Among 
the  earnest,  the  prayerful,  the  holy,  many  must  own 
that  the  vaults  of  death  have  brought  them  spiritual 
health.  Men  have  been  helped  to  live  by  remembering 
that  they  must  die:  yea,  some  men  knew  nothing  of  the 
highest  form  of  life  till  death  aroused  them  from  their 
deadly  slumbers. 

Death  Can  do  no  Real  Harm.—  Certain  Swiss  peasants  not 
very  long  ago  were  feeding  their  flocks  on  one  of  the 
lofty  upland  valleys.  On  one  side  of  the  pasturage 
stood  a  number  of  chalets,  or  wooden  huts,  in  which  they 
were  accustomed  to  live  during  the  summer,  poor  shelters 
which  were  left  as  soon  as  the  winter  set  in.  One  day 
they  heard  a  strange  rumbling  up  in  the  lofty  Alps,  and 
they  understood  what  it  meant;  it  meant  that  a  mass  of 
rock  or  snow  or  ice  had  fallen,  and  would  soon  come 
crushing  down  in  the  form  of  an  avalanche.  In  a  brief 


ioo     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

space  their  fears  were  realized,  for  they  saw  a  tremen 
dous  mass  come  rushing  from  above,  bearing  destruction 
in  its  course.  What  did  it  destroy?  Only  the  old,  crazy 
chalets:  that  was  all.  Every  man  of  the  shepherds  was 
safe,  and  untouched:  the  event  was  rather  to  them  a 
matter  which  caused  a  Te  Deum  to  be  sung1  in  the  vil 
lage  church  below  than  a  subject  for  mourning  and  sor 
row.  They  said,  "  The  avalanche  is  terrible,  but  it  has 
not  slain  the  aged  mother,  nor  crushed  the  babe  in  its 
cradle:  it  has  injured  none  of  us,  but  only  buried  a  few 
hovels  which  we  can  soon  rebuild."  Their  case  is  a 
picture  of  ours.  The  avalanche  of  death  will  fall;  but 
O  ye  saints  when  it  comes  this  is  all  it  will  do  for  you 
—  your  earthly  house  will  be  dissolved !  Will  you  fret 
over  so  small  a  loss? 

Dying  Without  Hope.—  Some  years  ago  I  was  awakened 
about  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  by  a  sharp  ring  of 
the  doorbell.  I  was  urged  without  delay  to  visit  a  house 
not  very  far  from  London  Bridge.  I  went;  and  up  two 
pair  of  stairs  I  was  shown  into  a  room  the  occupants  of 
which  were  a  nurse  and  a  dying  man.  There  was  no 
body  else.  "  Oh,  sir,"  said  she,  "  Mr.  So-and-so,  about 
half-an-hour  ago,  begged  me  to  send  for  you."  "  What 
does  he  want?"  I  asked.  "He  is  dying,  sir,"  she  re 
plied.  I  said,  "  I  see  that.  What  sort  of  a  man  was 
he  ? "  "  He  came  home  last  night,  sir,  from  Brighton. 
He  had  been  out  all  day.  I  looked  for  a  Bible,  sir,  but 
there  is  not  one  in  the  house;  I  hope  you  have  got  one 
with  you."  "  Oh,"  I  said,  "  a  Bible  would  be  of  no  use 
to  him  now.  If  he  could  understand  me  I  could  tell  him 
the  way  of  salvation  in  the  very  words  of  Holy  Scrip 
ture."  I  spoke  to  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer.  I 
spoke  again;  still  there  was  no  reply.  All  sense  had 
fled.  I  stood  a  few  minutes  gazing  at  his  face,  till  I 
perceived  he  was  dead.  His  soul  had  departed.  That 


DECISION  101 


man  in  his  lifetime  had  been  wont  to  jeer  at  me.  In 
strong  language  he  had  often  denounced  me  as  a  hy 
pocrite.  Yet  he  was  no  sooner  smitten  with  the  darts  of 
death  than  he  sought  my  presence  and  my  counsel,  feel 
ing  no  doubt  in  his  heart  that  I  was  a  servant  of  God, 
though  he  did  not  care  to  own  it  with  his  lips.  There 
I  stood,  unable  to  help  him.  Promptly  as  I  had  re 
sponded  to  his  call,  what  could  I  do,  but  look  at  his 
corpse,  and  go  home  again.  He  had,  when  too  late, 
sighed  for  the  ministry  of  reconciliation,  sought  to  enter 
in,  but  he  was  not  able. 

Death  of  the  Wicked.— I  never  wish  to  stand  by  the 
deathbed  of  any  who  die  in  their  sins;  this  is  a  dreadful 
woe  indeed,  to  be  wrapped  in  the  black  winding-sheet 
of  guilt.  I  have  seen  the  eyes  starting  from  the  sock 
ets;  I  have  seen  the  throat  dried  up  like  a  potsherd;  I 
have  heard  the  cries  of  one  man  in  death  whom  I  vis 
ited.  The  scene  comes  up  before  me  at  the  present 
moment  as  I  saw  him  rise  in  his  bed  and  shriek,  "  0 
God,  I  will  not  die,  there  is  no  mercy  for  me."  He 
begged  of  us  to  pray  for  him,  and  yet  he  knew  that 
our  prayers  were  of  no  avail.  "I  have  had  my  sea 
sons,"  said  he,  "but  I  can't  repent;  I  shall  die  in  a 
short  time,  and  I  shall  soon  be  in  hell."  "Water,"  said 
he,  "  give  me  water."  Yet  again  he  cried,  "  0,  God,  I 
cannot  die,  I  will  not  die,"  and  this  was  a  prelude  to  his 
departure,  for  he  shortly  afterwards  expired  in  desperate 
agony.  Death  is  indeed  a  woe  to  such  a  man  as  that. 

DECISION 

Indecision.— "  Now,"  says  the  prophet,  "how  long  halt 
ye?"  or,  if  you  like  to  read  it  so,  "how  long  limp  ye 
between  two  opinions'?"  (How  long  wriggle  ye  between 
two  opinions?  would  be  a  good  word,  if  I  might  em- 


102      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

ploy  it.)  He  represents  them  as  like  a  man  whose  legs 
are  entirely  out  of  joint;  he  first  goes  on  one  side,  and 
then  on  the  other,  and  can  not  go  far  either  way.  I 
could  not  describe  it  without  putting  myself  into  a  most 
ludicrous  posture. 

The  Great  Decision.— I  can  scarcely  recall  the  details  of 
a  little  incident  in  Russian  history  which  might  illus 
trate  the  emergency:  but  the  fact,  as  far  as  my  memory 
serves,  was  this.  The  Czar  had  died  suddenly,  and  in 
the  dead  of  night  one  of  the  counselors  of  the  empire 
came  to  the  Princess  Elizabeth  and  said  to  her,  "You 
must  come  at  once  and  take  possession  of  the  crown." 
She  hesitated,  for  there  were  difficulties  in  the  way,  and 
she  did  not  desire  the  position.  But  he  said,  "  Now,  sit 
down,  Princess,  for  a  minute."  Then  he  drew  her  two 
pictures.  One  was  the  picture  of  herself  and  the  Count 
thrown  into  prison,  racked  with  tortures,  and  presently 
both  brought  out  to  die  beneath  the  axe.  "That,"  he 
said,  "you  can  have  if  you  like."  The  other  picture 
was  of  herself  with  the  imperial  crown  of  all  the  Russias 
on  her  brow,  and  all  the  princes  bowing  before  her,  and 
all  the  nation  doing  her  homage.  "  That,"  said  he,  "  is 
the  other  side  of  the  question.  But,  to-night,  your 
Majesty  must  choose  which  it  shall  be."  With  the  two 
pictures  vividly  depicted  before  her  mind's  eye  she  did 
not  hesitate  long,  but  cast  in  her  choice  for  the  crown. 
Now,  I  would  fain  paint  to  you  such  pictures,  only  I 
lack  the  skill.  You  will  either  sink  forever  down  in 
deeper  and  yet  deeper  woe,  filled  with  remorse  because 
you  brought  it  all  upon  yourself,  or  else,  if  you  de 
cide  for  Christ,  and  trust  in  him,  you  shall  enter  into 
the  bliss  of  those  who  forever  and  forever,  without  ad 
mixture  of  grief,  enjoy  felicity  before  the  throne  of 
God.  To  my  mind,  there  ought  to  be  no  halting  as  to 
the  choice.  It  should  be  made.  I  pray  God's  Holy 


DECISION  103 


Spirit  to  help  you  to  make  it  to-night.  On  this  winged 
hour  eternity  is  hung.  The  choice  of  this  night  may  be 
the  cooling  of  the  wax  which  now  is  soft.  Once  cooled, 
it  will  bear  the  impress  throughout  eternity.  God  grant 
it  may  be  a  resolve  for  Christ,  for  his  cause,  for  his 
cross,  for  his  crown. 

Solemn  Decisions.—  I  am  told  that  just  under  the  dome 
of  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  there  is  the  mark  of  a  workman's 
hammer,  and  it  is  said  that  years  ago  one  who  was 
engaged  in  the  roof  fell  down  and  there  met  his  death. 
It  is  the  place  where  a  soul  departed,  where  a  man  died. 
I  do  not  know  where  it  is,  but  it  may  be  that  there  is  a 
solemn  spot  here  to-night  where  a  soul  will  be  lost  for 
ever.  Maybe  the  moment  has  come  when  the  wax  upon 
the  soul's  death-warrant  shall  grow  cold,  when  it  shall 
say  in  its  heart,  "  I  will  have  none  of  these  things,"  and 
when  God  shall  say,  "  Thou  shalt  have  none  of  them ; 
I  will  let  thee  alone;  thy  conscience  shall  never  be 
troubled  again;  thou  shalt  go  through  life  in  peace, 
thou  shalt  go  to  thy  death  with  carelessness;  only  in 
hell  shalt  thou  ever  open  thine  eyes."  God  grant  that 
it  be  not  so,  but  I  feel  as  if  it  would  be  so  with  some 
of  you,  unless  sovereign  and  irresistible  grace  should 
decide  otherwise,  and  then,  to-night,  there  will  be  a  spot 
in  this  house  of  prayer  where  a  soul  will  be  born  to 
God.  What  man  is  he  that  just  now  gives  his  heart  to 
Christ?  Are  there  none  of  you?  Must  I  go  back  to  my 
Master  with  no  joyful  tidings?  Is  there  no  heart  here 
that  says :  — 

*'  I'll  go  to  Jesus,  though  my  sins 

Have  like  a  mountain  rose; 
I  know  his  courts,  I'll  enter  in 
Whatever  may  oppose." 


io4     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Prompt  Decision.—  Suppose  yourself  placed  in  the  same 
position  as  King  Antiochus.  When  the  Roman  ambas 
sador  met  him  and  asked  him  whether  it  was  to  be  peace 
or  war,  he  said  he  must  have  time  to  consider.  The  am 
bassador  with  his  sword  drew  a  circle  in  the  sand. 
"  Give  an  answer/'  he  said,  "  before  you  move  out  of 
that  circle,  or  if  you  step  out  of  it  your  answer  is  war." 
I  think  there  is  such  a  phase  in  a  man's  life,  when  he 
must  give  a  prompt  reply.  I  know  what  that  answer 
will  be  unless  God  the  Holy  Ghost  makes  you  give  the 
right  one,  but  you  must  give  it  one  way  or  the  other,  and 
if  the  man  saith,  "No,  I  will  give  no  answer,"  yet  if 
he  stop  beyond  that  appointed  hour,  it  is  war  between 
him  and  God  forever,  and  the  sword  shall  never  be 
sheathed,  nor  go  back  into  its  scabbard.  He  hath  thrown 
down  the  gauntlet,  by  refusing  to  give  a  decisive  pledge 
of  obedience.  The  Lord  hath  declared  eternal  war 
against  him;  peace  shall  not  be  made  forever.  Before 
you  go  farther,  which  shall  it  be? 

DUTY 

Day  by  Day.—  But  why  is  it  you  will  be  troubling  yourself 
about  the  things  of  to-morrow?  The  common  people 
say,  "  Cross  a  bridge  when  you  come  to  it."  That  is 
good  advice.  Do  the  same.  When  a  trouble  comes,  at 
tack  it,  and  down  with  it,  and  master  it;  but  do  not  be 
gin  now  to  forestall  your  woes.  "  Ah !  but  I  have  so 
many,"  says  one.  Therefore  I  say,  do  not  look  further 
before  thee  than  thou  needest.  "  Sufficient  unto  the  day 
is  the  evil  thereof."  Do  as  the  brave  Grecian  did,  who, 
when  he  defended  his  country  from  Persia,  did  not  go 
into  the  plains  to  fight,  but  stood  in  the  narrow  pass  of 
Thermopylae;  there,  when  the  myriads  came  to  him,  they 
had  to  come  one  by  one,  and  he  felled  them  to  the  earth. 
Had  he  ventured  into  the  plain  he  would  have  been  soon 


DUTY  105 

devoured,  and  his  handful  would  have  been  melted  like 
a  drop  of  dew  in  the  sea.  Stand  in  the  narrow  pass  of 
to-day,  and  fight  thy  troubles  one  by  one;  but  do  not 
rush  into  the  plains  of  to-morrow,  for  there  thou  wilt 
be  routed  and  killed. 

Our  Duty  to  Our  Neighbor.—  An  infidel  once  met  a  Chris 
tian,  and  said,  "  I  know  you  do  not  believe  your  re 
ligion."  "Why?"  asked  the  Christian.  "Because,"  said 
the  other,  "  for  years  you  have  passed  me  on  my  way 
to  my  house  of  business.  You  believe,  do  you  not, 
there  is  a  hell,  into  which  men's  spirits  are  cast  1 "  "  Yes, 
I  do,"  said  the  Christian.  "  And  you  believe  that  unless 
I  believe  in  Christ  I  must  be  sent  there?"  "Yes." 
"  You  do  not,  I  am  sure,  because  if  you  did,  you  must 
be  a  most  inhuman  wretch  to  pass  me,  day  by  day,  and 
never  tell  me  about  it  or  warn  me  of  it." 

Stedfast  in  Duty.—"  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be 
sober,  and  hope  to  the  end,"—  because  there  is  wondrous 
grace  to  be  revealed  to  you  by  and  by.  I  should  like  you 
to  act  as  an  American  —  Colonel  Davenport  —  did  upon 
a  certain  occasion.  One  day,  many  years  back,  a  thick 
darkness  came  over  the  United  States.  Now  and  then  in 
London  we  have  dreadfully  dark  days,  for  which  we  can 
scarcely  account,  but  this  was  quite  a  new  experience 
for  the  New  Englanders,  and  caused  a  terrible  sensa 
tion.  So  exceedingly  black  was  it  that  the  barn-door 
fowls  went  to  roost  in  the  middle  of  the  day.  The  dark 
ness  grew  worse,  and  people  trembled  in  their  houses, 
declaring  that  the  end  of  the  world  was  coming.  They 
were  all  excited  and  alarmed.  One  of  the  houses  of 
legislature  adjourned  under  the  belief  that  the  Day  of 
Judgment  was  come.  The  other  house  was  sitting,  and 
the  blackness  was  so  intense  that  everybody  was  awed. 
A  motion  was  made  that  they  should  break  up,  as  the 
end  of  the  world  had  certainly  arrived.  Colonel  Daven- 


io6     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

port  objected,  saying,  "  The  judgment  is  either  approach 
ing  or  it  is  not.  If  it  is  not,  there  is  no  cause  for  ad 
journing;  and  if  it  is,  I  choose  to  be  found  doing  my 
duty.  I  wish,  therefore,  that  candles  may  be  brought." 
Brethren,  it  is  dark;  but  whatever  is  going  to  happen, 
or  whatever  is  not  going  to  happen,  let  us  be  found 
girded,  sober,  and  hopeful.  In  these  dark  political  times, 
these  dark  religious  times,  I  call  for  candles,  for  we 
mean  to  go  on  working. 

The  Duty  at  Hand.—  Nothing  for  a  Christian  to  do !  You 
are  lazy,  sirs;  lazy,  listless,  sluggish,  or  else  you  would 
never  raise  such  a  question.  It  is  not,  "  What  should  I 
do, "  but  "  Where  shall  I  begin  doing  it  —  which  is  the 
first  point?"  And  I  would  say,  begin  at  the  point  that 
is  nearest  to  you.  So  they  did  when  they  built  the  walls 
of  Jerusalem.  Every  man  built  opposite  to  his  own 
house.  There,  you  see,  the  advantage  was  he  had  not 
to  walk  two  miles  to  his  work  at  mom  and  then  come 
back  at  night.  He  built  opposite  to  his  own  house,  so 
he  was  spared  all  that  trouble.  And  when  he  had  a 
little  leisure  time,  when  he  went  to  his  dinner,  he  could 
sit  and  look  at  his  work,  and  think  how  to  do  it  better 
next  time.  There  was  a  further  advantage  in  that. 
Much  economy  and  great  benefit  would  come  of  it  were 
Christians  to  work  near  where  they  live,  and  take  up 
that  part  of  Christian  service  most  congenial  to  their 
circumstances  and  to  their  tastes.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand 
findeth  to  do  "—  next  to  thine  own  door  — "  do  it  with  all 
thy  might." 

EARNESTNESS 

Wasted  Zeal.—  We  like  to  associate  with  people  who  have 
hearts  —  not  dry  leather  bottles,  out  of  which  all  the 
juice  has  gone;  but  those  who  have  heart,  and  soul,  and 
life,  and  fire,  and  go.  I  love  to  meet  with  those  who 


EARNESTNESS  107 


believe  in  something,  and  who  work  under  the  pressure 
of  their  belief,  and  give  their  strength  to  the  carrying 
out  of  what  they  believe  to  be  the  will  of  God.  It  does 
seem  a  very  great  pity  that  any  zeal  should  be  wasted, 
and  that  any  one  full  of  zeal  should  yet  miss  his  way. 
We  fear  that  there  are  some  who  will  do  so.  If  you 
want  to  go  to  York  you  may  ride  very  fast  south,  but 
you  will  not  get  to  York  with  all  your  speed.  Un 
less  you  turn  your  rein  towards  the  north,  you  may 
ride  a  thousand  horses  to  death,  and  never  see  the  gates 
of  the  old  city.  It  is  of  no  use  to  be  zealous  if  you  are 
zealous  in  a  wrong  cause;  but  when  we  meet  with  any 
who  are  such,  I  say  that  they  become  peculiarly  the  ob 
ject  of  a  Christian's  prayers.  Pray  for  the  zealous 
with  all  your  hearts,  for  it  is  such  a  pity  that  one  of 
them  shoulcT  go  astray. 

Christian  Earnestness.—  "  Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind." 
My  brethren,  that  certainly  teaches  us,  in  the  first  place, 
earnestness.  A  man  going  to  work  tucks  up  his  sleeves, 
and  tightens  his  robes.  He  has  something  to  do  which 
demands  all  his  strength,  and,  therefore,  he  cannot  afford 
to  have  anything  hanging  loosely  about  him,  to  hinder 
him.  We  brace  ourselves  for  a  supreme  effort:  and  the 
Christian  life  is  always  such.  We  must  always  be  in 
earnest  if  we  would  be  disciples  of  our  earnest  Lord. 

Refreshed  by  Enthusiasm.—  The  chamois-hunter  quits  his 
couch  long  before  the  sun  is  up,  and  climbs  the  mountains. 
He  watches  from  the  first  gray  light  for  the  creature 
which  is  the  object  of  his  pursuit.  Ask  him  how  it  is 
when  he  returns  late  in  the  evening  that  he  has  had 
nothing  to  eat  all  day  long.  He  answers,  "  I  never 
thought  of  it;  I  saw  a  chamois  on  a  distant  crag  and  I 
hastened  after  it.  I  leaped  the  ravines,  I  climbed  the 
steep  faces  of  the  rocks,  I  sprang  down  again;  I  was 
almost  on  my  prey,  but  it  was  gone.  I  crept  up  within 


io8     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

range  again,  holding  my  breath  lest  the  scent  of  me  should 
alarm  the  watchful  chamois.  I  thought  of  nothing  but 
my  sport;  and  I  never  knew  what  hunger  meant  until 
my  bullet  found  its  mark  in  the  heart  of  my  prey,  and 
I  had  drawn  out  my  hunting-knife.  It  was  not  until  I 
began  to  lift  the  game  to  my  shoulder  that  I  bethought 
me  that  I  had  neither  eaten  nor  drunk  that  day.  You 
understand  what  this  enthusiasm  means  and  how  it  re 
freshes  the  hunter. 

Earnestness. —  There  was  a  man  who  strove  in  the  House 
of  Commons  for  what  he  thought  would  be  a  great  boon 
to  seamen,  but  he  could  not  prevail.  At  last  he  broke 
through  all  the  rules  of  the  house  and  acted  like  a  fa 
natic,  and  when  everybody  saw  that  the  man  was  so  in 
earnest  that  he  was  ready  to  faint  and  die,  they  said, 
"  We  must  do  something " ;  and  it  was  done.  An  en 
thusiasm  which  overpowers  yourself  is  likely  to  over 
power  others. 

EXERCISE 

Exercising  Our  Faith.—  Strong  faith  must  always  be  an 
exercised  faith;  and  he  that  dares  not  exercise  the  faith 
he  has  shall  not  have  more.  "  Take  away  from  him  the 
one  talent  and  give  it  to  him  that  hath,  because  he  did 
not  put  it  out  to  usury/'  In  Mr.  Whitfield's  life,  you 
do  not  often  find  any  complaining  of  want  of  faith;  or 
if  he  did,  it  was  when  he  only  preached  nine  times  a 
week ;  he  never  complained  when  he  preached  sixteen  times. 
Read  Grimshaw's  life :  you  do  not  often  find  him  troubled 
with  despondency  when  he  preached  twenty-four  times 
in  seven  days;  it  was  only  when  he  was  growing  a  little 
idle  and  only  preached  twelve  times.  Keep  always  at  it, 
and  all  at  it,  and  there  is  not  much  fear  of  j^our  faith 
becoming  weak.  It  is  with  our  faith  as  with  boys  in 
the  winter  time.  There  they  go  round  the  fire,  rubbing 


FAITH  109 


and  chafing  their  hands  to  keep  the  blood  in  circulation, 
and  almost  fighting  each  other  to  see  which  shall  sit  on 
the  fire  and  get  warm.  At  last  the  father  comes,  and 
says,  "Boys,  this  won't  do;  you  will  never  get  warm  by 
these  artificial  means ;  run  out  and  do  some  work."  Then 
they  all  go  out,  and  they  come  in  again  with  a  ruddy 
hue  in  their  cheeks,  their  hands  no  longer  tingle,  and 
they  say,  "  "Well,  father,  we  didn't  think  it  half  so  warm 
as  it  is."  So  must  it  be  with  you;  you  must  set  to  work 
if  you  would  have  your  faith  grow  strong  and  warm. 
Need  of  Spiritual  Exercise.—  Some  men  seem  as  if  they 
only  had  to  meet  one  form  of  trial.  They  remind  me 
of  the  Indian  Fakir;  he  holds  his  arm  straight  up;  that 
is  the  triumph  of  his  strength.  Now,  God  does  not  ex 
ercise  a  believer's  limbs  till  they  grow  stiff;  but  he  ex 
ercises  them  in  every  way,  that  they  may  become  supple, 
so  that,  come  what  may,  he  is  ready  to  achieve  any 
exploit. 

FAITH 

Fear  Not  Faith. —  A  soldier  in  the  army  of  the  Potomac, 
of  whom  I  somewhere  read,  was  taken  to  the  rear  to 
die.  He  was  badly  wounded ;  he  was  also  suffering  from 
fever.  Some  one  had  told  him,  just  before  the  fever 
came  on,  of  a  soldier  found  asleep  at  his  post  who  was 
condemned  to  die.  The  poor  fellow  in  his  delirium  im 
agining  that  he  was  that  soldier,  cried  out  to  the  doctor 
who  was  attending  him,  "  Sir,  I  am  to  be  shot  to-morrow 
morning;  and  as  I  wish  to  have  all  right,  I  want  you  to 
send  for  the  chaplain  at  once.  I  want  to  see  him."  The 
doctor,  to  calm  his  fears,  said.  "No,  no,  you  are  not  to 
be  shot  to-morrow  morning ;  it's  a  mistake."  "  Oh,  but 
I  am,"  he  said;  "  I  know  I  shall."  "  But  I  will  be  here," 
said  the  doctor,  "  and  if  any  one  comes  to  touch  you,  I 
will  have  him  arrested.  I  will  take  care  you  shall  not 


no  SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

die."  "Is  it  so,  doctor?"  said  he,  in  calmer  accents, 
"  then  you  need  not  send  for  the  chaplain ;  I  shall  not 
want  him  just  yet."  So  the  truth  came  out  that  fear, 
not  faith,  animated  him,  though  it  was  but  spoken  in  a 
feverish  dream. 

Faith  and  Joy.—  "  Is  it  not  surprising,"  said  one,  "  that 
God  should  have  heard  my  prayers,  and  have  been  so 
gracious  to  me  in  providence  ? "  "  No,"  said  an  old 
saint,  whose  long  experience  had  taught  her  more  of  the 
Lord,  "  it  does  not  surprise  me,  it  is  just  like  him,  it  is 
his  way  with  his  people.  Oh,  to  feel  that  great  mercy 
is  like  him ;  that  it  is  what  we  should  expect  of  God,  that 
he  should  give  great  deliverances,  should  walk  the  waters 
of  our  griefs,  and  bid  them  cease  their  raging!  It  is  a 
blessed  faith  which  enables  us  to  recognize  Jesus  on  the 
waters,  and  to  say,  "  I  know  it  is  Jesus,  nobody  but  Jesus 
could  act  so  wondrously;  I  might  not  have  known  him 
if  I  had  seen  him  working  in  an  ordinary  way,  or  trav 
elling  like  a  common  wayfarer,  but  here  amidst  extra 
ordinary  seasons  I  expected  his  help ;  if  I  never  had  seen 
him  before,  I  expected  to  see  him  now;  and  now  I  do 
see  him  I  am  not  amazed,  though  I  am  delighted.  I 
looked  for  him,  and  I  knew  that  when  the  need  of  him  was 
greatest,  his  coming  would  be  sure."  When  faith  bright 
ens  the  eye  of  hope  with  the  flash  of  expectation,  joy  is 
not  far  away. 

Faith  and  Healing. —  If  you  believe  his  word  you  shall 
know  the  sweets  of  grace.  To  ask  for  more  evidence 
first  is  as  though  a  man  should  say,  "  Here  is  a  medicine 
prepared  by  a  physician  of  great  repute,  and  it  is  said 
to  be  very  powerful  for  driving  out  the  disease  from 
which  I  suffer:  I  will  take  it  as  soon  as  I  see  that  I  am 
improving  by  its  means."  The  man  has  lost  his  reason, 
has  he  not?  He  cannot  expect  even  a  partial  cure  till 
be  has  taken  the  medicine.  He  cannot  expect  the  result 


FAITH  in 


to  come  before  the  cause.  You  must  take  the  good  Phy 
sician's  medicine  as  a  matter  of  faith,  and  afterwards 
your  faith  will  be  increased  by  the  beneficial  result.  You 
must  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  because  of  the  witness  of 
God  concerning  him,  for  that  is  all  the  witness  you  ought 
to  wish  for,  and  all  that  God  will  give  you.  After  you 
have  believed  other  witnesses  will  spring  up  in  your  soul, 
as  the  results  of  faith,  and  so  your  confidence  will  be 
strengthened;  but  just  now,  beloved,  believe  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  having  believed  in  him  you  shall  know  that 
you  are  forgiven  for  his  name's  sake. 

Faith  and  Feeling. —  A  certain  master  had  a  servant  whose 
mind  was  very  much  poisoned  against  him  by  slanderous 
tales.  Everything  the  master  did  the  servant  miscon 
strued,  because  he  considered  him  to  be  a  tyrant  and  an 
oppressor.  Now  it  came  to  pass  that  this  servant  one 
day  learned  more  concerning  his  master,  and  found  out 
that  everything  he  had  done  was  dictated  by  the  most 
generous  motives,  and  that  his  master  indeed  was  one  of 
the  excellent  of  the  earth.  The  moment  that  servant's 
thoughts  of  his  master  changed  and  he  had  faith  in  his 
goodness,  he  acted  very  differently,  as  you  may  well  con 
ceive;  none  could  be  more  faithful  and  diligent  than  he. 
Now,  we  prove  that  we  believe,  because  we  feel  towards 
God  so  very  differently;  he  is  loved  in  our  inmost  souls, 
and  we  delight  to  serve  him.  This  would  have  been  ut 
terly  impossible  if  we  had  not  been  changed  in  our  feel 
ings  toward  him  by  being  led  to  trust  him. 

Unknown  Heroes  of  Faith.—  Think  not  that  Luther  was 
the  only  man  that  wrought  the  Reformation.  There  were 
hundreds  who  sighed  and  cried  in  secret  in  the  cottages 
of  the  Black  Forest,  in  the  homes  of  Germany,  and  on 
the  hills  of  Switzerland.  There  were  hearts  breaking 
for  the  Lord's  appearing  in  strange  places,  they  might 
have  been  found  in  the  palaces  of  Spain,  in  the  dungeons 


ii2     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

of  the  Inquisition,  among  the  canals  of  Holland,  and  the 
green  lanes  of  England.  Women,  as  they  hid  their 
Bibles,  lest  their  lives  should  be  forfeited,  cried  out  in 
spirit,  "0  God,  how  long?" 

The  Riches  of  Christian  Faith.—  This  week  I  had  my  faith 
much  strengthened  in  visiting  a  sick  woman.  I  would 
fain  change  places  with  her.  Glad  enough  should  I  be 
to  lie  upon  that  sick  bed  and  die  in  her  room ;  for  though 
she  has  been  long  on  the  borders  of  the  grave,  and 
knows  it, —  knows  that  each  hour  may  probably  be  the 
last,  her  joy  is  so  great,  her  bliss  is  so  abundant,  that 
you  have  only  to  speak  with  her  and  her  joy  overflows. 
She  said  to  me,  "  I  prayed  that  if  God  would  spare  me, 
he  would  give  me  one  soul,  and  he  has  given  me  five  con 
verts  while  I  have  been  on  this  bed ;  "  and  I  did  not  won 
der  at  it,  as  I  saw  the  five  dear  friends  sitting  in  the 
room;  I  did  not  wonder  at  it  —  it  was  enough  to  make 
one  a  Christian  to  see  her  joy  and  her  peace,  and  hear 
her  talk  so  confidently  about  the  time  when  she  should 
see  her  Lord  and  be  in  his  embrace  forever.  "  Ah ! " 
says  the  devil  to  the  Christian,  "  I  will  give  you  so  much 
if  you  sin."  Our  reply  is,  "What  could  you  give  me 
compared  with  my  inheritance1?  0  fiend,  thou  bringest 
me  counterfeit  riches,  but  J  can  count  down  ten  thousand 
times  as  much  in  real  solid  gold!  Thou  profferest  me 
thy  paste  gems,  but  here  are  diamonds  and  pearls  of 
the  first  water  and  of  the  rarest  value ! 

Superficial  Unbelief.—  Addison  tells  us  of  a  man  who,  on 
board  ship  in  a  storm,  knelt  down  to  pray,  and  expressed 
his  firm  belief  in  a  God.  When  he  got  ashore  some  one 
laughed  at  him  for  it,  and  he  challenged  the  man  to  a 
duel.  They  fought  together,  and  the  atheist  fell  wounded. 
When  the  blood  was  flowing  he  believed  there  was  a  God, 
and  he  began  to  cry  to  God  with  all  his  might  to  save 
him.  The  physician  bound  up  the  wound.  The  man 


FAITH  113 


put  the  question  to  him,  "Is  it  mortal?"  "No,"  he 
says :  "  it  is  only  a  flesh  wound."  Then  said  the  man, 
"  There  is  no  God ;  I  am  a  thorough  atheist."  He  be 
lieved  in  God  when  he  thought  he  was  going  to  die;  the 
moment  he  felt  himself  better,  he  returned  to  his  unbe 
lief. 

Faith  and  Reason. —  Once  Reason  came  along,  and  heard 
a  man  cry,  "  I  am  guilty,  guilty,"  She  stopped,  and  said, 
"  The  man  is  guilty ;  God  condemns  the  guilty,  therefore 
this  man  will  be  condemned."  She  went  away  —  left 
the  man  condemned  and  ruined,  and  quivering  with  fear. 
Faith  came  and  heard  the  self -same  cry,  rendered  more 
bitter  by  the  cruel  syllogism  of  Reason.  Faith  stopped: 
she  said,  "  The  man  is  guilty ;  Christ  died  for  the  guilty ; 
the  man  will  be  saved ;  "  and  her  logic  was  right ;  the  man 
lifted  up  his  head,  and  rejoiced.  Reason  came  one  day, 
and  saw  a  man  naked,  and  she  said,  "  He  hath  not  on 
a  wedding  garment;  can  naked  souls  appear  before  the 
bar  of  God?  Should  they  have  a  place  at  the  supper  of 
the  Lamb?  The  man  is  naked;  he  must  be  cast  out,  for 
naked  ones  cannot  enter  heaven !  "  Then  Faith  came  by, 
and  said,  "  The  man  is  naked ;  Christ  wrought  a  robe  of 
righteousness;  he  must  have  made  it  for  the  naked;  he 
would  not  have  made  it  for  those  who  have  a  robe  of 
their  own.  The  robe  is  for  the  naked  man,  and  he  shall 
stand  in  it  before  God."  And  her  logic  was  right  and 
just.  The  other  might  seem  strictly  according  to  rule, 
but  this  was  better  still.  Reason  one  day  heard  a  man 
say  that  he  was  very  good  and  righteous.  She  saw  him 
go  up  to  the  temple,  and  heard  him  pray,  "  Lord,  I  thank 
thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men."  Said  Reason,  "  That 
man  is  better  than  others,  and  he  will  be  accepted."  But 
she  argued  wrongly;  for,  lo!  he  went  out,  and  a  poor 
sinner  by  his  side,  who  could  only  say,  "  God  be  merciful 
to  me,  a  sinner,"  went  down  to  his  house  justified,  while 


ii4     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

the  proud  Pharisee  went  on  his  way  disregarded.  The 
logic  of  faith  is  to  argue  white  from  black,  whereas  the 
logic  of  reason  argues  white  from  white.  Luther  says, 
"  Once  upon  a  time  the  devil  came  to  me,  and  said,  '  Mar 
tin  Luther,  you  are  a  great  sinner,  and  you  will  be 
damned.'  '  Stop,  stop/  said  I,  '  one  thing  at  a  time ;  I  ain 
a  great  sinner,  it  is  true,  though  you  have  no  right  to 
tell  me  of  it.  I  confess  it ;  what  next  ? '  '  Therefore 
you  will  be  damned/  '  That  is  not  good  reasoning.  It  is 
true  I  am  a  great  sinner,  but  it  is  written  "  Jesus  Christ 
came  to  save  sinners ; "  therefore  I  shall  be  saved.  Now 
go  your  way/  So  I  cut  the  devil  off  with  his  own  sword, 
and  he  went  away  mourning,  because  he  could  not  cast 
me  down  by  calling  me  a  sinner." 

Danger  of  Unbelief.—  When  our  sappers  and  miners  went 
to  work  around  Sebastopol,  they  could  not  work  in  front 
of  the  walls,  if  they  had  not  something  to  keep  off  the 
shots ;  so  they  raised  earth- works,  behind  which  they  could 
do  what  they  pleased.  So  with  the  ungodly  man.  The 
devil  gives  him  unbelief:  he  thus  puts  up  an  earth-work, 
and  finds  refuge  behind  it.  Ah,  sinners!  when  once  the 
Holy  Ghost  knocks  down  your  unbelief;  when  once  he 
brings  home  the  truth  in  demonstration  and  in  power, 
how  the  law  will  work  upon  your  soul.  If  man  did  but 
believe  that  the  law  is  holy,  that  the  commandments  are 
holy,  just,  and  good,  how  he  would  be  shaken  over  hell's 
mouth;  there  would  be  no  sitting  and  sleeping  in  God's 
house;  no  careless  hearers;  no  going  away  and  straight 
way  forgetting  what  manner  of  men  ye  are.  Oh!  once 
get  rid  of  unbelief,  how  would  every  ball  from  the  bat 
teries  of  the  law  fall  upon  the  sinner;  and  the  slain  of 
the  Lord  would  be  many. 

Faith  Awakened  Through  God's  Kindness.— I  remember 
an  old  experimental  Christian  speaking  about  the  great 
pillars  of  our  faith;  he  was  a  sailor;  we  were  then  on 


FAITH  115 


board  ship,  and  there  were  sundry  huge  posts  on  the 
shore,  to  which  the  ships  were  usually  fastened,  by 
throwing  a  cable  over  them.  After  I  had  told  him  a 
great  many  promises,  he  said,  "I  know  they  are  good 
strong  promises,  but  I  can  not  get  near  enough  to  shore 
to  throw  my  cable  around  them;  that  is  the  difficulty." 

Now,  it  often  happens  that  God's  past  mercies  and 
loving  kindnesses  would  be  good  sure  posts  to  hold  on 
to,  but  we  have  not  got  faith  enough  to  throw  our  cable 
round  them,  and  so  we  go  slipping  down  the  stream  of 
unbelief,  because  we  can  not  stay  ourselves  by  our  former 
mercies.  I  will,  however,  give  you  something  that  I 
think  you  can  throw  your  cable  over.  If  God  has  never 
been  kind  to  you,  one  thing  you  surely  know,  and  that 
is,  he  has  been  kind  to  others. 

"  Little  Faith." —  There  are  some  Christians  who  never  get 
out  of  little  faith  all  the  while  they  are  here.  You  notice 
in  John  Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  how  many  Lit 
tle-faith's  he  mentions.  There  is  our  old  friend  Ready- 
to-halt,  who  went  all  the  way  to  the  celestial  city  on 
crutches,  but  left  them  when  he  went  into  the  river  Jor 
dan.  Then  there  is  little  Feeble-mind,  who  carried  his 
feeble  mind  with  him  all  the  way  to  the  banks  of  the 
river  and  then  left  it,  and  ordered  it  to  be  buried  in  a 
dunghill  that  none  might  inherit  it.  Then  there  is  Mr. 
Fearing,  too,  who  used  to  stumble  over  a  straw,  and  was 
always  frightened  if  he  saw  a  drop  of  rain,  because  he 
thought  the  floods  of  heaven  were  let  loose  upon  him. 
And  you  remember  Mr.  Despondency  and  Miss  Much- 
afraid,  who  were  so  long  locked  up  in  the  dungeon  of 
Giant  Despair  that  they  were  almost  starved  to  death, 
and  there  was  little  left  of  them  but  skin  and  bone;  and 
poor  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  who  had  been  taken  into  the  cave 
of  Giant  Slay-good  who  was  about  to  eat  him,  when 
Great-heart  came  to  his  deliverance.  John  Bunyan  was 


u6  SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

a  very  wise  man.  He  has  put  a  great  many  of  those 
characters  in  his  book,  because  there  are  a  great  many  of 
them.  He  has  not  left  us  with  one  Mr.  Ready-to-halt, 
but  he  has  given  us  seven  or  eight  graphic  characters, 
because  he  himself  in  his  own  time  had  been  one  of  them, 
and  he  had  known  many  others  who  had  walked  in  the 
same  path. 

A  Sham  Faith. —  I  know  a  man  who  walks  seven  miles  every 
Sabbath  to  hear  the  gospel  preached  at  a  certain  place  — 
a  place  where  they  preach  the  gospel.  You  know  that 
very  particular,  superfine  sort  —  the  gospel,  a  gospel,  the 
spirit  of  which  consists  in  bad  temper,  carnal  security, 
arrogance,  and  a  seared  conscience.  But  this  man  was  one 
day  met  by  a  friend,  who  said  to  him,  "  Where  is  your 
wife?  "  "  Wife?  "  said  he  to  him.  "  What!  does  she  not 
come  with  you  ?  "  "  0 !  no,"  said  the  man ;  "  she  never 
goes  anywhere."  "  Well,  but,"  said  he,  "  don't  you  try 
to  get  her  to  go,  and  the  children  ?  "  "  No ;  the  fact  of 
it  is,  I  think,  if  I  look  to  myself,  that  is  quite  enough." 
"  Well,"  said  the  other,  "  and  you  believe  that  you  are 
God's  elect,  do  you!"  "Yes."  "Well,  then,"  said  the 
other,  "  I  don't  think  you  are,  because  you  are  worse  than 
a  heathen  man  and  a  publican,  for  you  don't  care  for 
your  own  household;  therefore  I  don't  think  you  give 
much  evidence  of  being  God's  elect,  for  they  love  their 
fellow-creatures."  So  sure  as  our  faith  is  real,  it  will 
want  to  bring  others  in. 

The  Rope  of  Faith.—  The  stupendous  falls  of  Niagara  have 
been  spoken  of  in  every  part  of  the  world ;  but  while  they 
are  marvelous  to  hear  of,  and  wonderful  as  a  spectacle, 
they  have  been  very  destructive  to  human  life,  when  by 
accident  any  have  been  carried  down  the  cataract.  Some 
years  ago  two  men,  a  bargeman  and  a  collier,  were  in  a 
boat,  and  found  themselves  unable  to  manage  it,  it  being 
carried  so  swiftly  down  the  current  that  they  must  both 


FAITH  117 


inevitably  be  borne  down  and  dashed  to  pieces.  Persons 
on  the  shore  saw  them,  but  were  unable  to  do  much  for 
their  rescue.  At  last,  however,  one  man  was  saved  by 
floating  a  rope  to  him,  which  he  grasped.  The  same  in 
stant  that  the  rope  came  into  his  hand  a  log  floated  by 
the  other  man.  The  thoughtless  and  confused  barge 
man  instead  of  seizing  the  rope  laid  hold  on  the  log.  It 
was  a  fatal  mistake;  they  were  both  in  imminent  peril, 
but  the  one  was  drawn  to  shore  because  he  had  a  connec 
tion  with  the  people  on  the  land,  whilst  the  other,  clinging 
to  the  log,  was  borne  irresistibly  along  and  never  heard  of 
afterward.  Do  you  not  see  that  here  is  a  practical  illus 
tration?  Faith  is  a  connection  with  Christ.  Christ  is  on 
the  shore,  so  to  speak,  holding  the  rope  of  faith,  and  if 
we  lay  hold  of  it  with  the  hand  of  our  confidence  he  pulls 
us  to  shore;  but  our  good  works,  having  no  connection 
with  Christ,  are  drifted  along  down  the  gulf  of  fell  de 
spair.  Grapple  them  as  tightly  as  we  may,  even  with 
hooks  of  steel,  they  can  not  with  all  our  efforts  avail  us  in 
the  least  degree. 

Solid  Footing  for  Faith.— Mr.  Innis,  a  great  Scotch  min 
ister,  once  visited  an  infidel  who  was  dying.  When  he 
came  to  him  the  first  tune,  he  said,  "  Mr.  Innis,  I  am  re 
lying  on  the  mercy  of  God;  God  is  merciful,  and  he  will 
never  damn  a  man  for  ever."  When  he  got  worse  and 
was  nearer  death,  Mr.  Innis  went  to  him  again,  and  he 
said,  "  0 !  Mr.  Innis,  my  hope  is  gone ;  for  I  have  been 
thinking,  if  God  be  merciful,  God  is  just  too;  and  what 
if,  instead  of  being  merciful  to  me,  he  should  be  just  to 
me?  What  would  then  become  of  me?  I  must  give  up 
my  hope  hi  the  mere  mercy  of  God;  tell  me  how  to  be 
saved ! "  Mr.  Innis  told  him  that  Christ  had  died  in 
the  stead  of  all  believers  —  that  God  could  be  just,  and 
yet  the  justifier  through  the  death  of  Christ.  "Ah!" 
said  he,  "Mr.  Innis,  there  is  something  solid  in  that; 


n8  SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

I  can  rest  on  that ;  I  can  not  rest  on  anything  else  j  " 
and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  none  of  us  ever  met 
with  a  man  who  thought  he  had  his  sins  forgiven  unless 
it  was  through  the  blood  of  Christ. 

The  Leap  of  Faith. —  A  boy  at  sea,  who  was  very  fond  of 
climbing  to  the  mast-head,  one  day  climbed  to  the  main- 
truck,  and  could  not  get  down  again.  The  sea  was  very 
rough,  and  it  was  seen  that  in  a  little  while  the  boy  would 
fall  on  the  deck,  and  be  dashed  to  pieces.  His  father 
saw  but  one  way  of  saving  his  life.  Seizing  a  speaking- 
trumpet,  he  cried  out,  "  Boy,  the  next  time  the  ship 
lurches,  you  fall  into  the  sea."  The  next  time  the  ship 
lurched  the  boy  looked  down,  and,  not  much  liking  the 
idea  of  throwing  himself  into  the  sea,  still  held  to  the 
mast.  The  father,  who  saw  that  the  boy's  strength 
would  soon  fail  him,  took  a  gun  in  his  hand,  and  cried 
out,  "  Boy,  if  you  do  not  drop  into  the  sea  the  next  time 
the  ship  lurches,  I'll  shoot  you ! "  The  boy  knew  his 
father  meant  it,  and  the  next  time  the  ship  lurched  he 
leaped  into  the  sea.  It  seemed  like  certain  destruction, 
but  out  went  a  dozen  brawny  arms,  and  he  was  saved. 
The  sinner,  in  the  midst  of  the  storm,  thinks  he  must 
cling  to  the  mast  of  his  good  works,  and  so  be  saved. 
Says  the  gospel,  "  Let  go  your  good  works,  and  drop  into 
the  ocean  of  God's  love."  "  No,"  says  the  sinner,  "  it  is 
a  long  way  between  me  and  God's  love;  I  must  perish  if 
I  trust  to  that ;  I  must  have  some  other  reliance."  "  If 
you  have  any  other  reliance  than  that,  you  are  lost." 
Then  comes  the  thundering  law,  and  declares  to  the  sin 
ner,  that  unless  he  gives  up  every  dependence,  he  will  be 
lost.  And  then  comes  the  happy  moment,  when  the  sin 
ner  says,  "  Dear  Lord,  I  give  up  all  my  dependence,  and 
cast  myself  on  thee;  I  take  thee,  Jesus,  to  be  my  one  ob 
ject  in  life,  my  only  trust,  the  refuge,  the  only  refuge 
I  have,  for  my  soul." 


FAITH  ng 


Confidence  and  Heroism.—  A  holy  confidence  in  the  divine 
purpose  instead  of  making  men  grow  stolid  and  idle  may 
prove  to  be  one  of  the  mightiest  impulses  to  the  heroic 
life.  Cromwell's  Ironsides  to  a  man  believed  in  the  ev 
erlasting  purpose,  therefore  they  were  invincible,  for  no 
fear  ever  breathed  upon  them.  Tho  the  hosts  of  the 
tyrant  may  be  innumerable,  yet  with  the  war  cry,  "  The 
Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us,"  we  will  ride  forth  conquering 
and  to  conquer.  Settle  it  in  your  mind  that  the  Lord  has 
called  you  to  the  work,  and  then  advance  without  question 
or  fear. 

Pioneers  of  Faith. —  I  greatly  esteem  in  my  own  mind  those 
first  believers  who  were  not  borne  in  by  the  throng  of 
others,  but  went  forward  alone.  I  compare  them  to  the 
first  navigators  upon  an  untried  sea;  the  men  who  first 
sailed  out  of  sight  of  shore,  greatly  venturing.  To  be 
first  in  perceiving  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the 
Anointed  of  the  Lord  was  no  mean  thing,  for  none  of 
the  princes  of  this  world  had  any  idea  of  that  great 
fact.  These  were  in  truth  the  "  men  of  light  and  lead 
ing,"  the  foremost  minds  of  their  age,  peasants  and 
fishermen  tho  they  were.  These  were  the  first  swal 
lows  heralding  a  glorious  summer-tide.  These  were  the 
first  song-birds  waking  the  morning  to  behold  the  newly 
risen  sun.  It  is  a  patent  of  nobility  to  be  numbered 
with  these. 

Faith  Honored. —  A  slaveholding  American,  on  one  oc 
casion,  buying  a  slave,  said  to  the  person  of  whom  he 
was  purchasing  him,  "  Tell  me  honestly  what  are  his 
faults?"  Said  the  seller:  "He  has  no  faults,  that  I 
am  aware  of,  but  one:  that  one  fault  is,  he  will  pray."— 
"Ah!"  said  the  purchaser,  "I  don't  like  that;  but  I 
know  something  that  will  cure  him  of  it  pretty  soon." 
So,  the  next  night,  Cuffey  was  surprised  by  his  master 
in  the  plantation  while  in  earnest  prayer,  praying  for 


130     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

>' 

his  new  master,  and  his  master's  wife  and  family.  The 
man  stood  and  listened,  but  said  nothing  at  the  time; 
but  the  next  morning  he  called  Cuffey,  and  said,  "  I  do 
not  want  to  quarrel  with  you,  my  man,  but  I'll  have  no 
praying  on  my  premises:  so  you  just  drop  it."—"  Massa," 
said  he,  "  me  canna  leave  off  praying ;  me  must  pray." 
— "  I'll  teach  you  to  pray,  if  you  are  going  to  keep  on 
at  it."— "Massa,  me  must  keep  on."— "Well,  then,  I'll 
give  you  five-and-twenty  lashes  a  day  till  you  leave  off." — 
"  Massa,  if  you  give  me  fifty,  I  must  pray."—"  If  that's 
the  way  you  are  saucy  to  your  master,  you  shall  have 
it  directly."  So,  tying  him  up,  he  gave  him  five-and- 
twenty  lashes,  and  asked  him  if  he  would  pray  again. 
"  Yes,  massa,  me  must  pray  always ;  me  canna  leave  off." 
The  master  looked  astonished;  he  could  not  understand 
how  a  poor  saint  could  keep  on  praying,  when  it  seemed 
to  do  no  good,  but  only  brought  persecution  upon  him. 
He  told  his  wife  of  it.  His  wife  said :  "  Why  can't  you 
let  the  poor  man  pray?  He  does  his  work  very  well; 
you  and  I  do  not  care  about  praying,  but  there's  no  harm 
in  letting  him  pray,  if  he  gets  on  with  his  work."—"  But 
I  don't  like  it,"  said  the  master,  "  he  almost  frightened 
me  to  death.  You  should  see  how  he  looked  at  me."— 
"Was  he  angry?" — "No,  I  should  not  have  minded 
that;  but  after  I  had  beaten  him,  he  looked  at  me  with 
tears  in  his  eyes,  as  if  he  pitied  me  more  than  himself." 
That  night  the  master  could  not  sleep;  he  tossed  to  and 
fro  on  his  bed;  his  sins  were  brought  to  his  remem 
brance;  he  remembered  he  had  persecuted  a  saint  of 
God.  Rising  in  his  bed,  he  said,  "  Wife,  will  you  pray 
for  me?"— "I  never  prayed  in  my  life,"  said  she,  "I 
cannot  pray  for  you."  "  I  am  lost,"  he  said,  "  if  some 
body  does  not  pray  for  me;  I  cannot  pray  for  myself." — 
"  I  don't  know  any  one  on  the  estate  that  knows  how  to 
pray,  except  Cuffey,"  said  his  wife.  The  bell  was  rung, 


FAITH  121 


and  Cuffey  was  brought  in.  Taking  hold  of  his  black 
servant's  hand,  the  master  said,  "  Cuffey,  can  you  pray 
for  your  master?  "— "  Massa,"  said  he,  "  me  been  praying 
for  you  eber  since  you  flogged  me,  and  me  mean  to  pray 
always  for  you."  Down  went  Cuffey  on  his  knees,  and 
poured  out  his  soul  in  tears,  and  both  husband  and  wife 
were  converted.  That  negro  could  not  have  done  this 
without  faith.  Without  faith  he  would  have  gone  away 
directly,  and  said,  "Massa,  me  leave  off  praying;  me  no 
like  de  white  man's  whip."  But  because  he  persevered 
through  his  faith,  the  Lord  honored  him,  and  gave  him 
his  master's  soul  for  his  hire. 

Obedience  of  Faith.—  The  ship"  is  on  fire;  the  bales  of  cot 
ton  are  pouring  forth  a  black,  horrible  smoke;  pas 
sengers  and  crew  are  in  extreme  danger,  but  a  capable 
captain  is  in  command,  and  he  says  to  those  around  him, 
"  If  you  will  behave  yourselves,  I  think  I  shall  be  able 
to  effect  the  escape  of  you  all."  Now,  if  they  trust  in 
the  captain  they  will  do  precisely  as  he  orders.  No  sailor 
or  engineer  will  refuse  to  work  the  pumps,  or  to  prepare 
the  boats,  neither  will  any  passenger  disobey  rule.  In 
proportion  to  their  confidence  in  their  leader  will  be  the 
alacrity  with  which  they  obey  him  at  once.  They  be 
lieve  his  orders  to  be  wise,  and  so  they  keep  to  them. 
Neither  their  fear,  nor  their  rashness,  will  lead  them  to 
rush  to  and  fro  contrary  to  his  bidding  if  they  have  a 
firm  trust  in  him.  When  the  boats  are  lowered,  and  are 
brought  one  by  one  to  the  ship's  side,  those  who  are  to 
fill  them  wait  till  their  turns  come,  in  firm  reliance 
upon  the  captain's  impartiality  and  prudence.  They 
will  get  into  the  boats  or  they  will  wait  on  board,  for 
they  consider  that  his  orders  are  dictated  by  a  better  judg 
ment  than  their  own.  So  far  as  each  man  and  each 
woman  firmly  believes  in  the  superior  officer,  discipline 
will  be  maintained.  Do  you  not  see  this? 


122     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Obedience  is  the  necessary  outcome  of  true  and  real 
faith,  and  there  is  no  trust  where  there  is  no  obedience. 
Some  of  you  fancy  that  you  are  to  trust  Christ,  and  then 
d<f  what  you  like.  You  believe  a  lie,  for  such  is  not 
the  teaching  of  God's  word.  The  faith  which  saves  is 
a  faith  which  obeys. 

Faith  in  Tribulation.—  Oh !  what  a  precious  thing  faith  is, 
when  we  are  enabled  to  believe  our  God,  and  how  easy 
then  it  is  to  endure  and  to  surmount  all  trouble.  Hear 
the  old  man  in  the  garret,  with  a  crust  of  bread  and  a 
cup  of  cold  water.  Sickness  has  confined  him  these 
years  within  that  narrow  room.  He  is  too  poor  to 
maintain  an  attendant.  Some  woman  comes  in  to  look 
to  him  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening,  and  there  he 
sits,  in  the  depths  of  poverty.  And  you  will  suppose 
he  sits  and  groans.  No,  brethren;  he  may  sometimes 
groan  when  the  body  is  weak,  but  usually  he  sits  and 
sings;  and  when  the  visitor  climbs  the  creaking  staircase 
of  that  old  house,  where  human  beings  scarcely  ought 
to  be  allowed  to  live;  and  when  he  goes  into  that  poor 
cramped  up  room  that  is  more  fit  to  accommodate  swine 
than  men,  he  sits  down  upon  that  bottomless  chair,  and 
when  he  has  seated  himself  as  well  as  he  can  upon  the 
four  cross  pieces  of  it  he  begins  to  talk  to  him,  and  he 
finds  him  full  of  heaven.  "  Oh !  sir,"  he  says,  "  my  God 
is  very  kind  to  me."  Propped  up  he  is  with  pillows, 
and  full  of  pain  in  every  member  of  his  body,  but  he 
says,  "Blessed  be  his  name,  he  has  not  left  me.  Oh! 
sir,  I  have  enjoyed  more  peace  and  happiness  in  this 
room,  out  of  which  I  have  not  gone  for  years,"—  (the 
case  is  real  that  I  am  now  describing)  "  I  have  enjoyed 
more  happiness  here  than  I  ever  did  in  all  my  life.  My 
pains  are  great,  sir,  but  they  will  not  be  for  long;  I  am 
going  home  soon." 


FORGIVENESS  123 


FORGIVENESS 

A  Sure  Pardon.—  In  the  reign  of  King  George  the  Third, 
the  son  of  a  member  of  this  church  lay  under  sentence 
of  death  for  forgery.  My  predecessor,  Dr.  Rippon, 
after  incredible  exertions,  obtained  a  promise  that  his 
sentence  should  be  remitted.  By  a  singular  occurrence, 
the  present  senior  deacon  —  then  a  young  man  —  learned 
from  the  governor  of  the  jail  that  the  reprieve  had  not 
been  received;  and  the  unhappy  prisoner  would  have 
been  executed  the  next  morning,  had  not  Dr.  Rippon 
gone  post-haste  to  Windsor,  obtained  an  interview  with 
the  king  in  his  bedchamber,  and  received  from  the  mon 
arch's  own  hand  a  copy  of  that  reprieve  which  had  been 
negligently  put  aside  by  a  thoughtless  speed. 

"  I  charge  you,  doctor,"  said  his  majesty,  to  make  good 
speed."  "  Trust  me, '  sire,  for  that,"  responded  your  old 
pastor,  and  he  returned  to  London  in  time,  just  in  time, 
and  only  just  in  time,  for  the  prisoner  was  being  marched 
with  many  others  on  to  the  scaffold.  Ay,  that  pardon 
might  have  been  given,  and  yet  the  man  might  have  been 
executed  if  it  had  not  been  effectually  carried  out.  But, 
blessed  be  God,  our  non-condemnation  is  an  effectual 
thing.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  letter,  it  is  a  matter  of  fact. 
Ah,  poor  souls,  you  know  that  condemnation  is  a  mat 
ter  of  fact. 

When  you  and  I  suffered  in  our  souls,  and  were  brought 
under  the  heavy  hand  of  the  law,  we  felt  that  its  curses 
were  no  mock  thunders  like  the  wrath  of  the  Vatican, 
but  they  were  real;  we  felt  that  the  anger  of  God  was 
indeed  a  thing  to  tremble  at;  a  real  substantial  fact. 
Now,  just  as  real  as  the  condemnation  which  Justice 
brings,  just  so  real  is  the  justification  which  mercy  be 
stows. 


124     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

A  Free  Pardon.—  A  prisoner  was  taken  out  to  die,  and 
as  he  rode  along  in  the  death  cart  his  heart  was  heavy 
at  the  thought  of  death,  and  none  could  cheer  him  of 
all  the  throng.  The  gallows-tree  was  in  sight,  and  this 
blotted  out  the  sun  for  him.  But  lo,  his  prince  came 
riding  up  in  hot  haste,  bearing  a  free  pardon.  Then 
the  man  opened  his  eyes,  and,  as  tho  he  had  risen 
from  the  dead,  he  returned  to  happy  consciousness.  The 
sight  of  his  prince  had  chased  all  gloom  away.  He 
declared  that  he  had  never  seen  a  fairer  countenance  in 
all  his  days;  and  when  he  read  his  pardon  he  vowed 
that  no  poetry  should  ever  be  dearer  to  his  heart  than 
those  few  lines  of  sovereign  grace.  Friends,  I  remem 
ber  well  when  I  was  in  that  death-cart,  and  Jesus  came 
to  me  with  pardon.  Death  and  hell  were  before  me;  but 
I  rejoiced  exceedingly  when  I  saw  the  nailprints  in  his 
hands  and  feet,  and  the  wound  in  his  side.  When  he 
said,  "  Thy  sins,  which  are  many,  are  all  forgiven  thee," 
I  thought  I  never  saw  such  loveliness  before,  and  never 
heard  such  music  in  all  my  days.  Nay,  it  was  not  mere 
thought,  I  am  sure  my  judgment  was  right.  Eternity 
itself  shall  never  disclose  anything  to  me  more  sweet. 
My  pardoning  Lord  hath  no  peer  nor  rival.  Oh,  what 
a  Christ  is  he  who  appeared  to  me,  a  guilty,  condemned 
sinner,  on  the  way  to  hell!  Blessed  be  his  name,  he 
bore  on  the  tree  my  curse,  and  shame,  and  death  and 
I  am  free. 

The  Returning  Prodigal. —  Picture  the  case  of  the  prodigal 
son  when  he  went  home.  Suppose  when  he  reached  the 
house  the  elder  brother  had  come  to  meet  him.  I  must 
take  a  supposition  that  the  elder  brother  had  sweetened 
himself,  and  made  himself  amiable;  and  then  I  hear 
say,  "  Come  in,  brother,  welcome  home !  "  But  I  see  the 
returning  one  stand  there  with  the  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  I 
hear  him  lament  "  I  want  to  see  my  father.  I  must  tell 


FORGIVENESS  1*5 


him  that  I  have  sinned  and  done  evil  in  his  sight."  An 
old  servant  whispers,  "  Master  John,  I  am  glad  to  see  you 
back.  Be  happy,  for  all  the  servants  are  rejoiced  to 
hear  the  sound  of  your  voice.  It  is  true  your  father 
will  not  see  you,  but  he  has  ordered  the  fatted  calf  to 
be  killed  for  you,  and  here  is  the  best  robe,  and  a  ring, 
and  shoes  for  your  feet,  and  we  are  told  to  put  them 
upon  you."  All  this  would  not  content  the  poor  penitent. 
I  think  I  hear  him  cry  — "  I  do  not  despise  anything  my 
father  gives  me,  for  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  as  his  hired 
servant;  but  what  is  all  this  unless  I  see  his  face,  and 
know  that  he  forgives  me  ?  There  is  no  taste  in  the  feast, 
no  glitter  in  the  ring,  no  fitness  in  the  shoes,  no  beauty 
in  the  robe  unless  I  can  see  my  father  and  can  be  recon 
ciled  to  him."  Do  you  not  see  that  in  the  case  of  the 
prodigal  son  the  great  matter  was  to  get  his  head  into 
his  father's  bosom,  and  there  to  sob  out  "  Father,  I  hav« 
sinned1?"  The  one  thing  needful  was  the  kiss  of  free 
forgiveness,  the  touch  of  those  dear,  warm,  loving  lips, 
which  said,  "  My  dear  child,  I  love  you,  and  your  faults 
are  blotted  out."  That  was  the  thing  that  gave  his  soul 
rest  and  perfect  peace;  and  this  is  the  mystery  we  come 
to  preach  to  you  —  God  himself  drawing  near  to  you  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  out  of  His  great  beneficence  forgiving 
you  all  trespasses. 

The  Forgiveness  of  God.— Fleming  tells  us  in  a  book 
of  his  that  a  great  culprit  had  been  condemned  to  be 
hanged  at  Ayr.  He  had  been  a  very  great  offender,  but, 
while  he  lay  in  prison,  God  granted  him  repentance,  and 
he  was  heard  to  say  continually  as  they  took  him  to  the 
scaffold,  "  Oh !  but  he's  a  great  f orgiver !  Oh !  but  he's 
a  great  f  orgiver!"  and  I  have  often  felt  as  if  I  could 
stand  and  cry,  yea,  even  dance  with  delight  and  say  it, 
"  Oh,  but  he's  a  great  f  orgiver !  Oh !  but  he's  a  great 
f orgiver ! " 


126     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Christ's  Instant  Pardon.— The  Emperor  of  Germany,  in 
the  olden  times  when  popes  were  popes,  had  offended 
his  Unholiness,  and  before  he  could  be  restored  to  favor 
he  had  to  stand  for  three  days  (I  think  it  was)  outside 
the  castle  gate,  in  the  deep  snow,  in  the  depth  of  winter, 
and  do  penance.  I  have  seen,  myself,  in  Rome  and 
elsewhere,  outside  of  the  older  churches,  places  uncovered 
and  exposed  to  wind  and  rain,  to  the  heat  of  summer  and 
the  frost  of  winter,  where  backsliders  were  made  to 
stand,  sometimes  for  years  even,  before  they  were  re 
stored,  if  they  had  committed  some  offence  against  ec 
clesiastical  statutes.  You  will  sometimes  see  in  old  coun 
try  churches  of  England  little  windows  that  run  slanting 
and  just  look  towards  the  communion  table  through 
which  poor  offenders  who  professed  repentance,  after 
some  months  of  standing  in  the  churchyard,  or  perhaps 
outside  of  it,  were  at  last  allowed  to  take  a  peep  at  the 
altar,  at  the  expiration  of  their  weary  term  of  penance. 
All  this  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  for  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel  is,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason 
together;  tho  thy  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as 
wool."  The  spirit  of  my  text  is  "  Kiss  the  Son  now ; " 
and  that  is  all.  Tho  those  lips  were  once  blaspheming, 
let  them  kiss  the  Son.  Tho  those  lips  have  uttered  high 
words  and  proud  words,  or  perhaps  lying  and  lascivious 
words,  "  Kiss  the  Son."  Bow  down  at  those  dear  pierced 
feet,  and  trust  Emmanuel,  and  own  yourself  his  servant, 
and  you  shall  be  forgiven  —  forgiven  at  once,  without  de 
lay  —  and  this  night  you  shall  be  accepted  in  Christ. 

GOD 

Knowing  God.—  We  have  heard  also  of  Juggernauth,  and 
of  the  thousand  and  millions  of  gods  of  Hindustan,  but 
we  have  no  acquaintance  with  them.  I  have  felt  thank 
ful  when  I  have  seen  likenesses  of  Krishna  and  Siva 


GOD  127 

that  they  were  no  relations  of  mine.  There  is  one  god 
with  an  elephant's  head,  and  another  god  with  a  cat's 
head :  I  am  delighted  to  think  that  I  never  was  on  speak 
ing  terms  with  such  monsters,  and  could  never  call  them 
mine.  If  they  be  gods  to  others  they  are  not  so  to  us: 
we  know  them  not,  their  names  we  despise,  and  their 
pretensions  we  detest.  But,  brethren,  we  know  that  we 
know  our  God. 

For  His  Son's  Sake. —  There  has  been  a  war,  and  a  wounded 
soldier  comes  home,  and  he  goes  to  the  house  of  a  father 
and  mother  who  have  a  son  out  in  the  army,  and  he 
inquires,  "  Does  so-and-so  live  here  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Can 
I  see  him?"  "Yes."  "I  have  a  letter  from  your  son, 
whom  I  left  in  the  army,  he  was  my  dear  comrade." 
"Are  you  sure  you  have  such  a  letter?"  The  man 
looks  disreputable,  and  his  garments  are  torn,  and  he 
is  evidently  very  poor,  but  he  replies,  "  Yes,  I  have  a 
letter  from  your  son."  He  puts  his  hands  into  his  pock 
ets,  and  he  cannot  find  it.  The  master  of  the  house  is 
angry,  and  says,  "  It  is  of  no  use  your  coming  here  with 
this  tale,  you  are  deceiving  me."  He  fumbles  still  in 
his  pockets,  and  at  last  he  brings  it  out.  Yes,  there  is 
the  token,  the  father  knows  the  handwriting  of  his  dear 
boy.  The  letter  says,  "  Father,  this  is  a  choice  compan 
ion  of  mine,  and  I  want  you,  when  he  reaches  home, 
to  treat  him  kindly  for  my  sake.  Tell  mother  that  any 
thing  she  does  for  him  shall  be  the  same  as  if  she  had 
done  it  to  her  own  boy."  See  how  well  he  is  received 
at  sight  of  that  token,  and  even  so  when  we  present  the 
blood-mark,  we  say  to  the  Lord,  "  There  is  the  token 
that  we  are  Jesus'  friends,"  and  the  Lord  does  not  look 
at  the  rags  in  which  our  poor  nature  is  arrayed,  but  he 
looks  at  the  token  of  his  own  Son's  blood  and  accepts 
us  for  his  sake.  "What  surer  and  more  suggestive  token 
could  we  desire?  When  cleansed  in  the  blood  of  Jesus 


128     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

we  are  comely  with  his  comeliness,  and  dear  to  the  heart 
of  God  for  his  Son's  sake. 

The  Love  of  God.— In  the  French  Revolution,  there  was 
a  young  man  condemned  to  the  guillotine,  and  shut  up 
in  one  of  the  prisons.  He  was  greatly  loved  by  many, 
but  there  was  one  who  loved  him  more  than  all  put  to 
gether.  How  know  we  this?  It  was  his  own  father; 
and  the  love  he  bore  his  son  was  proved  in  this  way: 
when  the  lists  were  called,  the  father,  whose  name  was 
exactly  the  same  as  his  son's,  answered  to  the  name,  and 
the  father  rode  in  the  gloomy  tumbril  out  to  the  place 
of  execution,  and  his  head  rolled  beneath  the  axe  in 
stead  of  his  son's,  a  victim  to  mighty  love.  See  here  an 
image  of  the  love  of  Christ  to  sinners;  for  thus  Jesus 
died  for  the  ungodly,  viewed  as  such.  If  they  had  not 
been  ungodly,  neither  they  nor  he  had  needed  to  have 
died;  if  they  had  not  sinned,  there  would  have  been  no 
need  for  a  suffering  Savior,  but  Jesus  proved  his  bound 
less  love  "  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died 
for  us."  Your  name  was  in  the  condemned  list,  my  fel 
low-sinner,  but,  if  you  believe  in  Jesus,  you  shall  find  that 
your  name  is  there  no  longer,  for  Christ's  name  is  put 
in  your  stead,  and  you  shall  learn  that  he  suffered  for 
you,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  you 
to  God.  Is  not  this  the  greatest  wonder  of  divine  love, 
that  it  should  be  set  upon  us  as  sinners?  I  can  under 
stand  God's  loving  reformed  sinners,  and  repenting  sin 
ners  ;  but  here  is  the  glory  of  it,  "  God  commendeth 
his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners  — 
yet  sinners!  —  Christ  died  for  us." 

God  Like  a  Mother.—  It  little  matters  where  you  seek  the 
Lord.  He  will  be  sure  to  see  you;  and  even  if  it  be  in 
the  crowded  street  of  Cheapside  of  Cornhill,  if  your 
soul  is  in  prayer,  all  the  din  of  noisy  London  cannot 
stop  the  prayer  from  reaching  the  ear  of  God.  You 


GOD  129 

know,  mothers,  how  quick  you  are  of  a  night  to  hear 
your  children  if  they  are  ill.  If  you  had  a  nurse,  she 
might  slumber  on;  but  as  for  you,  with  little  Jane 
up  stairs  sick,  if  you  do  fall  asleep,  the  faintest  noise 
awakes  you;  yet  you  are  not  one-half  so  wakeful  as 
God  is;  for  he  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  When  your 
heart  begins  to  say,  "  My  God,  my  God,  I  would  be 
reconciled;  my  Lord,  I  would  be  cleansed,"  the  Lord  is 
waiting  to  be  gracious.  Before  you  call,  God  hears  you, 
for  he  is  a  God  ready  to  pardon. 

A  Father's  Heart.— When  King  Henry  II.,  in  the  ages 
gone  by,  was  provoked  to  take  up  arms  against  his  un 
grateful  and  rebellious  son,  he  besieged  him  in  one  of 
the  French  towns,  and  the  son,  being  near  unto  death, 
desired  to  see  his  father  and  confess  his  wrongdoing; 
but  the  stern  old  sire  refused  to  look  the  rebel  in  the 
face.  The  young  man,  being  sorely  troubled  in  his  con 
science,  said  to  those  about  him,  "  I  am  dying ;  take 
me  from  my  bed,  and  let  me  lie  in  sackcloth  and  ashes, 
in  token  of  my  sorrow  for  my  ingratitude  to  my  father." 
Thus  he  died,  and  when  the  tidings  came  to  the  old  man 
outside  the  walls,  that  his  boy  had  died  in  ashes,  re 
pentant  for  his  rebellion,  he  threw  himself  upon  the 
earth,  like  another  David,  and  said,  "  Would  God  I  had 
died  for  him."  The  thought  of  his  boy's  broken  heart 
touched  the  heart  of  the  father.  If  ye,  being  evil,  are 
overcome  by  your  children's  tears,  how  much  more  shall 
your  Father  who  is  in  heaven  find  in  your  bemoanings 
and  confessions  an  argument  for  the  display  of  his 
pardoning  love  through  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

God  Ever  Present.—  When  Her  Majesty,  some  months  ago, 
heard  of  the  desolation  which  had  been  caused  by  an 
accident  in  the  pits,  her  tender  heart  hastened  to  the 
relief  of  the  widow  and  the  fatherless,  but  at  the  moment 
of  the  calamity  she  was  not  on  the  spot  in  person;  she 


130      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

could  not  be  in  the  pit  to  hear  the  groans  and  sustain 
the  faith  of  the  dying,  nay  she  could  not  be  in  the  cottage 
to  mark  the  tear  of  the  widow  and  to  cheer  her  with 
heavenly  promises;  but  our  God  is  on  the  spot  where 
calamity  occurs,  for  in  him  we  live  and  move  and  have 
our  being.  He  is  the  greatest  of  comforters,  and  he  is 
also  the  most  approachable.  He  is  "  a  very  present  help 
in  time  of  trouble." 

God's  Tenderness.—  When  the  King  of  Navarre  was  fight 
ing  for  his  throne,  the  writer  who  hymns  the  battle, 
says  — 

i(  He  looked  upon  the  foemen,  and  his  glance  was  stern  and 

high; 
He  looked  upon  his  people,  and  the  tear  was  in  his  eye." 

And  when  he  saw  some  of  the  French  in  arms  against 
him  — 

"  Then  out  spoke  gentle  Henry,  No  Frenchman  is  my  foe, 
Down,  down,  with  every  foreigner,  but  let  your  brethren  go." 

The  king  had  an  eye  to  his  people  even  when  they  were 
in  rebellion  against  him,  and  he  had  a  different  thought 
towards  them  from  what  he  had  towards  others.  "Let 
them  go,"  he  seemed  to  say,  "  they  are  my  people."  So, 
mark  you,  in  the  great  battles  and  strifes  of  this  world, 
when  God  lets  loose  the  dread  artillery  of  heaven,  his 
glance  is  stem  upon  his  enemies,  but  the  tear  is  in  his 
eye  towards  his  people.  He  is  always  tender  towards 
them.  "  Spare  my  people,"  saith  he,  and  the  angels 
interpose  lest  these  chosen  ones  should  dash  their  feet 
against  a  stone. 

Responsibility  to  God.—  That  was  grand  of  Latimer,  when 
he  preached  before  Henry  VIII.  He  had  greatly  dis 
pleased  his  majesty  by  his  boldness  in  a  sermon  preached 
before  the  king,  and  was  ordered  to  preach  again  on  the 


GOD  131 

following  Sabbath,  and  to  make  an  apology  for  the  of 
fence  he  had  given.  After  reading  his  text,  the  bishop 
thus  began  his  sermon :  "  Hugh  Latimer,  dost  thou  know 
before  whom  thou  art  this  day  to  speak?  To  the  high  and 
mighty  monarch,  the  king's  most  excellent  majesty,  who 
can  take  away  thy  life  if  thou  offendest;  therefore,  take 
heed  that  thou  speakest  not  a  word  that  may  displease. 
But  then  consider  well,  Hugh,  does  thou  not  know  from 
whence  thou  cornest  —  upon  whose  message  thou  art  sent  ? 
Even  by  the  great  and  mighty  God,  who  is  all-present, 
and  who  beholdeth  all  thy  ways,  and  who  is  able  to  cast 
thy  soul  into  hell!  Therefore,  take  care  that  thou  de- 
liverest  thy  message  faithfully." 

God's  Call. —  Standing  one  day  in  the  court-house,  some 
witness  was  required,  I  forget  his  name;  it  may  have 
been  Brown,  for  instance;  in  one  moment  the  name  was 
announced,  "  Brown,  Samuel  Brown/'  By  and  by  twen 
ty  others  take  up  the  cry,  "  Samuel  Brown,  Samuel 
Brown."  There  was  seen  a  man  pushing  his  way 
through.  "  Make  room,"  said  he,  "  make  room,  his 
honor  calls  me,"  and  tho  there  were  many  in  his 
path,  they  gave  way,  because  his  being  called  was  a 
sufficient  command  for  them,  not  to  hinder  him,  but 
to  let  him  come.  And  now,  soul,  if  thou  be  a  will 
ing  sinner,  who  why  name  is  not  mentioned  —  if  thou  be 
a  willing  sinner,  thou  art  as  truly  called  as  tho  thou 
wert  called  by  name,  and  therefore  push  through  thy 
fears.  Make  room,  and  come;  they  that  would  stop 
thee  are  cowards.  He  has  said  "Let  him  come,"  and 
they  cannot  keep  you  back ;  Jehovah  has  said,  "  Let  him 
come,"  and  it  is  yours  now  to  say,  "  I  will  come."  There 
is  nothing  that  shall  hinder  me,  I  will  push  through 
everything  and 

"  To  the  gracious  King  approach, 
Whose  sceptre  mercy  gives." 


132     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

God  Mare  Careful  Than  a  Mother. —  Look  at  the  mother, 
how  careful  she  is.  If  her  child  have  a  little  cough,  she 
notices  it:  the  slightest  weakness  is  sure  to  be  observed. 
She  has  watched  all  its  motions  anxiously,  to  see  whether 
it  walked  right,  whether  all  its  limbs  were  sound,  and 
whether  it  had  the  use  of  all  its  powers  in  perfection; 
but  she  has  never  thought  of  numbering  the  hairs  of 
her  child's  head,  and  the  absence  of  one  or  two  of  them 
would  give  her  no  great  concern.  But  our  God  is  more 
careful  of  us,  even  than^a  mother  with  her  child  —  so 
careful  that  he  numbers  the  hairs  of  our  head.  How 
safe  are  we,  then,  beneath  the  hand  of  God ! 

Helpless  Without  God.—  I  find  faith  just  the  easiest  thing 
in  the  world  when  there  is  nothing  to  believe;  but  when 
I  have  room  and  exercise  for  my  faith,  then  I  do  not 
find  I  have  so  much  strength  to  accomplish  it.  Talk 
ing  one  day  with  a  countryman,  he  used  this  figure :  "  In 
the  middle  of  winter  I  sometimes  think  how  well  I  could 
mow;  and  in  early  spring  I  think,  oh!  how  I  would  like 
to  reap;  I  feel  just  ready  for  it;  but  when  mowing  time 
comes,  and  when  reaping  time  comes,  I  find  I  have  not 
strength  to  spare."  So  when  you  have  no  troubles, 
couldn't  you  mow  them  down  at  once?  When  you  have 
no  work  to  do,  couldn't  you  do  it?  But  when  work  and 
trouble  come  you  find  how  difficult  it  is.  Many  Chris 
tians  are  like  the  stag,  who  talked  to  itself,  and  said, 
"Why  should  I  run  away  from  the  dogs?  Look  what 
a  fine  pair  of  horns  I've  got,  and  look  what  heels  I've 
got,  too;  I  might  do  these  hounds  some  mischief.  Why 
not  let  me  stand  and  show  them  what  I  can  do  with  my 
antlers?  I  can  keep  off  any  quantity  of  dogs."  No 
sooner  did  the  dogs  bark,  than  off  the  stag  went.  So 
with  us.  "Let  sin  arise,"  we  say,  "we  will  soon  rip 
it  up,  and  destroy  it;  let  trouble  come,  we  will  soon  get 
over  it;  but  when  sin  and  trouble  come,  we  then  find 


GOD  133 

what  our  weakness  is.  Then  we  have  to  cry  for  the  help 
of  the  Spirit;  and  through  him  we  can  do  all  things, 
tho  without  him  we  can  do  nothing  at  all. 

Depth  of  a  Father's  Love.—  There  was  a  little  boy  at  the 
corner  of  the  table,  and  his  father  asked  him,  "  Why 
does  your  father  love  you,  John  ?  "  Said  the  dear  little 
lad,  very  prettily,  "  Because  I'm  a  good  boy."  "  Yes," 
said  the  father,  "  he  would  not  love  you  if  you  were  not 
a  good  boy."  I  turned  to  the  good  father  and  remarked 
that  I  was  not  quite  sure  ajjout  the  truth  of  the  last 
remark,  for  I  believed  he  would  love  him  if  he  were  ever 
so  bad.  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  think  I  should."  And  said 
a  minister  at  the  table,  "  I  had  an  instance  of  that  yes 
terday.  I  stepped  into  the  house  of  a  woman  who  had 
a  son  transported  for  life,  and  she  was  as  full  of  her 
son  Richard  as  if  he  had  been  prime  minister,  or  had 
been  her  most  faithful  and  dutiful  son." 

God  Our  Deliverer.—  If  God  does  not  deliver  his  servants 
at  one  time  as  well  as  another,  he  has  not  kept  his  prom 
ise.  For  a  man  of  truth  is  always  true,  and  a  promise 
once  given  always  stands.  A  promise  cannot  be  broken 
now  and  then,  and  yet  the  honor  of  the  person  giving  it 
be  maintained  by  his  keeping  it  at  other  times.  The 
word  of  a  true  man  stands  always  good:  it  is  good  now. 
This  is  logic,  bitter  logic,  cold  steel  logic,  logic  which 
seems  to  cut  right  down  your  backbone  and  cleave  your 
chine.  "  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver 
him:  let  him  deliver  him  now."  Yet  this  hard  logic  can 
be  turned  to  comfort.  I  told  you  a  story  the  other  day 
of  the  brother  in  Guy's  Hospital  to  whom  the  doctors 
said  he  must  undergo  an  operation  which  was  extremely 
dangerous.  They  gave  him  a  week  to  consider  whether 
he  would  submit  to  it.  He  was  troubled  for  his  young 
wife  and  children,  and  for  his  work  for  the  Lord.  A 
friend  left  a  bunch  of  flowers  for  him,  with  this  verse 


134     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

as  its  motto,  "He  trusted  in  God;  let  him  deliver  him 
now."  "Yes,"  he  thought,  "now."  In  prayer  he  cast 
himself  upon  the  Lord,  and  felt  in  his  heart,  "  Come  on, 
doctors,  I  am  ready  for  you."  When  the  next  morning 
came,  he  refused  to  take  chloroform,  for  he  desired  to 
go  to  heaven  in  his  senses.  He  bore  the  operation  man 
fully,  and  he  is  yet  alive. 

God  Our  Defender.-—  Contend  not  with  a  man  who  has  God 
at  his  back.  Years  ago,  the  Mentonese  desired  to  break 
away  from  the  dominion  of  the  Prince  of  Monaco.  They 
therefore  drove  out  his  agent.  The  prince  came  with  his 
army,  not  a  very  great  one,  it  is  true,  but  still  formidable 
to  the  Mentonese.  I  know  not  what  the  high  and  mighty 
princeling  was  not  going  to  do;  but  news  came  that 
the  King  of  Sardinia  was  coming  up  in  the  rear  to  help 
the  Mentonese,  and  therefore  his  lordship  of  Monaco 
very  prudently  retired  to  his  own  rock.  When  a  be 
liever  stands  out  against  evil  he  may  be  sure  that  the 
lord  of  hosts  will  not  be  far  away.  The  enemy  shall 
hear  the  dash  of  his  horse-hoof  and  the  blast  of  his  trum 
pet,  and  shall  flee  before  him.  Wherefore  be  of  good 
courage,  and  compel  the  world  to  say  of  you,  "  He  trusted 
in  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him." 

The  Father's  Love.— Your  dear  children  do  not  trouble 
themselves  much,  do  they?  If  they  have  a  want,  they 
go  to  father;  if  they  are  puzzled,  they  ask  father;  if 
they  are  ill-treated,  they  appeal  to  father.  If  but  a 
thorn  is  in  their  finger,  they  run  to  mother  for  relief. 
Be  it  little  or  great,  the  child's  sorrow  is  the  parent's 
care.  This  makes  a  child's  life  easy :  it  would  make  ours 
easy  if  we  would  but  act  as  children  towards  God.  Let 
us  imitate  the  Elder  Brother,  and  when  we,  too,  are  in 
our  Gethsemane,  let  us,  as  he  did,  continue  to  cry,  "  My 
Father,  My  Father."  This  is  a  better  defence  than  shield 
or  sword. 


GOD  135 

God's  Consideration. —  A  person  may  happen  to  do  you 
a  good  turn;  but  if  you  are  sure  that  he  did  it  by  acci 
dent,  or  with  no  more  thought  than  that  wherewith  a 
passing  stranger  throws  a  penny  to  a  beggar,  you  are 
not  impressed  with  gratitude.  But  when  the  action  of 
your  friend  is  the  result  of  earnest  deliberation,  and  you 
see  that  he  acts  in  the  tenderest  regard  to  your  welfare, 
you  are  are  far  more  thankful:  traces  of  anxiety  to  do 
you  good  are  very  pleasant.  Have  I  not  heard  persons 
say,  "  It  was  so  kind  and  so  thoughtful  of  him ! "  Do 
you  not  notice  that  men  value  kindly  thought,  and  set 
great  store  by  tender  consideration!  Remember,  then, 
that  there  is  never  a  thoughtless  action  on  the  part  of 
God.  His  mind  goes  with  his  hand:  his  heart  is  in  his 
acts.  He  thinks  so  much  of  his  people,  that  the  very 
hairs  of  their  heads  are  all  numbered :  he  thinks  not  only 
of  the  great  thing,  but  of  all  the  little  things  which  are 
incidental  to  the  great  thing;  as  the  hairs  are  to  the 
head.  Every  affliction  is  timed  and  measured,  and  every 
comfort  is  sent  with  a  loving  thoughtfulness  which  makes 
it  precious  in  a  sevenfold  degree.  0  believer,  the  great 
thoughtfulness  of  the  divine  mind  is  exercised  towards 
you,  the  chosen  of  the  Lord. 

God's  Pity. —  The  old  father  had  a  very  long  range  of  eye 
sight;  and  tho  the  prodigal  could  not  see  him  in  the  dis 
tance,  he  could  see  the  prodigal.  And  the  father's  first 
thought  when  he  saw  him  was  this  — "  0  my  poor  son, 
0  my  poor  boy !  that  ever  he  should  have  brought  himself 
into  such  a  state  as  this ! "  He  looked  through  his  tele 
scope  of  love,  and  he  saw  him,  and  said,  "Ah!  he  did 
not  go  out  of  my  house  in  such  trim  as  that.  Poor  crea 
ture,  his  feet  are  bleeding;  he  has  come  a  long  way,  I'll 
be  bound.  Look  at  his  face,  he  doesn't  look  like  the  same 
boy  he  was  when  he  left  me.  His  eye  that  was  so  bright, 
is  now  sunken  in  its  socket;  his  cheeks  that  once  stood 


i36     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

out  with  fatness,  have  now  become  hollow  with  famine. 
Poor  wretch,  I  can  tell  all  his  bones,  he  is  so  emaciated." 
Instead  of  feeling  any  anger  in  his  heart,  he  felt  just 
the  contrary;  he  felt  such  pity  for  his  poor  son.  And 
so  the  Lord  feels  for  you. 

God's  Fatherhood.— A  child  may  be  happy  at  school,  but 
he  longs  for  the  holidays.  Is  it  merely  to  escape  his 
lessons  ?  Ah,  no !  Ask  him,  and  he  will  tell  you.  "  I 
want  to  go  home  to  see  my  father."  The  same  is  equally 
true,  and  possibly  more  so,  if  we  include  the  feminine 
form  of  parentage.  What  a  home-cry  is  that  of 
"  mother !  "  The  sight  of  that  dear  face  has  been  longed 
and  hungered  for  by  many  a  child  when  far  away. 
Mother  or  father,  which  you  will;  they  are  blended  in 
the  great  Fatherhood  of  God.  Let  it  but  be  said  that 
any  one  has  gone  to  his  father,  and  no  further  question 
is  asked  as  to  the  right  of  his  going  thither.  To  the 
father  belongs  the  first  possession  of  the  child;  should 
he  not  have  his  own  child  at  home?  The  Savior  wipes 
our  tears  away  with  a  handkerchief  which  is  marked  in 
the  corner  with  this  word  — "  Father." 

At  Home  in  God's  Arms.—  I  had  a  great  sorrow  yesterday 
of  speaking  to  a  dear  brother  whom  I  had  hoped  would 
be  spared  for  great  usefulness  in  a  distant  land;  but 
he  had  just  received  from  the  doctor's  examination  the 
solemn  information  that  he  was  hopelessly  diseased.  We 
proposed  that  he  should  go  to  the  seaside;  but  I  saw 
which  way  his  heart  went.  He  thought  of  his  wife  and 
his  habitation,  and  he  said,  "Let  me  go  home.  If  I 
must  die,  let  it  be  in  my  own  house."  He  spoke  as  I 
should  have  done  in  like  case.  At  home  one  might  not 
have  all  the  skill  of  the  hospital  at  command;  but  one 
would  be  sure  of  a  certain  priceless  tenderness  which 
no  nurse  can  rival.  Lord,  thou  hast  been  my  dwelling- 
place:  I  will  die  in  thy  arms.  When  I  am  sick  and 


GOD  137 

weary  there  is  none  like  thee,  my  God !  When  my  heart 
breaks  and  all  things  seem  lost,  none  can  bind  it  up  but 
thee,  my  God! 

God's  Defence  of  His  Children. —  A  man  is  generally  much 
grieved  with  any  one  who  injures  his  children.  I  have 
known  a  man  behave  patiently  to  his  neighbors,  and 
put  up  with  a  great  deal  from  them;  but  when  one  of 
them  has  struck  his  child  I  have  seen  him  incensed  to  the 
last  degree.  He  has  said,  "I  cannot  stand  that,  I  will 
not  look  on  and  see  my  own  children  ill-used."  The 
Lord  says,  "  He  that  touches  you  touches  the  apple  of 
my  eye."  Jesus  rises  from  his  throne  in  glory  and 
stands  up  indignantly  while  his  servant  Stephen  is  being 
stoned.  If  I  had  no  other  amusement  whatever,  I  would 
not  for  merriment  sake  mock  the  people  of  God;  for 
it  will  go  hard  with  those  who  make  unhallowed  mirth 
out  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High. 

The  Patience  of  God.—  They  said  of  Cranmer  that  he  was 
more  than  ready  to  forgive,  for  he  always  returned  good 
for  evil.  It  was  a  common  saying,  u  Do  my  Lord  of 
Canterbury  an  ill  turn,  and  he  will  be  your  friend  as 
long  as  you  live."  That  was  fine;  but  my  lord  of 
Canterbury  was  nothing  in  gentleness  compared  with  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ.  The  holy 
Leighton,  also  was  of  such  a  gentle  spirit  that  one  day 
when  he  went  out  for  a  walk  and  came  back  he  could 
not  get  into  his  own  house,  for  it  was  locked  up,  and 
his  servant  had  gone  away  for  a  day's  fishing  without 
leave  or  notice.  All  the  good  man  said  was,  "  John, 
next  time  you  go  fishing,  please  to  let  me  know,  or  at 
least  leave  me  the  key,  so  that  I  may  open  the  door." 
That  was  all.  If  even  men  have  come  up  to  such  a  de 
gree  of  patience,  much  more  will  you  find  longsuffering 
in  God. 


138     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Imitating  God.— "Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  chil 
dren  :  "  not  as  slaves  might  imitate  their  master  —  un 
willingly,  dreading  the  crack  of  his  whip;  but  loving, 
willing  imitators,  such  as  children  are.  You  do  not  urge 
your  children  to  imitate  you;  they  do  this  even  in  their 
games.  See  how  the  boy  rides  his  wooden  horse,  and 
the  girl  imitates  her  nurse.  You  see  the  minister's  little 
boy  trying  to  preach  like  his  father;  and  you  all  re 
member  the  picture  of  the  tiny  girl  with  a  Bible  in  front 
of  her  and  an  ancient  pair  of  spectacles  upon  her  nose, 
saying,  "  Now  I'm  grandmamma."  They  copy  us  by 
force  of  nature:  they  cannot  help  it.  Such  will  be  the 
holiness  of  the  genuine  Christian.  He  is  born  from  above, 
and  hence  he  lives  above.  His  imitation  of  God  springs 
out  of  his  relationship  to  God.  Holiness  must  be  spon 
taneous,  or  it  is  spurious.  We  cannot  be  driven  to  holi 
ness  like  a  bullock  to  his  ploughing;  we  must  delight  in 
the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man.  "  Be  ye  imitators 
of  God,  as  dear  children/'  because  you  do  not  wish  for 
anything  better  than  to  be  like  your  Father,  and  have 
no  ambition  in  the  world  that  approaches  your  aspira 
tion  to  be  holy  even  as  God  is  holy,  according  to  that 
word,  "Be  ye  perfect  even  as  your  Father  which  is  in 
heaven  is  perfect." 

Under  the  Divine  Shadow.— A  Christian  lady  not  long 
ago  dreamed  a  dream  which  was  not  a  dream,  but  fact. 
She  saw  herself  as  surrounded  with  God ;  encircled  above, 
beneath,  and  all  around,  as  with  a  blaze  of  light.  Bril 
liance  inconceivable  made  a  pavilion  for  her;  and  while 
she  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  glory  she  saw  all  her  cares 
and  her  troubles,  and  her  temptations,  and  her  sins, 
wandering  about  outside  of  the  wall  of  light,  unable  to 
reach  her.  Unless  that  light  itself  should  open  and  make 
a  way  for  them  she  was  serenely  secure,  altho  she  could 
see  the  perils  which  else  would  destroy  her.  Is  not 


GOD  139 

the  Lord  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  us,  and  the  glory 
in  the  midst?  Is  it  not  written,  "He  that  dwelleth  in 
the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High  shall  abide  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Almighty?" 

Chastening  a  Pledge  of  Fatherly  Love.-—  If  any  one  should 
say  to  a  father,  after  he  had  chastened  his  child,  "  Why 
is  it  you  have  chastened  the  child  ?  "  he  would  not  say, 
it  is  because  I  am  his  father.  It  is  true  in  one  sense; 
but  he  would  say,  "  I  have  chastened  the  child  because 
he  has  done  wrong."  Because  the  proximate  reason  why 
he  had  chastened  his  child  would  not  be  that  he  was  his 
father,  tho  that  would  have  something  to  do  with  it 
as  a  primary  reason;  but  the  absolute  and  primary 
cause  would  be,  "  I  have  chastened  him  because  he  has 
done  wrong,  because  I  wish  to  correct  him  for  it,  that 
he  might  not  do  so  again."  Now,  God,  when  he  chastens 
his  children,  never  does  it  absolutely;  because  he  is  his 
father;  but  he  does  it  for  a  wise  reason.  He  has  some 
other  reason  besides  his  fatherhood.  At  the  same  time, 
one  reason  why  God  afflicts  his  children  and  not  others, 
is  because  he  is  their  Father.  If  you  were  to  go  home 
to-day  and  see  a  dozen  boys  in  the  streets  throwing  stones 
and  breaking  windows  it  is  very  likely  you  would  start 
the  whole  lot  of  them;  but  if  there  is  one  boy  that 
would  get  a  sweet  knock  on  the  head  it  would  be  your 
own ;  for  you  would  say,  "  What  are  you  at,  John  ? 
What  business  have  you  here  ?  "  You  might  not  be  jus 
tified,  perhaps,  in  meddling  with  the  others  —  you  would 
let  their  own  fathers  attend  to  them;  but  because  you 
were  his  father,  you  would  tiy  to  make  him  remember  it. 
Certain  special  chastisements  are  inflicted  on  God's  chil 
dren,  because  they  are  his  children;  but  it  is  not  because 
they  are  his  children  that  he  chastens  them  at  any  one 
time,  but  because  they  have  been  doing  something  wrong. 
Now,  if  you  are  under  chastisement,  let  this  truth  be 


i4o     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

certain  to  you.  Are  the  consolations  of  God  small  with 
thee?  Is  there  any  secret  thing  with  thee?  Art  thou 
chastened  in  thy  busines?  Then  what  sin  hast  thou 
committed'?  Art  thou  cast  down  in  thy  spirit?  Then 
what  transgression  has  brought  this  on  thee?  Remem 
ber,  it  is  not  fair  to  say,  "  I  am  chastened  because  I 
am  his  child ; "  the  right  way  to  say  it  is,  u  I  am  his 
child,  and  therefore  when  he  chastens  me  has  a  reason 
for  it." 

Give  God  the  Rudder.-—  True  wisdom  is  sure  to  set  folly 
in  a  strong  light.  I  have  heard  of  a  young  man  who 
went  to  college;  and  when  he  had  been  there  one  year, 
his  parent  said  to  him,  "  What  do  you  know  ?  Do  you 
know  more  than  when  you  went  ? "  "  Oh !  yes,"  said 
he,  "I  do."  Then  he  went  the  second  year,  and  was 
asked  the  same  question  —  "  Do  you  know  more  than 
when  you  went  ?  "  "  Oh !  no,"  said  he,  "  I  know  a  great 
deal  less."  "Well,"  said  the  father,  "you  are  getting 
on."  Then  he  went  the  third  year,  and  was  asked  the 
same  question  — "  What  do  you  know  now?"  "Oh!" 
said  he,  "I  don't  think  I  know  anything."  "That  is 
right,"  said  the  father;  "you  have  now  learnt  to  profit, 
since  you  say  you  know  nothing."  He  who  is  convinced 
that  he  knows  nothing  of  himself  as  he  ought  to  know, 
gives  up  steering  his  ship,  and  lets  God  put  his  hand  on 
the  rudder. 

GOODNESS 

Genuine  Piety.-— When  a  great  Grecian  artist  was  fash 
ioning  an  image  for  the  temple  he  was  diligently  carv 
ing  the  back  part  of  the  goddess,  and  one  said  to  him, 
"You  need  not  finish  that  part  of  the  statue,  because  it 
is  to  be  built  into  the  wall."  He  replied,  "  The  gods 
can  see  in  the  wall."  He  had  a  right  idea  of  what  is 


GOODNESS  141 


due  to  God.  That  part  of  my  religion  which  no  man 
can  see  should  be  as  perfect  as  if  it  were  to  be  observed 
by  all.  The  day  shall  declare  it.  When  Christ  shall 
come  everything  shall  be  made  known,  and  published  be 
fore  the  universe.  Therefore  see  to  it  that  it  be  fit  to  be 
thus  made  known. 

Good  but  Good  for  Nothing.—  T  heard  the  other  day  of 
a  Sunday-school  address  in  America  which  pleased  me 
much.  The  teacher,  speaking  to  the  boys,  said,  "  Boys, 
here's  a  watch,  what  is  it  for  ? "  The  children  answered, 
"  To  tell  the  time."  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  suppose  my  watch 
does  not  tell  the  time,  what  is  it  good  for  ?  "  "  Good- 
for-nothing,  sir."  Then  he  took  out  a  pencil.  "  What 
is  this  pencil  for  ?  "  "  It  is  to  write  with,  sir."  "  Sup 
pose  this  pencil  won't  make  a  mark,  what  is  it  good  for?  " 
"Good-for-nothing,  sir."  Then  he  took  out  his  pocket- 
knife.  "Boys,  what  is  this  for?"  They  were  American 
boys,  and  so  they  shouted,—  "  to  whittle  with,"—  that  is 
to  experiment  on  any  substance  that  came  in  their  way 
by  cutting  a  notch  in  it.  "But,"  said  he,  "suppose  it 
will  not  cut,  what  is  the  knife  good  for?"  "Good-for- 
nothing,  sir."  Then  the  teacher  asked,  "  What  is  the 
chief  end  of  man?  "  and  they  replied,  "  To  glorify  God." 
"  But  suppose  a  man  does  not  glorify  God,  what  is  he 
good  for?"  "Good-for-nothing,  sir."  That  brings  out 
my  point  most  clearly;  there  are  many  professors  of 
whom  I  will  not  say  that  they  are  good-for-nothing, 
but  methinks  if  they  do  not  soon  stir  themselves  up  to 
glorify  God  by  proclaiming  the  sweetness  of  God's  love 
it  will  go  hard  with  them.  Remember  how  Jesus  said  of 
the  savourless  salt  "henceforth  it  is  good  for  nothing." 
What  were  you  converted  for?  What  were  you  forgiven 
for?  What  were  you  renewed  for?  What  have  you 
been  preserved  on  earth  for  but  to  tell  to  others  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation  and  so  to  glorify  God?  Do,  then, 


i42      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

go  out  with  your  hands  full  of  the  honey  of  divine  love 
and  hold  it  out  to  otherr 

GRATITUDE 

Gratitude  for  Spiritual  Blessings. —  I  was  preaching  this 
week  for  a  young  minister,  and  being  anxious  to  know 
his  character,  I  spoke  of  him  with  apparent  coolness  to 
an  estimable  lady  of  his  congregation.  In  a  very  few 
moments  she  began  to  warm  in  his  favor.  She  said, 
"  You  must  not  say  any  thing  against  him,  sir ;  if  you 
do,  it  is  because  you  do  not  know  him."  "  Oh,"  I  said, 
"  I  knew  him  long  before  you  did ;  he  is  not  much,  is  he  f  " 
"  Well,"  she  said,  "  I  must  speak  well  of  him,  for  he  has 
been  a  blessing  to  my  servants  and  family."  I  went  out 
into  the  street,  and  saw  some  men  and  women  standing 
about ;  so  I  said  to  them,  "  I  must  take  your  minister 
away."  "  If  you  do,"  they  said,  "  we  will  follow  you  all 
over  the  world,  if  you  take  away  a  man  who  has  done  so 
much  good  to  our  souls."  After  collecting  the  testimony 
of  fifteen  or  sixteen  witnesses,  I  said,  "  If  the  man  gets 
such  witnesses  as  these  let  him  go  on;  the  Lord  has 
opened  his  mouth,  and  the  devil  will  never  be  able  to 
shut  it."  These  are  the  witnesses  we  want  —  men  who 
can  sing  with  the  angels  because  their  own  households 
are  converted  to  God. 

Gratitude  for  Salvation.—  It  strikes  me  with  wonder  when 
I  see  how  many  of  the  very  greatest  of  sinners  have  be 
come  the  most  useful  of  men.  Do  you  see  John  Bunyan 
yonder?  He  is  cursing  God.  He  goes  into  the  belfry 
and  pulls  the  bell  on  Sunday,  because  he  likes  the  bell- 
ringing;  but  when  the  church  door  is  open,  he  is  playing 
bowls  upon  the  village  green.  There  is  the  village  tap, 
and  there  is  no  one  that  laughs  so  loud  as  John  Bunyan. 
There  are  some  people  going  to  the  meeting-house;  there 


GRATITUDE  143 


is  no  one  curses  them  so  much  as  John.  He  is  a  ring 
leader  in  all  vice.  If  there  is  a  hen-roost  to  be  robbed, 
Jack's  your  man.  If  there  is  any  iniquity  to  be  done, 
if  there  is  any  evil  in  the  parish,  you  need  not  guess  twice, 
John  Bunyan  is  at  the  bottom  of  it.  But  who  is  it 
stands  there  in  the  dock  before  the  magistrate1?  Who  is 
it  I  hear  just  now  —"If  you  will  let  me  out  of  prison 
to-day,  I  will  preach  the  gospel  to-morrow,  by  the  help 
of  God  ?  "  Who  was  it  that  lay  twelve  years  in  prison, 
and  when  they  said  he  might  go  out  if  he  would  promise 
not  to  preach,  replied,  "  No,  I  will  be  here  till  the  moss 
grows  on  mine  eyelids,  but  I  must  and  will  preach  God's 
gospel  as  soon  as  I  have  liberty  f  "  Why,  that  is  John 
Bunyan,  the  very  man  who  cursed  Christ  the  other  day. 
A  ringleader  in  vice  has  become  the  glorious  dreamer,  the 
very  leader  of  God's  hosts.  See,  what  God  did  for  him, 
and  what  God  did  for  him  he  will  do  for  you,  if  now 
you  repent  and  seek  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 

"  He  is  able,  he  is  willing,  doubt  no  more." 

Expressing  Gratitude.— We  read  in  the  paper  some  time 
ago  that  the  King  of  Italy,  to  his  great  honor,  appeared 
in  a  court  of  law  on  behalf  of  a  man  brought  under 
charge  of  causing  death.  The  king  had  seen  the  accident, 
and  he  came  forward  as  a  common  witness  in  the  court 
to  say  that  the  horse  had  mastered  the  driver,  and  the 
man  was  not  to  be  blamed.  I  do  not  know  the  name 
of  the  man,  but  I  feel  pretty  sure  that  Jacobi  or  An 
tonio,  whoever  he  may  be,  if  ever  King  Humbert  wants 
somebody  to  speak  up  for  him,  he  will  find  a  friend  in 
him:  he  will  say,  "My  King  came  into  court  and  spoke 
for  me,  and  I  will  as  long  as  ever  I  live  speak  up  for 
him."  Now,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  an  advocate  for 
you,  therefore  be  an  advocate  for  him.  Can  you  ever 
Tie  silent  for  Christ  now  that  the  Lord  Christ  has  re- 


144     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

deemed  you  from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  the  penalty 
of  sin?  I  tell  you,  if  you  can  be  quiet  and  do  nothing 
for  Christ,  I  am  afraid  you  have  never  tasted  of  his  love 
and  grace. 

HEARERS 

Hearers,  but  Not  Doers.—-  Beware  of  being  like  John  Bun- 
yan's  trees  that  were  green  outside,  but  inwardly  rotten, 
and  only  fit  to  be  tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder-box.  Oh " 
beware  of  saying  as  some  of  you  do,  "I  go,  sir,"  while 
you  go  not.  I  sometimes  see  sick  people  who  quite  alarm 
and  distress  me.  I  say  to  them,  "  My  dear  friend,  you 
are  dying;  have  you  a  hope?"  There  is  no  answer. 
"Do  you  know  your  lost  state?"  "Yes,  sir."  "  Christ 
died  for  sinners."  "Yes,  sir."  "Faith  gives  us  of  his 
grace."  "  Yes,  sir."  They  say,  "  Yes,  sir ;  yes,  sir ;  yes, 
sir;  yes,  sir;  yes,  sir."  I  sometimes  wish  before  God 
they  would  contradict  me,  for  if  they  would  but  have 
honesty  enough  to  say,  "  I  do  not  believe  a  word  of  it," 
I  should  know  how  to  deal  with  them.  Stubborn  oaks 
are  levelled  by  the  gale,  but  those  who  bend  like  the 
willow  before  every  wind,  what  wind  shall  break  them? 
Oh,  dear  brethren,  beware  of  being  gospel-hardened;  or 
what  is  the  same  thing,  softened  but  for  a  season.  Be 
ware  of  being  a  promising  hearer  of  the  word,  and 
nothing  more! 

Personal  Application  of  Truth. —  A  minister  once  sent  his 
deacon  to  attend  a  certain  anniversary  service.  The  dis 
course  turned  upon  Diotrephes,  who  loved  the  pre 
eminence.  The  deacon's  character  was  aptly  described. 
He  did  not,  however,  agree  with  the  preacher.  He  was 
himself  a  Diotrephes,  though  he  failed  to  detect  his  own 
portrait;  or  at  least,  with  apparent  indifference,  he  asked 
a  friend  of  his  if  he  supposed  there  were  such  persons 
existing  as  those  who  had  been  described  in  the  discourse  ? 


HEART 


"  I  cannot  think,"  said  he,  "  who  the  preacher  could  have 
been  aiming  at?"  So  his  friend  said,  "Well,  I  think 
he  must  have  been  intending  you  and  me."  No  better 
answer  could  have  been  given.  I  like  each  hearer  to  make 
the  application  to  himself. 

Deaf  Hearers. —  Many  years  ago  a  friend  said  that  he  could 
not  hear  me  preach.  I  said  to  him,  "  Buy  a  horn." 
"No,"  he  said,  "it  is  not  your  voice;  I  can  hear  that, 
but  I  don't  enjoy  it."  My  reply  was :  "  Perhaps  that 
is  my  fault,  but  I  am  far  from  sure  that  it  is  not  your 
own."  I  fear,  in  such  cases,  it  is  quite  as  often  the 
hearer's  fault  as  the  preacher's  fault.  At  any  rate,  when 
others  profit,  and  our  judgment  approves,  tho  our 
hearts  find  no  refreshment,  there  is  reason  to  suspect  that 
in  the  dulness  of  our  senses  we  are  compelled  to  bear 
chastisement  for  our  unblief.  You  go  where  others  go, 
and  find  no  solace.  You  hear  what  edifies  and  comforts 
them;  but  there  is  no  cheer  for  you.  You  are  deaf;  your 
ears  are  closed  to  what  the  Lord  says. 

HEART 

Writing  on  the  Heart. —  I  have  marvelled  at  the  expres 
sion  used  in  the  text,  "  I  will  write  my  law  in  their 
hearts."  To  write  on  a  heart  must  be  difficult  work  but  to 
write  in  a  heart,  in  the  very  centre  of  the  heart,  who  can 
do  this  but  God?  A  man  cuts  his  name  upon  a  tree  in 
the  bark,  and  there  it  stands,  and  the  letters  grow  with 
the  tree ;  but  to  cut  his  name  in  the  heart  of  the  tree  — 
how  shall  he  accomplish  this?  And  yet  God  doth  divine 
ly  engrave  his  will  and  his  law  in  the  very  heart  and 
nature  of  man ! 

The  Burglar  in  the  Heart.— I  do  not  believe  that  a  man 
becomes  a  villain  all  at  once.  He  puts  his  soul  to  school, 
his  thoughts  are  his  teachers,  or  rather  they  are  the 


146     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

school-books  in  which  his  soul  reads;  and  at  last  he  be 
comes  capable  of  transacting  the  deeds  of  a  scoundrel. 
If  you  think  long  upon  any  sin,  the  chances  are  that,  as 
soon  as  the  temptation  to  that  sin  comes,  you  will  com 
mit  it.  I  have  known  persons  produce  a  monomania  by 
constant  brooding  upon  one  object.  I  did  once  know 
a  man  who  was  constantly  apprehensive  that  he  was  be 
ing  poisoned  by  people;  and  I  always  stood  in  trepida 
tion  for  that  man,  lest  he  should  poison  himself.  If  you 
will  harbor  the  thought  —  if  you  will  ruminate  on  any 
sin,  turn  it  over,  and  advise  with  it  on  your  pillow;  your 
affability  will  disarm  your  fear ;  and  the  traitor  you  have 
harbored  will  betray  you  before  your  suspicions  are 
aroused.  Beware,  then,  of  all  thoughts  of  sin.  If  you 
show  a  thief  all  the  locks  and  bolts  and  bars  in  your 
house,  and  tell  him  how  the  cellar-window  could  be 
opened,  or  the  back-door  be  made  to  give  way,  do 
not  be  surprised  if,  one  of  these  nights,  you  should  find 
all  your  goods  stolen.  If  you  introduce  these  evil 
thoughts  into  your  habitation,  you  cannot  wonder  at  the 
consequence,  however  startled  your  friends  may  be  at 
the  detection. 

Tainted  Food. —  When  I  am  asked  to  read  a  heretical  book 
I  think  of  good  John  Newton.  Dr.  Taylor,  of  Norwich, 
said  to  him :  "  Have  you  read  my  Key  to  the  Romans?  " 
"  I  have  turned  it  over,"  said  the  doctor.  "  And  is  this 
the  treatment  a  book  must  meet  with  which  has  cost  me 
so  many  years'  hard  study;  you  ought  to  have  read  it 
carefully,  and  weighed  deliberately  what  comes  forward 
on  so  serious  a  subject."  "  Hold,"  said  Newton,  "  you 
have  cut  me  out  full  employment  for  a  life  as  long  as 
Methuselah's.  My  life  is  too  short  to  be  spent  in  read 
ing  contradictions  of  my  religion.  If  the  first  page  tells 
me  the  man  is  undermining  truths,  it  is  enough  for  me. 
If  I  had  the  first  mouthful  of  a  joint  tainted,  I  do  not 


HEART  147 


want  to  eat  it  through  to  be  convinced;  I  ought  to  send 
it  away."  Having  the  truth  confirmed  in  us,  we  can 
laugh  all  arguments  to  scorn ;  we  are  plated  in  a  sheet  of 
mail  when  we  have  a  witness  within  us  to  God's  truth. 
All  the  men  in  this  world  can  not  make  us  alter  one 
single  iota  of  what  God  has  written  within  us. 

Keeping  the  Heart  Pure.—  It  would  be  of  little  use  for  our 
water  companies  to  keep  their  reservoirs  full,  if  they  did 
not  also  keep  them  pure.  I  remember  to  have  read  a 
complaint  in  the  newspaper  of  a  certain  provincial  town, 
that  a  tradesman  had  been  frequently  supplied  with  fish 
from  the  water  company,  large  eels  having  crept  down 
the  pipe,  and  sometimes  creatures  a  little  more  loath 
some.  We  have  known  such  a  thing  as  water  companies 
supplying  us  with  solids  when  they  ought  to  have  given 
us  nothing  but  pure  crystal.  Now,  no  one  likes  that. 
The  reservoir  should  be  kept  pure  and  clean;  and  unless 
the  water  comes  from  a  pure  spring,  and  is  not  impreg 
nated  with  deleterious  substances,  however  full  the  reser 
voir  may  be,  the  company  will  fail  of  satisfying  or  of 
benefiting  its  customers.  Now  it  is  essential  for  us  to  do 
with  our  hearts  as  the  company  must  do  with  its  reser 
voir.  We  must  keep  our  hearts  pure;  for  if  the  heart 
be  not  pure,  the  life  can  not  be  pure.  It  is  quite  im 
possible  that  it  should  be  so. 

The  Wicked  Heart. —  An  officer  in  India  had  tamed  a 
leopard.  From  the  time  when  it  was  quite  a  kitten  he 
had  brought  it  up,  till  it  went  about  the  house  like  a 
cat,  and  everybody  played  with  it;  but  he  was  sitting 
in  his  chair  one  day  asleep,  and  the  leopard  licked  his 
hand  —  licked  it  in  all  innocence ;  but  as  he  licked,  the 
skin  was  broken,  and  the  taste  of  blood  came  to  the 
leopard,  and  from  that  moment  it  was  not  content  to 
dwell  with  men.  It  rushed  forth  to  kill,  and  was  no  more 
at  ease  till  it  reached  the  jungle.  That  leopard,  tho 


148     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

tamed,  was  a  leopard  still.  So  a  man,  sobered  by  moral 
motives,  but  unchanged  in  heart,  is  a  fallen  man  still, 
and  the  taste  of  blood,  I  mean  the  taste  of  sin,  will  soon 
reveal  the  tiger  in  him.  Wash  a  Russian,  and  you  find 
a  Tartar;  tempt  a  moralist,  and  you  discover  a  sinner! 
The  thin  crust  of  goodness,  which  is  formed  by  education, 
soon  disappears  under  temptation.  You  may  be  every 
thing  that  looks  like  good,  but  except  you  have  been 
born  again  you  must  remember  you  are  still  capable  of 
the  direst  evil. 

The  Trouble  Within.—  The  wise  man  saith,  "  As  a  bird 
that  wandereth  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wander- 
eth  from  his  place."  It  is  not  the  box  that  makes  the 
jewel,  nor  the  place  that  makes  the  man.  "  Oh,  but  any 
where  rather  than  this ! "  Yes,  and  when  you  get  into 
the  place  you  now  covet,  you  will  pine  to  be  back  again. 
A  barren  tree  is  none  the  better  for  being  transplanted. 
A  blind  man  may  stand  at  many  windows  before  he  will 
improve  his  view.  If  it  is  difficult  to  produce  good 
works  where  you  are,  you  will  find  it  still  difficult  whero 
you  wish  to  be.  He  who  said  that  he  leaped  so  many 
yards  at  Rhodes,  was  asked  to  do  the  same  feat  at  home ; 
surely  the  place  could  not  take  away  his  strength,  nor 
give  it  to  him. 

Oh,  sirs,  the  real  difficulty  lies  not  without  you,  but 
within  you. 

Gospel  Hardened.— It  is  quite  possible  for  a  minister  to 
preach  too  long  to  any  one  set  of  people,  if  they  get  so 
accustomed  to  the  tones  of  his  voice  that  they  are  never 
aroused.  The  "click,  click"  of  the  mill  gets  to  be  so 
custoinary  to  the  miller  that  he  goes  to  sleep.  Over  in 
Bankside,  I  am  told,  when  a  man  is  first  put  inside  a 
boiler  while  the  rivets  are  being  fastened,  he  cannot  stop 
long,  the  noise  is  so  dreadful,  but  after  a  time  the  boiler- 
maker  gets  so  used  to  the  horrible  din  that  he  can  al- 


HEAVEN  149 


most  go  to  sleep  inside.  Well,  now,  so  it  really  is  under 
any  ministry  when  the  people  get  gospel-hardened. 
The  Hardening  Heart. —  Have  you  ever  seen  sponges  that 
have  been  turned  into  flints?  Well,  that  is  a  slow 
process,  it  takes  a  long  time.  The  like  process,  however, 
is  gradually  happening  to  you;  every  year  you  are  get 
ting  more  flinty.  The  drip,  drip,  drip  of  this  world's 
care  and  sin  is  petrifying  you.  You  are  getting  stony. 
It  strikes  me  the  best  time  to  repent  in  is  this  moment; 
and  the  very  best  season  in  which  to  fly  to  Jesus  is  now. 
Ere  yet  the  clock  has  ticked  again  your  heart  will  have 
grown  more  callous.  It  certainly  does  not  soften.  When 
will  there  be  any  influence  more  potent  than  there  is 
now  to  help  you? 

HEAVEN 

Only  the  Good  Would  be  Happy  in  Heaven. —  Some  of 
you  could  not  be  happy  if  you  were  allowed  to  enter  that 
heaven.  If  you  could  be  admitted  between  those  pearly 
gates  which  forever  exclude  pollution,  sin,  and  shame, 
you  could  not  be  happy  there.  Shall  I  tell  you  whyf 
It  is  a  land  of  spirit,  and  you  have  neglected  your  spirit; 
some  of  you  even  deny  that  you  have  a  spirit,  and  I  do 
not  wonder  that  you  say  so,  because  I  do  not  suppose 
that  you  have  ever  exercised  it;  but  let  a  man  who  has 
delighted  to  commune  with  the  Holy  Spirit  enter  into  the 
spirit-world,  and  he  will  be  in  his  element!  Besides,  the 
world  to  come  is  a  holy  world;  the  engagements  of  dis 
embodied  spirits  are  all  pure  and  lovely.  What  will  that 
man  do  who  loved  drunkenness,  who  indulged  in  unclean 
habits?  He  will  be  out  of  his  element.  If  he  could  be 
in  heaven,  as  Whitfield  used  to  say,  he  would  ask  God 
to  let  him  out,  and  would  run  into  hell  for  shelter,  for 
heaven  would  be  a  dreadful  place  to  an  ungodly  man. 
There  is  a  dream  which  is  told  (I  tell  it  not  for  the  dream. 


150     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

but  for  the  moral  of  it)  of  a  young  woman  who  imagined 
that  she  was  in  heaven  unconverted,  and  thought  she  saw 
upon  the  pavement  of  transparent  gold  multitudes  of 
spirits  dancing  to  the  sweetest  music.  She  stood  still, 
unhappy,  motionless,  silent,  and  when  the  King  said  to 
her,  "Why  do  you  not  partake  in  the  joy?"  she  answered, 
"I  cannot  join  in  the  dance,  for  I  do  not  knew  the 
measure;  I  cannot  join  in  the  song,  for  I  do  not  know 
the  tune  ; "  then  said  he  in  a  voice  of  thunder,  "  What 
dost  thou  here  ?  "  And  she  thought  herself  cast  out  for 
ever.  Ah,  dear  hearer !  heaven  is  a  prepared  place  for  a 
prepared  people.  If  you  do  not  learn  heaven's  language 
on  earth  you  must  know  you  cannot  learn  it  in  the  world 
to  come. 

Not  Yet  Due  in  heaven. —  Whitefield  and  a  company  of 
ministers  were  talking  together  and  expressing  their  de 
sire  to  go  to  heaven.  Good  Mr.  Tennant  was  the  only 
man  who  differed  from  them.  He  said  he  did  not  wish 
to  die;  and  he  thought  that  if  his  brother  Whitefield 
would  but  consider  for  a  time,  he  would  not  wish  to  be 
gone  either ;  for,  he  said,  if  you  hire  a  man  to  do  a  day's 
work,  and  he  is  saying  all  the  day,  "  I  wish  it  were  even 
ing;  I  wish  it  were  time  to  go  home,"  you  would  think, 
"  What  a  lazy  fellow  he  is ; "  and  you  would  wish  you 
'  /  had  never  engaged  him.  "  So,"  he  said,  "  I  am  afraid 
it  is  nothing  but  our  idleness  that  often  prompts  us  to 
desire  to  be  away  from  our  work."  If  there  be  a  soul  to 
win,  let  me  stop  until  I  have  won  it.  Truly,  some  of  us 
might  summon  up  courage  enough  to  say,  "  I  would  fain 
barter  heaven  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  not  only  wait 
twenty  years  out  of  heaven  if  I  may  have  twenty  years 
of  glorifying  him  the  better,  but  wait  out  altogether  if  I 
may  outside  heaven  sing  to  him  sweeter  songs,  and  honor 
him  more  than  I  can  inside  its  walls;  for  outside  heaven 
shall  be  heaven  to  me  if  it  shall  help  me  to  glorify  my 


HEAVEN  151 


Lord  and  Master  the  better."  You  have  heard,  I  dare 
say,  that  anecdote  of  good  Mr.  Whitefield,  in  his  early 
ministry,  lying  down,  as  he  thought,  to  die,  in  a  high 
fever,  and  a  poor  negro  woman  sitting  by  his  side  and 
tending  him.  In  his  sad  moments,  Whitefield  thought  of 
dying ;  but  the  black  woman  said,  "  No,  Master  White- 
field,  you  are  not  to  die  yet :  there  are  thousands  of  souls 
to  bring  to  Christ ;  so  keep  up  your  spirits,  for  you  must 
live,  and  not  die;  your  Master  has  yet  a  work  for  you 
to  do." 

No  Strife  in  Heaven.— An  old  Scotch  elder  had  been  dis 
puting  with  his  minister  at  an  elders'  meeting.  He  said 
some  hard  things,  and  almost  broke  the  minister's  heart. 
Afterwards  he  went  home,  and  the  minister  went  home 
too.  Next  morning  the  elder  came  down,  and  his  wife 
said  to  him,  "Eh,  Jan!  ye  look  very  sad  this  morning. 
What's  the  matter  wi'  ye?  "  "  Ah !  "  said  he,  "  you  would 
be  sad,  too,  if  you  had  had  such  a  dream  as  I've  had." 
"Weel,  and  what  did  ye  dream  about?"  "Och!  I 
dreamed  I  had  been  at  an  elders'  meeting,  and  I  said 
some  hard  things  and  grieved  the  minister;  and  as  he 
went  hame  I  thought  he  died  and  went  to  heaven.  A 
fortnight  after,  I  thought  I  died,  and  that  I  went  to 
heaven,  too.  And  when  I  got  to  the  gates  of  heaven,  out 
came  the  minister  and  put  out  his  hand  to  take  me,  say 
ing,  '  Come  alang,  Jan,  there's  nae  strife  up  here,  and 
I'm  happy  to  see  ye.' "  The  elder  went  to  the  minister 
to  beg  his  pardon  directly,  but  he  found  he  was  dead; 
and  he  laid  it  so  to  heart  that  within  a  fortnight  the 
elder  himself  departed.  And  I  should  not  wonder  if  he 
did  meet  the  minister  at  heaven's  gates,  and  hear  him  say, 
"Come  alang,  Jan!  there's  nae  strife  up  here."  It 
would  be  good  for  us  to  recollect  that  there  is  no  strife 
up  there.  Glorified  saints  have  not  strife  among  them 
selves  ;  and  we  should  love  one  another  more  in  brotherly 


152      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

kindness  if  we  thought  more  of  heaven  and  more  of  our 
blessed  Jesus. 

Recognition  of  Friends  in  Heaven. —  I  always  thought  that 
a  quietus  to  the  question  which  the  wife  of  old  John 
Ryland  asked :  "  Do  you  think,"  she  said,  "  you  will 
know  me  in  heaven  ?  "  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  I  know  you 
here ;  and  do  you  think  I  shall  be  a  bigger  fool  in  heaven 
than  I  arn  on  earth1?"*  The  question  is  beyond  dispute. 
We  shall  live  in  heaven  with  bodies,  and  that  decides  the 
matter.  We  shall  know  each  other  in  heaven;  you  may 
take  that  for  a  positive  fact,  and  not  mere  fancy. 

Memory  of  Earth's  Mercies  a  Joy  in  Heaven.— I  think 
Dr.  Watts  is  right  when  he  says  that  we  shall  "  with 
transporting  joys  recount  the  labors  of  our  feet."  It  is 
rather  a  small  subject,  and  probably  we  shall  far  more 
delight  to  dwell  on  the  labors  of  our  Redeemer's  hands 
and  feet;  but  still  we  shall  remember  all  the  way  where 
by  the  Lord  our  God  led  us,  and  we  shall  talk  to  one 
another  concerning  it.  In  heaven  we  shall  remember 
our  happy  Sabbaths  here  below,  when  our  hearts  burned 
within  us  while  Jesus  himself  drew  near.  Since  Jesus 
speaks  after  he  has  risen  of  the  things  that  he  said 
while  he  was  with  his  disciples,  we  perceive  that  the 
river  of  death  is  not  like  the  fabled  Lethe,  which  caused 
all  who  drank  thereof  to  forget  their  past.  We  shall 
arise  with  a  multitude  of  hallowed  memories  enriching 
our  minds.  Death  will  not  be  oblivion  to  us,  for  it  was 
not  so  to  Jesus.  Rather  shall  we  meditate  on  mercies 
experienced,  and  by  discoursing  thereon  we  shall  make 
known  to  principalities  and  powers  the  manifold  wisdom 
of  God. 

The  Rewards  of  Heaven.—  Here  comes  Whitfield,  the  man 
who  stood  before  twenty  thousand  at  a  time  to  preach 
the  gospel,  who  in  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and 
America  has  testified  the  truth  of  God,  and  who  could 


HEAVEN  153 


count  his  converts  by  thousands,  even  under  one  sermon ! 
Here  he  comes,  the  man  that  endured  persecution  and 
scorn,  and  yet  was  not  moved  —  the  man  of  whom  the 
world  was  not  worthy,  who  lived  for  his  fellow  men,  and 
died  at  last  for  their  cause;  stand  by  angels  and  admire, 
while  the  Master  takes  him  by  the  hand  and  says,  "  Well 
done,  well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant;  enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord ! "  See  how  free  grace  honors 
the  man  whom  it  enabled  to  do  valiantly.  Hark!  Who 
is  this  that  comes  there?  a  poor  thin-looking  creature, 
that  on  earth  was  a  consumptive;  there  was  a  hectic 
flush  now  and  then  upon  her  cheek,  and  she  lay  three  long 
years  upon  her  bed  of  sickness.  Was  she  a  prince's 
daughter,  for  it  seems  heaven  is  making  much  stir  about 
her?  No,  she  was  a  poor  girl  that  earned  her  living  by 
her  needle,  and  she  worked  herself  to  death !  —  Stitch, 
stitch,  stitch,  from  morning  to  night !  and  here  she  comes. 
She  went  prematurely  to  her  grave,  but  she  is  coming, 
like  a  shock  of  corn  fully  ripe,  into  heaven;  and  her 
Master  says,  "Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  serv 
ant,  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  few  things,  I  will  make 
thee  ruler  over  many  things;  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of 
thy  Lord."  She  takes  her  place  by  the  side  of  Whitfield. 
Ask  what  she  ever  did,  and  you  find  out  that  she  used  to 
live  in  some  back  garret  down  some  dark  alley  in  London ; 
and  there  used  to  be  another  poor  girl  come  to  work  with 
her,  and  that  poor  girl,  when  she  first  came  to  work 
with  her,  was  a  gay  and  volatile  creature,  and  this  con 
sumptive  child  told  her  about  Christ;  arid  they  used, 
when  she  was  well  enough,  to  creep  out  of  an  evening 
to  go  to  chapel  or  to  church  together.  It  was  hard  at 
first  to  get  the  other  one  to  go,  but  she  used  to  press  her 
lovingly;  and  when  the  girl  went  wild  a  little,  she  never 
gave  her  up.  She  used  to  say,  "  0,  Jane,  I  wish  you 
loved  the  Savior ; "  and  when  Jane  was  not  there  she  used 


154     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

to  pray  for  her,  and  when  she  was  there  she  prayed  with 
her :  and  now  and  then  when  she  was  stitching  away,  read 
a  page  out  of  the  Bible  to  her,  for  poor  Jane  could  not 
read.  And  with  many  tears  she  tried  to  tell  her  about 
the  Savior  who  loved  her  and  gave  himself  for  her.  At 
last,  after  many  a  day  of  hard  persuasion,  and  many  an 
hour  of  sad  disappointment,  and  many  a  night  of  sleep 
less  tearful  prayer,  at  last  she  lived  to  see  the  girl  pro 
fess  her  love  to  Christ;  and  she  left  her  and  took  sick, 
and  there  she  lay  till  she  was  taken  to  the  hospital, 
where  she  died.  When  she  was  in  the  hospital  she  used 
to  have  a  few  tracts,  and  she  used  to  give  them  to  those 
who  came  to  see  her;  she  would  try,  if  she  could,  to  get 
the  women  to  come  around,  and  she  would  give  them  a 
tract.  When  she  first  went  into  the  hospital,  if  she 
could  creep  out  of  bed,  she  used  to  get  by  the  side  of  one 
who  was  dying,  and  the  nurse  used  to  let  her  do  it;  till 
at  last  she  got  too  ill,  and  then  she  used  to  ask  a  poor 
woman  on  the  other  side  of  the  ward,  who  was  getting 
better,  and  was  going  out,  if  she  would  come  and  read 
a  chapter  to  her;  not  that  she  wanted  her  to  read  to  her 
on  her  own  account,  but  for  her  sake,  for  she  thought  it 
might  strike  her  heart  while  she  was  reading  it.  At  last 
this  poor  girl  died  and  fell  asleep  in  Jesus;  and  the  poor 
consumptive  needle-woman  had  said  to  her,  "  Well  done  n 
—  and  what  more  could  an  archangel  have  said  to  her? 
— "she  hath  done  what  she  could." 

HINDRANCES 

Overcoming  Hindrances. —  You  remember  in  John  Bun- 
yan's  Life  he  says  that  one  Sunday,  when  he  was  playing 
on  the  village  green  at  a  game  of  cat,  he  was  just  about 
to  strike  the  cat  when  a  voice  came  to  him  from  heaven, 
and  said,  "  Wilt  thou  have  thy  sins  and  go  to  hell,  or 
leave  thy  sins  and  go  to  heaven  *? "  And  he  stood  there 


HINDRANCES  155 


in  the  midst  of  his  companions  and  paused,  and  they 
could  not  think  what  ailed  the  tinker  while  he  was  dis 
puting  in  his  mind  which  it  should  be,  Christ  and  heaven, 
or  his  sins  and  hell.  Now,  whatever  your  hindrance  is 
—  be  it  money,  be  it  worldly  ambition,  or  be  it  any  fond 
passion  of  the  flesh  —  whatever  it  is,  give  it  up.  If  it 
be  thy  right  hand,  thou  hadst  better  cut  it  off,  and  cast 
it  from  thee,  than  keeping  it  seal  thine  endless  doom.  If 
it  be  thy  right  eye,  'twere  better  for  thee  to  pluck  it  out, 
than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell  fire. 

Overcoming  Difficulties. —  I  have  known  a  brother  wanting 
to  go  abroad  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  heathen,  but  a 
great  many  difficulties  have  been  thrown  in  his  way,  and 
therefore  he  has  said,  "  I  can  see  that  I  am  not  called  to 
go."  Why  not?  Is  no  man  called  unless  his  way  is 
easy?  I  should  think  myself  all  the  more  called  to  a 
service  if  I  found  obstacles  in  my  way.  The  course  of 
true  service  never  did  run  smooth.  I  should  say,  "  The 
devil  is  trying  to  hinder  me,  but  I  will  do  it  in  spite  of 
all  the  devils  in  hell."  Will  you  always  be  wanting  to 
have  your  bread  buttered  for  you  on  both  sides?  Must 
your  road  be  gravelled,  and  smoothed  with  a  garden 
roller?  Are  you  a  carpet  knight,  for  whom  there  is  to 
be  no  fighting?  You  are  not  worthy  to  be  a  soldier  of 
Jesus  Christ  at  all  if  you  look  for  ease. 

Meet  Difficulties  Bravely.-—  I  was  once  staying  in  the  north 
of  Scotland,  where  there  was  a  ferocious  dog  chained  up. 
He  came  out  and  I  patted  him,  and  he  jumped  up  with 
his  fore- feet  upon  me ;  I  caressed  him,  and  he  seemed  par 
ticularly  fond  of  me.  The  master  came  out.  "  Come 
away,  my  dear  sir,"  said  he,  "  that  dog  will  rend  you  to 
pieces."  But  I  did  not  know  it,  and  when  I  passed  by 
he  seemed  to  know  I  was  not  at  all  afraid  of  him,  so  he 
didn't  meddle  with  me.  In  like  manner,  Christians,  be 
not  terrified  at  your  adversaries. 


156     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 


HOPE 

Hope  "  The  Swimming  Thought."—  You  know  what  the 
New  Zealanders  call  hope;  they  call  it  in  their  language 
"  the  swimming  thought,"  because  it  always  floats  and 
never  sinks.  You  cannot  drown  it;  it  always  keeps  its 
head  above  the  wave.  When  you  think  you  have 
drowned  the  Christian's  hope,  up  it  comes  all  dripping 
from  the  brine,  and  cries  again,  "  Hope  thou  in  God,  for 
I  shall  yet  praise  him ! "  Hope  is  the  nightingale  that 
sings  in  the  night;  faith  is  the  lark  that  mounts  up 
towards  heaven;  but  hope  is  the  nightingale  that  cheers 
the  valley  in  the  darkness. 

Hope  of  Immortality.—  To-day  we  are  like  birds  in  the 
egg;  so  long  as  the  shell  is  whole  we  are  not  free:  death 
breaks  the  shell.  Does  the  fledgling  lament  the  dissolu 
tion  of  the  shell?  I  never  heard  of  a  bird  in  its  nest 
pining  over  its  broken  shell;  no,  its  thought  runs  other 
wise:  to  wings,  and  flight,  and  sunny  skies.  So  let  it  be 
with  us.  This  body  will  be  dissolved:  let  it  be  so;  it  is 
meet  it  should  be.  We  have  been  glad  of  it  while  we 
have  needed  it,  and  we  thank  God  for  the  wondrous  sk^ll 
displayed  in  it;  but  when  we  no  longer  require  it  we  shall 
escape  from  it  as  from  imprisonment,  and  never  wish  to 
return  to  its  narrow  bounds. 

The  Fountain  of  Hope. —  A  rich  man  has  a  cistern  full  of 
riches,  but  a  poor  saint  has  got  a  fountain  of  mercy,  and 
he  is  the  richest  who  has  a  fountain.  Now,  if  my  neigh 
bor  be  a  rich  man,  he  may  have  as  much  wealth  as  ever 
he  pleases,  it  is  only  a  cistern  full,  it  will  soon  be  ex 
hausted;  but  a  Christian  has  a  fountain  that  ever  flows, 
and  let  him  draw,  draw  on  forever,  the  fountain  will  still 
keep  on  flowing.  However  large  may  be  the  stagnant 
pool,  if  it  be  stagnant,  it  is  but  of  little  worth;  but  the 


HOPE  157 

flowing  stream,  tho  it  seem  to  be  but  small,  needs  but 
time,  and  it  will  have  produced  an  immense  volume  of 
precious  water.  Thou  are  never  to  have  a  great  pool  of 
riches,  they  are  always  to  keep  on  flowing  to  thee ;  "  Thy 
bread  shall  be  given  thee,  and  thy  water  shall  be  sure." 
As  old  William  Huntingdon  says,  "  The  Christian  has  a 
hand-basket  portion.  Many  a  man,  when  his  daughter 
marries,  does  not  give  her  much,  but  he  says  to  her,  '  I 
shall  send  you  a  sack  of  flour  one  day,  and  so-and-so  the 
next  day,  and  now  and  then  a  sum  of  gold;  and  as  long 
as  I  live  I  will  always  send  you  something."  Says  he, 
"  She  will  get  a  great  deal  more  than  her  sister,  who  has 
had  a  thousand  pounds  down.  That  is  how  my  God  deals 
with  me;  he  gives  to  the  rich  man  all  at  once,  but  to  me 
day  by  day."  Ah,  Egypt,  thou  wert  rich  when  thy 
granaries  were  full,  but  those  granaries  might  be  emptied ; 
Israel  was  far  richer  when  they  could  not  see  their 
granaries,  but  only  saw  the  manna  drop  from  heaven, 
day  by  day.  Now,  Christian,  that  is  thy  portion  —  the 
portion  of  the  fountain  always  flowing,  and  not  of  the 
cistern-full,  and  soon  to  be  emptied. 

Saved  Through  Blasted  Hopes. —  You  have  all  heard  the 
old  story  of  the  celebrated  painter  who  was  painting  in 
St.  Paul's,  and  who,  looking  at  his  work,  went  gradually 
back,  inch  by  inch,  to  get  a  view  of  it,  so  that  he  might 
see  the  excellence  of  its  proportions,  until  his  feet  were 
just  on  the  edge  of  the  platform  upon  which  he  stood; 
and  he  would  have  fallen  down  and  been  dashed  in 
pieces  upon  the  pavement  beneath,  but  just  at  that  mo 
ment  a  workman  who  stood  there,  desirous  to  save  his  life, 
and  not  knowing  how  to  do  it,  hit  upon  an  expedient 
which  proved  to  be  a  very  wise  one.  Instead  of  shout 
ing  out  to  his  master,  "  Sir,  you  are  in  danger,"  which 
would  most  certainly  have  sent  him  backward,  he  took 
up  a  brush,  and  dipping  it  in  a  pot  of  paint,  dashed  it  at' 


158     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

the  picture.  The  good  man  rushed  forward  in  anger  to 
chastise  him;  but  when  it  was  explained,  he  clearly  saw 
that  he  had  acted  wisely. 

HUMILITY 

Humility  Necessary.— He  gives  us  temporal  mercies,  and 
then  we  presumptuously  say,  "My  mountain  standeth 
firm;  I  shall  never  be  moved/'  We  meet  with  the  poor 
saints,  and  we  begin  to  hector  over  them,  as  if  we  were 
something,  and  they  were  nothing.  We  find  some  in 
trouble;  we  have  no  sympathy  with  them;  we  are  bluff 
and  blunt  with  them,  as  we  talk  with  them  about  their 
troubles;  yea,  we  are  even  savage  and  cruel  with  them. 
We  meet  with  some  who  are  in  deep  distress  and  faint 
hearted;  we  begin  to  forget  when  we  were  faint-hearted 
too,  and  because  they  cannot  run  as  fast  as  we  can,  we 
run  far  ahead,  and  turn  back  and  look  at  them,  call 
them  sluggards,  and  say  they  are  idle  and  lazy.  And 
perhaps  even  in  the  pulpit,  if  we  are  preachers,  we  have 
got  hard  words  to  say  against  those  who  are  not  quite  so 
advanced  as  we  are.  Well,  mark,  there  never  was  a  saint 
yet,  that  grew  proud  of  his  fine  feathers,  but  what  the 
Lord  plucked  them  out  by  and  by.  There  never  yet  was 
an  angel  that  had  pride  in  his  heart,  but  he  lost  his 
wings,  and  fell  into  Gehenna,  as  Satan  and  those  fallen 
angels  did;  and  there  shall  never  be  a  saint  who  indulges 
self-conceit,  and  pride,  and  self-confidence,  but  the  Lord 
will  spoil  his  glories,  and  trample  his  honors  in  the  mire, 
and  make  him  cry  out  yet  again,  "  Lord,  have  mercy 
upon  me,"  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  and  the  "  very 
chief  of  sinners." 

Humility  in  Prayer. —  When  we  come  to  God,  our  prayers 
are  little  broken  things;  we  can  not  put  them  together; 
but  our  Father,  he  will  hear  us.  Oh!  what  a  beginning 


IMMORTALITY  159 


is  "  Our  Father,"  to  a  prayer  full  of  faults,  and  a  fool 
ish  prayer  perhaps,  a  prayer  in  which  we  are  going  to 
ask  what  we  ought  not  to  ask  for !  "  Father,  forgive 
the  language!  forgive  the  matter! "  As  one  dear  brother 
said  the  other  day  at  the  prayer  meeting,—  he  could  not 
get  on  in  prayer,  and  he  finished  up  on  a  sudden  by  say 
ing,  "Lord,  I  can  not  pray  to-night  as  I  should  wish;  I 
can  not  put  the  words  together;  Lord,  take  the  meaning, 
take  the  meaning,"  and  sat  down.  That  is  just  what 
David  said  once,  "  Lo,  all  my  desire  is  before  thee " — 
not  my  words,  but  my  desire. 

IMMORTALITY 

The  Healing  of  Death.—  At  Stratford-on-Bow,  in  the  days 
of  Queen  Mary,  there  was  once  a  stake  erected  for  the 
burning  of  two  martyrs,  one  of  them  a  lame  man,  the 
other  a  blind  man.  Just  when  the  fire  was  lit,  the  lame 
man  hurled  away  his  staff,  and  turning  round,  said  to 
the  blind  man,  "  Courage,  brother,  this  fire  will  cure  us 
both."  So  can  the  righteous  say  of  the  grave,  "  Cour 
age,  the  grave  will  cure  us  all;  we  shall  leave  our  in 
firmities  behind  us."  What  patience  this  should  give  us 
to  endure  all  our  trials,  for  they  are  not  of  long  duration. 

Immortality.—  I  have  often  thought  that  the  child  of  God 
is  very  much  like  the  Crusaders.  The  Crusaders  started 
off  on  their  journey,  and  they  had  to  fight  their  way 
through  many  miles  of  enemies,  and  to  march  through 
leagues  of  danger.  You  remember,  perhaps,  in  history, 
the  story  that  when  the  armies  of  the  Duke  of  Bouillon 
came  in  sight  of  Jerusalem,  they  sprang  from  their 
horses,  clapped  their  hands,  and  cried,  "  Jerusalem,  Jeru 
salem,  Jerusalem ! "  They  forgot  all  their  toils,  all  the 
weariness  of  the  journey  and  all  their  wounds,  for  there 
was  Jerusalem  in  their  sight.  And  how  will  the  saint  at 


160     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

last  cry,  "  Jerusalem !  Jerusalem ! "  when  all  sorrow,  and 
all  poverty  and  sickness  are  past,  and  he  is  blest  with 
immortality. 

"  The  Land  of  the  Living."—  A  saint  was  once  dying,  and 
another  who  sat  by  him  said  — "  Farewell,  brother,  I 
shall  never  see  you  again  in  the  land  of  the  living." 
"  Oh,"  said  the  dying  man,  "  I  shall  see  you  again  in  the 
land  of  the  living  that  is  up  yonder,  where  I  am  going; 
this  is  the  land  of  the  dying."  Oh,  brethren  and  sisters, 
if  we  should  never  meet  again  in  the  land  of  the  dying, 
have  we  a  hope  that  we  shall  meet  in  the  land  of  the 
living  and  drink  the  best  wine  at  last? 

INFIDELITY 

Paul  Not  an  Agnostic. —  Let  us  pass  on  to  consider  how 
Paul  could  say  he  knew  this.  This  wonderfully  enlight 
ened  nineteenth  century  has  produced  an  order  of  wise 
men  who  glory  in  their  ignorance.  They  call  themselves 
"Agnostics,"  or  knownothings.  When  I  was  a  boy  it 
would  have  seemed  odd  to  me  to  have  met  with  a  man 
who  gloried  in  being  an  ignoramus,  and  yet  that  is  the 
Latin  for  that  Greek  word  "  Agnostic."  Is  it  not  sin 
gular  to  hear  a  man  boastfully  say,  "  I  am  an  igno 
ramus"?  How  different  is  our  apostle!  He  says  "we 
know." 

Infidelity  a  Frail  Support.-—  In  the  backwoods  of  Canada 
there  resided  a  good  minister,  who  one  evening  went  out 
to  meditate,  as  Isaac  did,  in  the  fields.  He  soon  found 
himself  on  the  borders  of  a  forest,  which  he  entered,  and 
walked  along  a  track  which  had  been  trodden  before 
him;  musing,  musing  still,  until  at  last  the  shadows  of 
twilight  gathered  around  him,  and  he  began  to  think  how 
he  should  spend  a  night  in  the  forest.  He  trembled  at 
the  idea  of  remaining  there,  with  the  poor  shelter  of  a 


INFIDELITY  161 


tree  into  which  he  would  be  compelled  to  climb.  On  ft 
sudden  he  saw  a  light  in  the  distance,  among  the  trees, 
and  imagining  that  it  might  be  from  the  window  of  some 
cottage  where  he  would  find  a  hospitable  retreat,  he 
hastened  to  it,  and  to  his  surprise  saw  a  space  cleared, 
and  trees  laid  down  to  make  a  platform,  and  upon  it  a 
speaker  addressing  a  multitude.  He  thought  to  himself, 
"  I  have  stumbled  on  a  company  of  people,  who  in  this 
dark  forest  have  assembled  to  worship  God,  and  some 
minister  is  preaching  to  them,  at  this  late  hour  of  the 
evening,  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  right 
eousness  ;  "  but  to  his  surprise  and  horror,  when  he  came 
nearer,  he  found  a  young  man  declaiming  against  God, 
daring  the  Almighty  to  do  his  worst  upon  him,  speaking 
terrible  things  in  wrath  against  the  justice  of  the  Most 
High,  and  venturing  most  bold  and  lawful  assertions  con 
cerning  his  own  disbelief  in  a  future  state.  It  was  alto 
gether  a  singular  scene;  it  was  lighted  up  by  pine-knots, 
which  cast  a  glare  here  and  there,  while  the  thick  dark 
ness  in  other  places  still  reigned.  The  people  were  intent 
on  listening  to  the  orator,  and  when  he  sat  down  thun 
ders  of  applause  were  given  to  him;  each  one  seeming 
to  emulate  the  other  in  his  praise.  Thought  the  minister, 
"  I  must  not  let  this  pass ;  I  must  rise  and  speak ;  the 
honor  of  my  God  and  his  cause  demands  it."  But  he 
feared  to  speak,  for  he  knew  not  what  to  say,  having 
come  there  suddenly;  but  he  would  have  ventured,  had 
not  something  else  occurred.  A  man  of  middle  age,  hale 
and  strong,  rose,  and  leaning  on  his  staff,  he  said :  "  My 
friends,  I  have  a  word  to  speak  to  you  to-night.  I  am 
not  about  to  refute  any  of  the  arguments  of  the  orator; 
I  shall  not  criticise  his  style ;  I  shall  say  nothing  concern 
ing  what  I  believe  to  be  the  blasphemies  he  has  uttered; 
but  I  shall  simply  relate  to  you  a  fact,  and  after  I  have 
done  that  you  shall  draw  your  own  conclusions.  Tester- 


162     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

day  I  walked  by  the  side  of  yonder  river;  I  saw  on  its 
floods  a  young  man  in  a  boat.  The  boat  was  unmanage 
able;  it  was  going  fast  toward  the  rapids;  he  could  not 
use  the  oars,  and  I  saw  that  he  was  not  capable  of  bring 
ing  the  boat  to  the  shore.  I  saw  that  young  man  wring 
his  hands  in  agony;  by-and-by  he  gave  up  the  attempt 
to  save  his  life,  kneeled  down  and  cried  with  desperate 
earnestness,  i  0,  God !  save  my  soul !  If  my  body  can 
not  be  saved,  save  my  soul/  I  heard  him  confess  that  he 
had  been  a  blasphemer;  I  heard  him  vow  that  if  his  life 
were  spared  he  would  never  be  such  again;  I  heard  him 
implore  the  mercy  of  heaven  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  and 
earnestly  plead  that  he  might  be  washed  in  his  blood. 
These  arms  saved  that  young  man  from  the  flood;  I 
plunged  in,  brought  the  boat  to  shore,  and  saved  his  life. 
That  same  young  man  has  just  now  addressed  you,  and 
cursed  his  Maker.  What  say  you  to  this,  sirs'?"  The 
speaker  sat  down.  You  may  guess  what  a  shudder  ran 
through  the  young  man  himself,  and  how  the  audience 
in  one  moment  changed  their  notes,  and  saw  that  after 
all,  while  it  was  a  fine  thing  to  brag  and  bravado  against 
Almighty  God  on  dry  land,  and  when  danger  was  distant, 
it  was  not  quite  so  grand  to  think  ill  of  him  when  near 
the  verge  of  the  grave.  We  believe  there  is  enough  con 
science  in  every  man  to  convince  him  that  God  must 
punish  him  for  his  sin;  therefore  we  think  that  our  text 
will  wake  an  echo  in  every  heart.— "If  he  turn  not,  he 
will  whet  his  sword." 

INVITATION 

The  Pearl  of  Great  Price.— I  will  suppose  this  morning 
that  I  am  sent  here  by  high  authority  to  sell  the  Koh-i- 
noor,  or  a  diamond  worth  ten  thousand  times  as  much,  a 
jewel  worth  a  thousand  millions  of  pounds.  I  am  bound 
to  sell  it  to  you  now,  but  I  am  sure  you  cannot  purchase 


INVITATION  163 


it  at  any  price  worthy  of  it ;  all  you  could  offer  would  be 
BO  small  a  portion  of  its  value  that  I  would  sooner  give  it 
away  than  lower  the  repute  of  the  jewel  by  taking  such 
a  trifle  for  it.  The  gospel  is  so  precious  a  thing  that  if 
it  is  bought  the  whole  world  could  not  pay  for  it,  and 
therefore,  if  bought  at  all  it  must  needs  be  without  money 
and  without  price. 

The  Bell  of  Welcome.—  At  the  top  of  the  Hospice  of  St. 
Bernard,  in  the  storm,  when  the  snow  is  falling  fast,  the 
monks  ring  the  great  bell,  and  when  the  way  cannot  be 
seen,  the  traveller  can  almost  hear  the  way  to  the  house 
of  refuge  across  the  snowy  waste.  So  would  I  ring  that 
bell  this  morning.  Poor  lost  traveller,  with  thy  sins  and 
thy  fears  blowing  cold  into  thy  face,  "  Come  and  wel 
come,  come  and  welcome,"  to  a  Savior  once  dead  and 
buried  for  thee,  but  now  risen  and  pleading  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  If  thou  canst  not  see  thy  way,  yet  hear  it. 
"Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live;  and  he  will  make  an 
everlasting  covenant  with  you,  even  the  sure  mercies  of 
David." 

"Whosoever  Will."— "Ah!"  saith  one,  "God  knows  I 
am  willing,  but  still  I  do  not  think  I  am  worthy."  No, 
I  know  you  are  not,  but  what  is  that  to  do  with  it  ?  It  is 
not  "  whosoever  is  worthy"  but  "  whosoever  will,  let  him 
come."  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  I  believe  that  whosoever 
will,  may  come,  but  not  me,  for  I  am  the  vilest  sinner  out 
of  hell."  But  hark  thee,  sinner,  it  says,  "whosoever." 
What  a  big  word  that  is!  Whosoever!  There  is  no 
standard-height  here.  It  is  of  any  height  and  any  size. 
Little  sinners,  big  sinners,  black  sinners,  fair  sinners, 
sinners  doubled-dyed,  old  sinners,  aggravated  sinners, 
sinners  who  have  committed  every  crime  in  the  whole 
catalogue,— whosoever.  Doth  this  exempt  one?  Who 
can  be  excluded  from  this  whosoever?  It  mattereth  not 
who  thou  mayest  be,  nor  what  thou  mayest  have  been,  if 


164     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

thou  art  willing  to  be  saved;  free  as  the  air  thou 
breathest  is  the  love  and  grace  of  God.  "  Whosoever 
will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely." 
Whosoever. —  I  am  deeply  in  love  with  that  word  "  who 
soever."  It  is  a  splendid  word.  A  person  who  kept 
many  animals  had  some  great,  dogs  and  some  little  ones, 
and  in  his  eagerness  to  let  them  enter  his  house  freely 
he  had  two  holes  cut  in  the  door,  one  for  the  big  dogs 
and  another  for  the  little  dogs.  You  may  well  laugh, 
for  the  little  dogs  could  surely  have  come  in  wherever 
there  was  room  for  the  larger  ones.  This  "  whosoever  "  is 
the  great  opening,  suitable  for  sinners  of  every  size. 
"  Whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die." 

JOY 

Christian  Gladness.—  There  is  an  expression  in  the  Greek 
that  never  has  been  rendered  into  English,  and  never  will 
be.— ayoAAiao-tfe.  Old  Trapp  half  puns  upon  the  agal- 
liasthe  as  he  says,  "dance  a  galliard."  I  do  not  know 
what  a  "  galliard  "  was,  but  I  suppose  that  it  was  some 
very  joyous  kind  of  dance.  Certainly  we  know  of  no 
better  way  of  translating  our  Lord's  word  than  by  — 
exult,  or  leap  for  joy.  Even  when  your  good  name  shall 
be  tarnished  by  the  malice  of  the  wicked,  then  you  are 
to  leap.  When  are  you  to  be  wretched?  Surely  de 
spondency  is  excluded.  If  slander  is  to  make  us  dance, 
when  are  we  to  fret?  Suppose  some  other  kind  of  trial 
should  come  upon  you,  you  are  still  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord 
always. 

Afraid  of  Gladness.—  I  have  known  some  very  good  people 
spoiled  for  practical  usefulness,  and  spoiled  as  to  being 
like  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  their  deeply  laid  con 
viction  that  it  was  wicked  to  be  glad.  Well  do  I  remem 
ber  an  earnest  Christian  woman  who  saw  me  when  I 


JOY  165 

was  first  converted,  full  of  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  and 
joyfully  assured  of  my  salvation  in  Christ  Jesus.  She 
seemed  distressed  at  the  sight  of  so  much  joy.  She  shook 
her  head.  She  looked  at  me  with  that  heavenly-minded 
pity  which  these  good  people  usually  lay  by  in  store. 
It  seemed  to  her  a  dreadful  thing  that  so  young  a 
Christian  should  dare  to  know  whom  he  had  believed. 
If  you  had  been  a  Christian  a  hundred  years  you  might 
perhaps  begin  to  think  it  possible  that  you  were  saved; 
but  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  straight  away, 
like  a  little  child,  and  at  once  to  rejoice  in  his  salvation, 
seemed  to  this  dear  old  Christian  woman  to  be  an  act  of 
such  shocking  temerity  that  she  could  only  shake  her  dear 
head  and  prognosticate  all  sorts  of  horrible  things.  Since 
then  I  have  found  a  great  many  like  her. 

Superiority  of  Christian  Joy.—  The  joy  which  we  wear  is 
far  superior  to  any  which  the  evil  one  can  offer  us;  and 
so  his  temptation  has  lost  its  power.  What  can  the  devil 
offer  a  joyous  Christian?  Why,  if  he  were  to  say  to 
him,  "  I  will  give  thee  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
and  the  glory  thereof,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship 
me,  the  believer  would  reply  to  him,  "  Fiend,  I  have 
more  than  that.  I  have  perfect  contentment;  I  have 
absolute  delight  in  God.  My  soul  swims  in  a  deep  sea 
of  bliss  as  I  think  of  God."  The  devil  will  speedily  quit 
such  a  man  as  that;  for  the  joy  of  God  is  an  armor 
through  which  he  cannot  send  the  dagger  of  his  tempta 
tion. 

The  Honey  of  Christian  Experience. —  There  were  no 
plates  and  dishes  out  there  in  that  Timnath  vineyard,  and 
so  his  own  hands  were  the  only  salvers  upon  which  Sam 
son  could  present  the  delicacy,—"  he  took  thereof  in  his 
hands,  and  came  to  his  father  and  mother,  and  he  gave 
them,  and  they  did  eat."  Perhaps  you  think,  "  If  I  am 
to  speak  to  any  person  upon  true  religion,  I  should 


166     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

like  to  do  it  in  poetry."  Better  do  it  in  prose,  for  per 
haps  they  will  take  more  notice  of  your  verse  than  of 
your  subject.  Give  them  the  honey  in  your  hands,  and 
if  there  is  no  dish  they  cannot  take  notice  of  the  dish. 
"Ay,  but  I  should  like  to  do  it  very  properly,"  says 
one;  "it  is  a  very  important  matter,  I  should  like  to 
speak  most  correctly."  But  my  judgment  is,  that,  as 
you  will  not  be  likely  to  attain  to  correct  speech  all  in 
a  hurry,  and  your  friends  may  die  while  you  are  learning 
your  grammar  and  your  rhetoric,  you  had  better  tell 
them  of  Jesus  according  to  your  present  ability.  Tell 
them  there  is  life  in  a  look  at  Jesus.  Tell  them  the  story 
simply,  as  one  child  talks  to  another.  Carry  the  honey 
in  your  hands,  though  it  drip  all  round;  no  hurt  will 
come  of  the  spilling,  there  are  always  little  ones  waiting 
for  such  drops.  If  you  were  to  make  the  gospel  drip 
about  everywhere,  and  sweeten  all  things,  it  would  be  no 
waste,  but  a  blessed  gain  to  all  around.  Therefore,  I 
say  to  you,  tell  of  Jesus  Christ  as  best  you  can,  and 
never  cease  to  do  so  while  life  lasts. 
Overflowing  Christian  Joy. —  The  moment  a  man  is  con 
verted,  if  he  would  let  himself  alone,  his  instincts  would 
lead  him  to  tell  his  fellows.  I  know  that  the  moment 
I  came  out  of  that  little  chapel  wherein  I  found  the 
Savior,  I  wanted  to  pour  out  my  tale  of  joy.  I  could 
have  cried  with  Cennick  — 

"Now  will  I  tell  to  sinners  round, 

What  a  dear  Saviour  I  have  found; 
I'll  point  to  thy  redeeming  blood, 
And  say,  '  Behold  the  way  to  God !  ' " 

I  longed  to  tell  how  happy  my  soul  was,  and  what  a 
deliverance  I  had  obtained  from  the  crushing  burden 
of  sin.  I  longed  to  see  all  others  come  and  trust  my 


JUDGMENT  167 


Lord  and  live!  I  did  not  preach  a  sermon,  but  I  think 
I  could  have  told  out  all  the  gospel  at  that  first  hour. 
Joy  Without  Bitterness. —  Did  you  never  cry  for  joy? 
You  say,  perhaps,  "  Not  since  I  was  a  child."  Nor  have 
I;  but  I  have  always  remained  a  child  as  far  as  divine 
joy  is  concerned.  I  could  often  cry  for  joy  when  I 
know  whom  I  have  believed  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is 
able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  him. 

Ours  is  a  joy  which  will  bear  thinking  over.  You 
can  dare  to  pry  into  the  bottom  of  it  and  test  its  founda 
tion.  It  is  a  joy  which  does  not  grow  stale;  you  may 
keep  it  in  your  mouth  by  the  year  together,  and  yet  it 
never  cloys;  you  may  return  to  it  again,  and  again,  and 
again,  and  find  it  still  as  fresh  as  ever.  And  the  best  of 
it  is  there  is  no  repentance  after  it.  You  are  never  sorry 
that  you  were  so  glad.  The  world's  gay  folk  are  soon  sick 
of  their  drink;  but  we  are  only  sorry  that  we  were  not 
gladder  still,  for  our  gladness  sanctifies.  We  are  not  de 
nied  any  degree  of  joy  to  which  we  can  possibly  attain, 
for  ours  is  a  healthy,  health-giving  delight.  Christ  is  the 
fulness  of  joy  to  his  people,  and  we  are  bidden  to  enjoy 
him  to  the  full.  Christians  have  their  sweets,  and  those 
are  as  honey  and  the  honeycomb,  the  best  of  the  best. 

JUDGMENT 

Judgment  Warped  by  Personal  Considerations. —  We  have 
heard,  I  dare  say,  the  story  of  the  lawyer  who  was 
waited  upon  by  a  farmer,  to  ask  him  what  would  be 
the  penalty  for  a  man  whose  horse  was  always  getting 
into  his  neighbor's  field  and  eating  his  corn,  whether  it 
would  be  heavy;  he  had  warned  him  several  times,  and 
he  always  would  do  it,  and  it  was  his  fence,  and  he 
ought  to  have  mended  it.  The  lawyer  said  of  course 
there  would  be  a  considerable  fine,  no  doubt,  and  so  on. 
"Well,"  said  he,  "sir,  it  is  your  horse  that  has  done 


168     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

this."  "Oh!"  said  our  friend,  the  solicitor,  "that  is 
quite  a  different  question;  I  did  not  know  it  was  my 
horse  before  I  gave  my  opinion."  So  it  is,  generally, 
with  regard  to  anything  that  is  done  amiss,  if  it  hurts 
you,  or  if  it  hurts  me,  we  always  feel  very  indignant 
about  it,  but  if  it  only  offends  the  Majesty  of  heaven  we 
make  light  of  it. 

LIFE 

Human  Kindness.—  I  like  Luther  with  a  wife  and  chil 
dren.  I  like  to  see  him  with  his  family  and  a  Christmas- 
tree,  making  music  with  little  Johnny  Luther  on  his 
knee.  I  love  to  hear  him  sing  a  little  hymn  with  the 
children,  and  tell  his  pretty  boy  about  the  horses  in 
heaven  with  golden  bridles  and  silver  saddles.  Faith  had 
not  taken  away  his  manhood,  but  sanctified  it  to  noblest 
uses.  Luther  did  not  live  and  move  as  if  he  were  a 
mere  cleric,  but  as  a  brother  to  our  common  humanity. 

True  Wisdom.—  Copernicus  declared  the  truth  that  the 
earth  and  the  planets  revolve  around  the  sun.  His  oppo 
nents  replied  that  this  could  not  be  true,  for  if  the  planet 
Venus  revolved  around  the  sun,  she  must  present  the 
same  phases  as  the  moon.  This  was  very  true.  Coperni 
cus  looked  up  to  Venus,  but  he  could  not  see  those  phases, 
nor  could  any  one  else,  nevertheless  he  stuck  to  his  state 
ment,  and  said,  "  I  have  no  reply  to  give,  but  in  due 
time  God  will  be  so  good  that  an  answer  will  be  found." 
Copernicus  died,  and  his  teaching  had  not  yet  been 
justified;  but  soon  after  Galileo  came  forward  with  his 
telescope,  and  on  looking  at  Venus  he  saw  that  she  did 
pass  through  exactly  the  same  changes  as  the  moon. 
Thus  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children.  Truth  may 
not  prevail  to-day  or  to-morrow,  but  her  ultimate  victory 
is  sure. 


LIFE  169 

Known  by  Our  Deeds.— "  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their 
fruits"  But  how  am  I  to  know  a  man's  fruits'?  By 
watching  him  one  dayt  I  may,  perhaps,  form  a  guess 
of  his  character  by  being  with  him  for  a  single  hour; 
but  I  could  not  confidently  pronounce  upon  a  man's  true 
state  even  by  being  with  him  for  a  week.  George  White- 
field  was  asked  what  he  thought  of  a  certain  person's 
character.  "  I  have  never  lived  with  him,"  was  his  very 
proper  answer. 

Idle  Dreams. —  Rowland  Hill  said  to  a  lady,  who  knew  she 
was  a  child  of  God,  because  she  dreamed  such  and  such 
a  thing :  "  Never  mind,  ma'am,  what  you  did  when  you 
were  asleep ;  let  us  see  what  you  do  when  you  are  awake." 

A  Wasted  Life. —  Your  sins  cannot  keep  you  from  the 
jaws  of  death.  I  say,  sinner,  I  want  thee  to  look  at 
Christ's  sepulchre,  too,  for  when  thou  diest  it  may  have 
done  thee  great  good  to  think  of  it.  You  have  heard  of 
Queen  Elizabeth,  crying  out  that  she  would  give  an  em 
pire  for  a  single  hour.  Or  have  you  heard  the  despair 
ing  cry  of  the  gentleman  on  board  the  "  Arctic,"  when  it 
was  going  down,  who  shouted  to  the  boat,  "  Come  back ! 
I  will  give  you  £30,000  if  you  will  come  and  take  me 
in."  Ah!  poor  man,  it  were  but  little  if  he  had  thirty 
thousand  worlds,  if  he  could  thereby  prolong  his  life: 
"  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath,  will  he  give 
for  his  life."  Some  of  you  who  can  laugh  this  morn 
ing,  who  came  to  spend  a  meriy  hour  in  this  hall,  will 
be  dying,  and  then  ye  will  pray  and  crave  for  life,  and 
shriek  for  another  Sabbath-day.  Oh!  how  the  Sabbaths 
ye  have  wasted  will  walk  like  ghosts  before  you!  Oh! 
how  they  will  shake  their  snaky  hair  in  your  eyes !  How 
will  ye  be  made  to  sorrow  and  weep,  because  ye  wasted 
precious  hours,  which,  when  they  are  gone,  are  gone  too 
far  to  be  recalled.  May  God  save  you  from  the  pangs 
of  remorse. 


170     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Light  Needed  for  the  Feet. —  Some  people  make  use  of 
Christ's  gospel  to  illuminate  their  heads,  instead  of 
making  use  of  it  to  illuminate  their  hearts.  They  are 
like  the  farmer  Rowland  Hill  once  described.  The 
farmer  is  sitting  by  the  fire  with  his  children;  the  cat 
is  purring  on  the  hearth,  and  they  are  all  in  great  com 
fort.  The  plowman  rushes  in  and  cries,  "  Thieves ! 
thieves !  thieves ! "  The  farmer  rises  up  in  a  moment, 
grasps  the  candle,  holds  it  up  to  his  head,  rushes  after 
the  thieves,  and,  says  Rowland  Hill,  "  he  tumbles  over 
a  wheelbarrow,  because  he  holds  the  light  to  his  head,  in 
stead  of  holding  it  to  his  feet."  So  there  are  many  who 
just  hold  religion  up  to  illuminate  their  intellect,  instead 
of  holding  it  down  to  illuminate  their  practice;  and  so 
they  make  a  sad  tumble  of  it,  and  cast  themselves  into 
the  mire,  and  do  more  hurt  to  their  Christian  profession 
in  one  hour  than  they  will  ever  be  able  to  retrieve. 

The  Blessedness  of  Old  Age.—  Some  time  ago,  I  stepped 
up  to  an  old  man  whom  I  saw  when  preaching  at  an 
anniversary,  and  I  said  to  him,  "Brother,  do  you  know 
there  is  no  man  in  the  whole  chapel  I  envy  so  much  as 
you !  "  "  Envy  me,"  he  said,  "  why,  I  am  eighty-seven." 
I  said,  "I  do,  indeed;  because  you  are  so  near  your 
home,  and  because  I  believe  that  in  old  age  there  is  a 
peculiar  joy,  which  we  young  people  do  not  taste  at 
present.  You  have  got  to  the  bottom  of  the  cup,  and 
it  is  not  with  God's  wine  as  it  is  with  man's.  Man's 
wine  becomes  dregs  at  the  last,  but  God's  wine  is  sweeter 
the  deeper  you  drink  of  it."  He  said,  "  That's  very  true, 
young  man,"  and  shook  me  by  the  hand.  I  believe  there 
is  a  blessedness  about  old  age  that  we  young  men  know 
nothing  of.  I  will  tell  you  how  that  is.  In  the  first 
place  the  old  man  has  a  good  experience  to  talk  about. 
The  young  men  are  only  just  trying  some  of  the  prom 
ises;  but  the  old  man  can  turn  them  over  one  by 


LIFE  171 

one,  and  say,  "There,  I  have  tried  that,  and  that,  and 
that."  We  read  them  over  and  say,  "I  hope  they  are 
true,"  but  the  old  man  says,  "  I  know  they  are  true."  And 
then  he  begins  to  tell  you  why.  He  has  got  a  history 
for  every  one,  like  a  soldier  for  his  medals;  and  he  takes 
them  out  and  says,  "I  will  tell  you  when  the  Lord  re 
vealed  that  to  me:  just  when  I  lost  my  wife;  just  when 
I  buried  my  son;  just  when  I  was  turned  out  of  my 
cottage,  and  did  not  get  work  for  six  weeks;  or,  at 
another  time,  when  I  broke  my  leg."  He  begins  telling 
you  the  history  of  the  promises,  and  says,  "  There,  now, 
I  know  they  are  all  true."  What  a  blessed  thing,  to 
look  upon  them  as  paid  notes;  to  bring  out  the  old 
checks  that  have  been  cashed,  and  say,  "  I  know  they 
are  genuine,  or  else  they  would  not  have  been  paid." 
Making  Our  Own  Epitaph. —  When  the  Eastern  Emperors 
were  crowned  at  Constantinople,  it  is  said  to  have  been 
a  custom  for  the  royal  mason  to  set  before  his  majesty 
;  a  certain  number  of  marble  slabs,  one  of  which  he  was 
to  choose  to  be  his  tombstone.  It  was  well  for  him  to 
remember  his  funeral  at  his  coronation.  I  bring  before 
you  now  the  unwritten  marbles  of  life:  which  will  you 
have,  holiness,  or  sin,  Christ  or  self?  When  you  have 
chosen,  you  will  begin  to  write  the  inscription  upon  it; 
for  your  life's  works  will  be  your  memorial. 
The  Frailty  of  the  Human  Body.— Paul  was  accustomed 
to  make  tents.  I  do  not  suppose  he  ever  manufactured 
any  very  large  or  sumptuous  ones  —  probably  he  did  not 
own  capital  enough  for  that,  but  he  was  a  tent  worker 
and  mender.  The  use  of  tents  was  common  enough 
among  the  Roman  people  in  Paul's  day.  The  gentry 
delighted  in  bright  pavilions  which  they  could  set  up 
at  pleasure,  but  the  commoner  folk  found  pleasure  in 
spending  a  part  of  their  time  under  canvas.  Whilst  he 
was  sitting  writing  this  letter  it  is  most  likely  that  Paul 


172     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

had  a  tent  or  two  to  repair  lying  near  his  hand,  and 
this  suggested  to  him  the  language  of  the  verse  before 
us.  When  a  tent  is  newly  placed  it  is  but  a  frail  struc 
ture,  very  far  removed  from  the  substantiality  of  a 
house;  in  that  respect  it  is  exactly  like  this  feeble  cor 
poreal  frame  of  ours,  which  is  crushed  before  the  moth. 
Paul  felt  that  his  body  would  not  need  any  great  force 
to  overthrow  it;  it  was  like  the  tent  which  the  Midianite 
saw  in  his  dream,  which  only  needed  to  be  struck  by  a 
barley  cake,  and  lo!  it  lay  along.  A  house  of  solid 
masonry  may  need  a  crowbar  and  a  pick  to  start  its 
stones  from  their  places,  but  feebler  tools  will  soon 
overturn  a  tent  and  make  a  ruin  of  it.  The  body  is 
liable  to  dissolution  from  causes  so  minute  as  to  be  im 
perceptible  —  a  breath  of  foul  air,  an  atom  of  poisonous 
matter,  a  trifle,  a  mere  nothing,  may  end  this  mortal 
life.  I  hope  that  you  and  I  duly  remember  the  frailty 
of  our  bodies. 

Frailty  of  Human  Life. —  I  saw  the  other  day  an  encamp 
ment  of  gipsies  out  upon  the  common;  many  of  this 
wandering  race  were  sitting  under  a  coarse  covering 
sustained  by  sticks,  I  should  exaggerate  if  I  called  them 
poles;  and  I  could  not  help  feeling  that  such  an  abode 
was  all  veiy  well  on  a  warm  day,  but  not  at  all  desirable 
when  the  east-wind  was  blowing,  or  a  shower  of  sleet 
was  driving  along,  or  a  deluge  of  rain  descending. 

The  Loneliness  of  Life. —  Samson  was  not  hunting  for 
wild  beasts;  he  was  engaged  on  a  much  more  tender 
business.  He  was  walking  in  the  vineyards  of  Timnath, 
thinking  of  anything  but  lions,  and  "behold,"  says  the 
Scripture,  "a  young  lion  roared  against  him."  It  was 
a  remarkable  and  startling  occurrence.  He  had  left  his 
father  and  mother  and  was  quite  alone;  no  one  was 
within  call  to  aid  him  in  meeting  his  furious  assailant. 
Human  sympathy  is  exceedingly  precious,  but  there  are 


LIFE  i?3 

points  in  our  spiritual  conflict  in  which  we  cannot  expect 
to  receive  it.  To  each  man  there  are  passages  in  life  too 
narrow  for  walking  two  abreast.  Upon  certain  crags 
we  must  stand  alone.  As  our  constitutions  differ,  so  our 
trials,  which  are  suited  to  our  constitutions,  must  differ 
also.  Each  individual  has  a  secret  with  which  no  friend 
can  intermeddle;  for  every  life  has  its  mysteiy  and  its 
hid  treasure.  Do  not  be  ashamed,  young  Christian,  if 
you  meet  with  temptations  which  appear  to  you  to  be 
quite  singular:  we  have  each  one  thought  the  same  of 
his  trials.  You  imagine  that  no  one  suffers  as  you  do, 
whereas  no  temptation  hath  happened  unto  you  but  such 
as  is  common  to  man,  and  God  will  with  the  temptation 
make  a  way  of  escape  that  you  may  be  able  to  bear  it. 
Yet  for  the  time  being  you  may  have  to  enter  into  fel 
lowship  with  your  Lord  when  he  trod  the  wine-press 
alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  him.  Is  not 
this  for  your  good?  Is  not  this  the  way  to  strength? 
What  kind  of  piety  is  that  which  is  dependent  upon  the 
friendship  of  man?  What  sort  of  religion  is  that  which 
cannot  stand  alone?  Beloved,  you  will  have  to  die  alone, 
and  you  need  therefore  grace  to  cheer  you  in  solitude. 
Uncertain  Tenure  of  Life. —  Have  you  not  been  startled  by 
the  news  that  a  neighbor  or  acquaintance,  with  whom  you 
chatted  a  day  or  two  ago,  is  dead?  "Dead!"  you  said. 
"  Why,  he  was  in  my  shop  only  a  few  days  ago !  Dead ! 
Why,  he  seemed  to  be  in  good  health,  strong  in  body, 
vigorous  in  mind,  full  of  plans  and  projects;  I  should 
have  thought  of  any  man  being  dead  sooner  than  he ! " 
Do  not  you  recollect  the  time  when  you  heard  the  bell 
toll  for  a  near  relative,  and  when  you  stood  over  the 
open  grave?  Ah,  then,  when  the  dust  fell  upon  the 
coffin-lid,  and  the  words  were  uttered,  "Dust  to  dust, 
ashes  to  ashes,"  each  of  those  thundering  morsels  said, 
"I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee," 


174     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 


LOVE 

Loving  Our  Neighbors.—  It  would  be  a  good  thing  if  some 
ladies  loved  their  neighbors  as  much  as  they  loved  their 
lap-dogs.  It  would  be  a  fine  thing  for  many  a  country 
squire  if  he  loved  his  neighbors  as  much  as  he  loved  his 
pack  of  hounds.  I  think  it  might  be  a  high  pitch  of 
virtue,  if  some  of  you  were  to  love  your  neighbors  as 
much  as  you  love  some  favorite  animal  in  your  house. 
What  an  inferior  grade  of  virtue,  however,  that  appears 
to  be!  And  yet  it  were  something  far  superior  to  what 
some  of  you  have  attained  to.  You  do  not  love  your 
neighbor  as  you  love  your  house,  your  estate,  or  your 
purse.  How  high  then  is,  "  Love  thy  neighbor  as  thy 
self  "  the  gospel  standard  ?  How  much  does  a  man  love 
himself?  None  of  us  too  little,  some  of  us  too  much. 
Thou  mayest  love  thyself  as  much  as  thou  pleasest,  but 
take  care  that  thou  lovest  thy  neighbor  as  much.  I  am 
certain  thou  needest  no  exhortation  to  love  thyself,  thine 
own  case  will  be  seen  to,  thine  own  comfort  will  be  a 
very  primary  theme  of  thine  anxiety.  Thou  wilt  line 
thine  own  nest  well  with  downy  feathers,  if  thou  canst. 
There  is  no  need  to  exhort  thee  to  love  thyself.  Thou 
wilt  do  that  well  enough.  Well,  then,  as  much  as  thou 
lovest  thyself  love  thy  neighbor. 

Christian  Love  Needed. —  An  evangelist  brings  into  the 
congregation  all  the  poor  people  of  the  district,  and  the 
very  worst  of  characters  gather  to  hear  him.  This  ought 
to  be  a  great  joy,  but  in  certain  cases  it  is  not.  Many 
are  offended,  and  in  effect  say,  "'Not  so,  Lord/  Well, 
really,  I  —  I  —  I  do  not  like  sitting  next  to  one  who  is 
dressed  so  badly,  and  smells  so  vilely.  I  saw  a  woman 
of  loose  character  come  in,  and  I  felt  as  if  I  must  leave 
my  pew."  Oh,  you  very  respectable  people,  you  know 
that  you  get  into  that  state  of  mind!  You  do  not  say 


MERCY  175 


much  about  it  when  we  hear  you,  because  you  know  that 
it  would  not  answer  your  purpose;  yet  you  squeeze  up 
against  the  corner  of  the  pew  to  get  away  from  the  poor 
and  needy.  Do  you  not?  If  a  man  with  a  smock-frock, 
or  with  a  dirty  face,  comes  in  here,  you  would  just  as 
soon  that  he  should  sit  on  the  flaps  in  the  aisle  as  sit 
in  your  seat,  and  a  great  deal  sooner,  I  dare  say.  There 
is  a  great  deal  of  that  kind  of  feeling  about,  and  it  may 
be  very  natural,  but  it  certainly  betrays  feebleness  of 
Christian  love. 

MERCY 

The  Music  of  Mercy.— When  loitering  upon  the  Island 
of  Liddo,  off  Venice,  and  listening  to  the  sound  of  the 
city's  bells,  I  thought  the  music  charming  as  it  floated 
across  the  lagune;  but  when  I  returned  to  the  city,  and 
sat  down  in  the  center  of  the  music,  in  the  very  midst 
of  all  the  bells,  the  sweetness  changed  to  a  horrible 
clash,  the  charming  sounds  were  transformed  into  a 
maddening  din;  not  the  slightest  melody  could  I  detect 
in  any  one  bell,  while  harmony  in  the  whole  company 
of  noisemakers  was  out  of  the  question.  Distance  had 
lent  enchantment  to  the  sound.  The  words  of  poets  and 
eloquent  writers  may,  as  a  whole,  and  heard  from  afar, 
sound  charmingly  enough;  but  how  few  of  them  bear  a 
near  and  minute  investigation!  Their  belfry  rings  pas 
sably,  but  one  would  soon  weary  of  each  separate  bell. 
It  is  never  so  with  the  divine  words  of  Jesus.  You  hear 
them  ringing  from  afar  and  they  are  sweetness  itself. 
When  as  a  sinner,  you  roamed  at  midnight  like  a  traveller 
lost  on  the  wilds,  how  sweetly  did  they  call  you  home! 
But  now  you  have  reached  the  house  of  mercy,  you  sit 
and  listen  to  each  distinct  note  of  love's  perfect  peal, 
and  wonderingly  feel  that  even  angelic  harps  cannot 
excel  it. 


176     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

The  Stream  of  Mercy.— There  is  the  stream  of  mercy, 
deep,  broad,  and  clear :  you  have  drunk  of  it,  and  are  re 
freshed,  but  it  is  as  full  as  ever.  It  will  flow  on,  will 
it  not?  You  do  not  suppose  that  you  and  I  have 
dammed  up  the  stream  so  as  to  keep  it  to  ourselves. 
No,  it  is  too  strong,  too  full  a  stream  for  that.  It  will 
flow  on  from  age  to  age.  God  will  bless  others  as  he 
has  blessed  us.  Unbelief  whispers  that  the  true  church 
will  die  out.  Do  not  believe  it.  Christ  will  live,  and 
his  church  will  live  with  him  till  the  heavens  be  no  more. 
Hath  he  not  said,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also  ?  " 
"  Oh,"  you  say,  "  but  we  shall  not  see  such  holy  men 
in  the  next  generation  as  in  past  ages."  Why  not?  I 
hope  the  next  age  will  see  far  better  men  than  any  of 
those  who  are  with  us  at  this  time.  Pray  that  it  may 
be  so.  Instead  of  the  fathers,  may  there  be  the  chil 
dren,  and  may  these  be  princes  before  the  Lord! 

Covenant  Mercies.— I  like  to  think  of  the  old  Scotch 
woman,  who  not  only  blessed  God  for  the  porridge  as 
she  ate  it,  but  thanked  God  that  she  had  a  covenant- 
right  to  the  porridge.  Daily  mercies  belong  to  the 
Lord's  household  by  covenant-right;  and  that  same  cov 
enant-right  which  will  admit  us  into  heaven  above,  also 
gives  us  bread  and  water  here  below.  The  trifles  in  the 
house,  and  the  jewels  of  the  house,  equally  belong  to 
the  children.  We  may  partake  of  the  common  mercies 
of  providence,  and  the  extraordinary  mercies  of  grace, 
without  stint.  None  of  the  dainties  of  the  royal  house 
are  locked  up  from  the  children.  The  Lord  says  to 
each  believer,  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that 
I  have  is  thine."  "  Ye  are  Christ's  and  Christ  is  God," 
and  therefore  "all  things  are  yours." 

Mercy  Through  Christ.— Once  on  a  time,  Mercy  sat  upon 
her  snow-white  throne,  surrounded  by  the  troops  of  love. 
A  sinner  was  brought  before  her,  whom  Mercy  designed 


MERCY  177 


to  save.  The  herald  blew  the  trumpet,  and  after  three 
blasts  thereof,  with  a  loud  voice,  he  said,  "  0  heaven  and 
earth,  and  hell,  I  summon  you  this  day  to  come  before 
the  throne  of  Mercy,  to  tell  why  this  sinner  should  not 
be  saved."  There  stood  the  sinner,  trembling  with  fear; 
he  knew  that  there  were  multitudes  of  opponents,  who 
would  press  into  the  hall  of  Mercy,  and  with  eyes  full 
of  wrath,  would  say,  "He  must  not,  and  he  shall  not 
escape ;  he  must  be  lost !  "  The  trumpet  was  blown,  and 
Mercy  sat  placidly  on  her  throne,  until  there  stepped  in 
one  with  a  fiery  countenance;  his  head  was  covered  with 
light;  he  spoke  with  a  voice  like  thunder,  and  out  of 
his  eyes  flashed  lightning!  "Who  art  thou?"  said 
Mercy.  He  replied,  "I  am  Law;  the  law  of  God." 
" And  what  hast  thou  to  say ? "  "I  have  this  to  say," 
and  he  lifted  up  a  stony  tablet,  written  on  both  sides; 
"these  ten  commands  this  wretch  has  broken.  My  de 
mand  is  blood ;  for  it  is  written,  '  The  soul  that  sinneth 
it  shall  die/  Die  he,  or  Justice  must."  The  wretch 
trembles,  his  knees  knock  together,  the  marrow  of  his 
bones  melts  within  him,  as  if  it  were  ice  dissolved  by 
fire,  and  he  shakes  with  very  fright.  Already  he  thought 
he  saw  the  thunderbolt  launched  at  him,  he  saw  the  light 
ning  penetrate  into  his  soul,  hell  yawned  before  him  in 
imagination,  and  he  thought  himself  cast  away  for  ever. 
But  Mercy  smiled,  and  said,  "Law,  I  will  answer  thee. 
This  wretch  deserves  to  die;  Justice  demands  that  he 
should  perish  —  I  award  thee  thy  claim."  And,  0 !  how 
the  sinner  trembles.  "  But  there  is  one  yonder  who  has 
come  with  me  to-day,  my  King,  my  Lord;  his  name  is 
Jesus;  he  will  tell  you  how  the  debt  can  be  paid,  and 
the  sinner  can  go  free."  Then  Jesus  spake,  and  said, 
"  0  Mercy,  I  will  do  thy  bidding.  Take  me,  Law ;  put 
me  in  a  garden;  make  me  sweat  drops  of  blood;  then 
nail  me  to  a  tree ;  scourge  my  back  before  you  put  me  to 


178     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

death;  bang  me  on  the  cross;  let  blood  run  from  my 
hands  and  feet;  let  me  descend  into  the  grave;  let  me 
pay  all  the  sinner  oweth;  I  will  die  in  his  stead."  And 
the  Law  went  out  and  scourged  the  Savior,  nailed  him 
to  the  cross,  and  coming  back  with  his  face  all  bright 
with  satisfaction,  stood  again  at  the  throne  of  Mercy, 
and  Mercy  said,  "  Law,  what  hast  thou  now  to  say  ?  " 
"Nothing,"  said  he;  "fair  angel,  nothing."  "What! 
not  one  of  these  commands  against  him1?"  "No,  not 
one.  Jesus,  his  substitute,  has  kept  them  all  —  has  paid 
the  penalty  for  his  disobedience;  and  now,  instead  of  his 
condemnation,  I  demand,  as  a  debt  of  Justice,  that  he 
be  acquitted."  "  Stand  thou  here,"  said  Mercy ;  "  sit 
on  my  throne;  I  and  thou  together  will  now  send  forth 
another  summons."  The  trumpet  rang  again.'  "  Come 
hither,  all  ye  who  have  aught  to  say  against  this  sinner, 
why  he  should  not  be  acquitted ;  "  and  up  comes  another 
—  one  who  often  troubled  the  sinner  —  one  who  had  a 
voice  not  so  loud  as  that  of  the  Law,  but  still  piercing 
and  thrilling  —  a  voice  whose  whispers  were  like  the 
cuttings  of  a  dagger.  "Who  art  thou?"  says  Mercy. 
"  I  am  Conscience ;  this  sinner  must  be  punished ;  he 
has  done  so  much  against  the  law  of  God  that  he  must  be 
punished;  I  demand  it;  and  I  will  give  him  no  rest  till 
he  is  punished,  nor  even  then,  for  I  will  follow  him 
even  to  the  grave,  and  persecute  him  after  death  with 
pangs  unutterable."  "  Nay,"  said  Mercy,  "  hear  me ;  " 
and  while  he  paused  for  a  moment,  she  took  a  bunch 
of  hyssop  and  sprinkled  Conscience  with  the  blood,  say 
ing,  "  Hear  me,  Conscience,  l  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
God's  Son,  cleanseth  from  all  sin.'  Now  has  thou  aught 
to  say  ?  "  "  No,"  said  Conscience,  "  nothing  — 

"  *  .Covered    is    his    unrighteousness ; 
From  condemnation  he  is  free.' 


MERCY  179 


Henceforth  I  will  not  grieve  him;  I  will  be  a  good  con 
science  unto  him,  through  the  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  The  trumpet  rang  a  third  time,  and  growling 
from  the  innermost  vaults,  up  there  came  a  grim  black 
fiend,  with  hate  in  his  eyes,  and  hellish  majesty  on  his 
brows.  He  is  asked,  "  Hast  thou  anything  against  that 
sinner  1 "  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "  I  have ;  he  has  made  a 
league  with  hell,  and  a  covenant  with  the  grave,  and 
here  it  is,  signed  with  his  own  hand.  He  asked  God  to 
destroy  his  soul  in  a  drunken  fit,  and  vowed  he  would 
never  turn  to  God ;  see  here  is  his  covenant  with  hell ! " 
"  Let  us  look  at  it,"  said  Mercy ;  and  it  was  handed  up, 
while  the  grim  fiend  looked  at  the  sinner,  and  pierced 
him  through  with  his  black  looks.  "Ah!  but,"  said 
Mercy,  "  this  man  had  no  right  to  sign  the  deed ;  a  man 
must  not  sign  away  another's  property.  This  man  was 
bought  and  paid  for  long  beforehand ;  he  is  not  his  own ; 
the  covenant  with  Death  is  disannulled,  and  the  league 
with  hell  is  rent  in  pieces.  Go  thy  way,  Satan."  "  Nay," 
said  he,  howling  again,  "  I  have  something  else  to  say : 
that  man  was  always  my  friend;  he  listened  ever  to  my 
insinuations;  he  scoffed  at  the  gospel;  he  scorned  the 
majesty  of  heaven:  he  is  to  be  pardoned,  while  I  repair 
to  my  hellish  den,  for  ever  to  bear  the  penalty  of  guilt  ?  " 
Said  Mercy,  "  Avaunt,  thou  fiend;  these  things  he  did 
in  the  days  of  his  unregeneracy ;  but  this  word  '  never 
theless  '  blots  them  out.  Go  thou  to  thy  hell;  take  this 
for  another  lash  upon  thyself  —  the  sinner  shall  be  par 
doned,  but  thou  —  never,  treacherous  fiend !  "  And  then 
Mercy,  smilingly  turning  to  the  sinner,  said,  "  Sinner, 
the  trumpet  must  be  blown  for  the  last  time ! "  Again 
it  was  blown,  and  no  one  answered.  Then  stood  the 
sinner  up,  and  Mercy  said,  "  Sinner,  ask  thyself  the 
question  —  ask  thou  of  heaven,  of  earth,  of  hell  — 
whether  any  can  condemn  thee  ?  "  And  the  sinner  stood 


i8o     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

up,  and  with  a  bold,  loud  voice,  said,  "  Who  shall  lay 
anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ? "  And  he  looked 
into  hell,  and  Satan  lay  there,  biting  his  iron  bonds;  and 
he  looked  on  earth,  and  earth  was  silent;  and  in  the 
majesty  of  faith  the  sinner  did  even  climb  to  heaven 
itself,  and  he  said,  "Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the 
charge  of  God's  elect1?  God?"  And  the  answer  came, 
"No;  he  justifieth."  "Christ?"  Sweetly  it  was  whis 
pered,  "  No ;  he  died."  Then  turning  round,  the  sinner 
joyfully  exclaimed,  "  Who  shall  separate  me  from  the 
love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ?  "  And 
the  once  condemned  sinner  came  back  to  Mercy;  pros 
trate  at  her  feet  he  lay,  and  vowed  henceforth  to  be  hers 
for  ever,  if  she  would  keep  him  to  the  end,  and  make  him 
what  she  would  desire  him  to  be.  Then  no  longer  did 
the  trumpet  ring,  but  angels  rejoiced,  and  heaven  was 
g]ad,  for  the  sinner  was  saved. 

God's  Mercy  for  All.— Let  us  divide  these  creatures  once 
more.  There  were  creeping  things,  and  there  were  flying 
things.  On  the  morning  when  the  ark  door  was  opened, 
you  might  have  seen  in  the  sky  a  pair  of  eagles,  a  pair 
of  sparrows,  a  pair  of  vultures,  a  pair  of  ravens,  a  pair 
of  humming-birds,  a  pair  of  all  kinds  of  birds  that  ever 
cut  the  azure,  that  ever  floated  on  wing,  or  whispered 
their  song  to  the  evening  gales.  In  they  came.  But 
if  you  had  watched  down  on  the  earth,  you  would  have 
seen  come  creeping  along  a  pair  of  snails,  a  pair  of 
snakes,  and  a  pair  of  worms.  There  ran  along  a  pair 
of  mice,  there  came  a  pair  of  lizards,  and  in  there  flew 
a  pair  of  locusts.  There  were  pairs  of  creeping  creatures, 
as  well  as  pairs  of  flying  creatures.  Do  you  see  what  I 
mean  by  that?  There  are  some  of  you  that  can  fly  so 
high  in  knowledge,  that  I  should  never  be  able  to  scan 
your  great  and  extensive  wisdom;  and  others  of  you  so 
ignorant,  that  you  can  hardly  read  your  Bibles.  Never 


PEACE  181 

mind;  the  eagle  must  come  down  to  the  door,  and  you 
must  go  up  to  it.  There  is  only  one  entrance  for  you  all ; 
and  as  God  saved  the  birds  that  flew,  so  he  saved  the 
reptiles  that  crawled.  Are  you  a  poor,  ignorant,  crawl 
ing  creature,  that  never  was  noticed  —  without  intellect, 
without  repute,  without  fame,  without  honor?  Come 
along,  crawling  one!  God  will  not  exclude  you.  I 
have  often  wondered  how  the  poor  snail  crawled  in;  but 
I  dare  say  he  started  many  a  year  before.  And  some  of 
you  have  started  for  years,  and  still  you  keep  crawling 
on.  Ah!  then,  come  along  with  thee,  poor  snail!  If  I 
could  just  pick  thee  up,  and  help  thee  on  a  yard  or  two, 
I  would  be  glad  to  do  it.  It  is  strange  how  long  you 
have  been  nigh  to  the  ark,  but  not  yet  entered  in;  how 
long  you  have  been  near  the  portals  of  the  church,  but 
never  joined  it. 

PEACE 

The  Peace  of  God.— There  is  Martin  Luther  standing  up 
in  the  minds  of  the  Diet  of  Worms;  there  are  the  kings 
and  the  princes,  and  there  are  the  bloodhounds  of  Rome 
with  their  tongues  thirsting  for  his  blood  —  there  is  Mar 
tin  rising  in  the  morning  as  comfortable  as  possible, 
and  he  goes  to  the  Diet,  and  delivers  himself  of  the 
truth,  solemnly  declares  that  the  things  which  he  has 
spoken  are  the  things  which  he  believes,  and  God  helping 
him,  he  will  stand  by  them  till  the  last.  There  is  his 
life  in  his  hands;  they  have  him  entirely  in  their  power. 
The  smell  of  John  Huss's  corpse  has  not  yet  passed 
away,  and  he  recollects  that  princes  before  this  have 
violated  their  words;  but  there  he  stands,  calm  and 
quiet ;  he  fears  no  man,  for  he  has  naught  to  fear ;  "  the 
peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding"  keeps 
his  heart  and  mind  through  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  an 
other  scene:  there  is  John  Bradford  in  Newgate.  He  is 


182     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

to  be  burned  the  next  morning  in  Smithfield,  and  he 
swings  himself  on  the  bedpost  in  very  glee,  and  delights, 
for  to-morrow  is  his  wedding-day;  and  he  says  to  an 
other,  "  Fine  shining  we  shall  make  to-morrow,  when 
the  flame  is  kindled."  And  he  smiles  and  laughs,  and 
enjoys  the  veiy  thought  that  he  is  about  to  wear  the 
blood-red  crown  of  martyrdom.  Is  Bradford  mad?  Ah. 
no ;  but  he  has  got  the  peace  of  God  that  passeth  all  un 
derstanding. 

A  Peaceful  Mind. —  I  compare  not  the  peaceful  mind  to  a 
lake  without  a  ripple.  Such  a  figure  would  be  inade 
quate.  The  only  comparison  I  can  find  is  in  that  un 
broken  tranquility  which  seems  to  reign  in  the  deep 
caverns  and  grottoes  of  the  sea  —  far  down  where  the 
sailor's  body  lies,  where  the  sea-shells  rest  undisturbed, 
where  there  is  nought  but  darkness,  and  where  nothing 
can  break  the  spell,  for  there  are  no  currents  there,  and 
all  is  still  —  that  is  somewhat  like  the  Christian's  soul 
when  God  speaks  to  him.  There  may  be  billows  on 
the  surface,  by  these  he  may  be  sometimes  ruffled,  but 
inside  the  heart  there  will  be  no  ebb  or  flow ;  he  will  have 
"  eternal  peace  with  God,"  a  "  peace  that  passeth  all 
understanding,"  too  deep  to  fathom,  too  perfect  to  con 
ceive,  for  none  but  they  who  prove  it  know:  such  peace 
that  you  could  to-night  lay  your  head  down  to  sleep 
with  the  knowledge  that  you  would  never  wake  again 
in  this  world  as  calmly  as  you  could  if  you  knew  your 
days  were  like  Hezekiah's,  lengthened  out  for  a  certainty 
of  fifteen  years.  When  we  have  peace  with  God,  we 
can  lie  down,  and  if  an  angel  visited  ua  to  say,  "  Soul, 
your  Master  calls  you,"  we  could  reply,  "  Tell  my  Mas 
ter,  I  am  ready.  And  if  grim  death  were  to  come  stalk 
ing  to  our  bed-side,  and  were  to  say,  "  The  pitcher  is 
broken  at  the  fountain,  and  the  well  is  broken  at  the 
cistern:  thou  shalt  die!"  we  might  answer,  "Die!  we 


PRAYER  183 

die  willingly;  we  are  prepared;  we  are  not  afraid;  we 
have  peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  we 
have  peace  here,  and  we  are  willing  to  go  and  have  that 
peace  consummated  up  yonder  in  the  better  world." 
Peace  in  Jesus  Only. —  I  have  heard  of  one  who  had  been 
into  the  Enquiry  Room  a  dozen  times,  and  when  on  an 
other  occasion  she  was  invited  to  go  there  she  said,  "  I 
really  do  not  know  why  I  should  go,  for  I  have  been 
told  that  I  was  saved  twelve  times  already,  and  I  am 
not  a  bit  better  than  before  they  told  me  so."  It  would 
be  better  to  send  some  home  weeping  rather  than  re 
joicing.  Many  a  wound  needs  the  lancet  more  than  the 
plaster.  You  may  be  comforted  by  well-meant  assur 
ances  of  tender  friends,  and  yet  that  comfort  may  be  all 
a  lie.  I  therefore  warn  you  against  any  peace  except 
that  which  comes  from  doing  that  which  Jesus  com 
mands,  or  in  other  words,  against  any  confidence  except 
that  which  rests  in  Jesus  only,  and  is  attended  with  re 
pentance,  faith,  and  a  life  of  obedience  to  your  Lord. 

PRAYER 

Empty  Prayers.— You  know  that  into  the  inward  soul, 
and  marrow,  and  bowels  of  devotion  you  have  never  yet 
learned  to  plunge.  You  know  your  devotion  is  like  that 
ox  which  was  slain  once  in  the  time  of  siege  in  Rome, 
and  was  said  to  portend  ill,  because  when  the  augur  slew 
it  he  declared  he  could  not  find  a  heart  anywhere.  He 
looked  through  all  the  entrails,  and  no  heart  could  he 
discover;  and  hence,  the  Romans  said  their  city  must  be 
destroyed.  It  was  a  solemn  augury,  they  said,  when  the 
sacrifice  had  no  heart  in  it.  It  is  just  the  same  with  you. 
You  have  done  all  these  things;  oh!  yes,  and  there  has 
been  as  much  reality  in  what  you  have  done  as  there 
was  devotion  in  the  poor  Kalmuck's  windmill,  when  he 
tied  the  prayer  to  it,  and  put  it  up  in  the  garden,  and 


184     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

every  time  it  blew  round,  that  wab  just  one  more  prayer. 
There  was  as  much  heart  in  your  prayer  as  there  was  in 
his  windmill;  that  is  to  say,  none  at  all.  There  it  is! 
How  far  have  you  got?  Go  on  no  longer  with  this  use 
less  round  of  performances.  I  would  not  have  you  give 
the  performances  up.  Stop  awhile,  and  ask  God  to  give 
you  that  inward  spirit  that  quickeneth,  for  that  is  what 
is  needed,  "  The  flesh  profiteth  nothing." 
Exaltation  in  Prayer.— I  was  much  struck  the  other  ev 
ening  at  a  prayer-meeting,  by  the  prayer  of  one  of  our 
brethren,  which  came  home  to  my  heart.  When  he 
prayed,  he  said,  "  0  Lord,  give  me  Mary's  place  — 

'  Oh !  that  I  might,  with  Mary  sit 
For  ever  at  my  Master's  feet, 
And  learn  of  him.'" 

He  prayed  that  he  might  have  her  part,  and  always  sit  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus.  But,  by  and  by,  the  good  man  kindled 
up  in  his  prayer,  and  said,  "  No,  my  Master,  I  have  not 
asked  enough  of  thee.  Mary's  place  is  too  low  for  me, 
if  I  may  have  a  better.  Lift  me  up  higher,  Lord;  give 
me  John's  place. 

'  Oh !  that  I  might,  with  favored  John, 
For  ever  lean  my  head  upon 
The  bosom  of  my  Lord.' " 

Then  again  he  pleaded  for  that  higher  degree  of  com 
munion  between  the  soul  and  Christ.  "  Surely,"  thought 
I,  "now  you  have  asked  enough."  But,  suddenly  rising 
up  to  another  flight  on  the  wings  of  communion,  like 
the  eagle  taking  its  last  soar  into  the  skies,  he  said,  "  No, 
Lord,  John's  place  doth  not  suffice  me.  Thou  hast  lifted 
me  from  thy  feet  to  thy  bosom  —  now  from  thy  bosom 
to  thy  lips."  Then,  quoting  the  words  of  the  spouse  — 
"Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth,  for  thy 


PRAYER  185 


love  is  better  than  wine "•—  he  sweetly  paraphrased  it 
thus,  "  Let  the  lip  of  my  petitioning  meet  the  lip  of  thy 
benediction ;  let  the  lip  of  my  praise  met  the  lip  of  thy  ac 
ceptance;  so  shall  the  kiss  be  consummated  and  my  joy 
be  complete."  Aye,  and  when  we  are  favored  to  go 
through  these  stages  of  fellowship;  to  go  from  the  foot 
to  the  bosom,  from  the  bosom  to  the  lip;  to  go  from  the 
mere  learner  and  to  be  a  friend  and  companion ;  and  then 
to  go  higher  still  —  to  be  lifted  up  and  to  feel  our  fellow 
ship  with  Christ,  by  standing  as  high  as  he  does,  and 
being  on  his  lip;  it  is  there  the  child  of  God,  insensibly 
almost,  receives  strength,  and,  like  Elijah  smitten  by  the 
angel,  he  rises  up  and  finds  his  meat  baked  upon  the 
coals,  and  eats  thereof,  and  lives  upon  it  for  forty  days 
to  come.  Precious  mode  of  feeding  this! 
Revival  Through  Prayer.— All  the  mighty  works  of  God 
have  been  attended  with  great  prayer,  as  well  as  with 
great  faith.  Have  ye  ever  heard  of  the  commencement 
of  the  great  American  revival?  A  man,  unknown  and 
obscure,  laid  it  up  in  his  heart  to  pray  that  God  would 
bless  his  country.  After  praying  and  wrestling  and 
making  the  soul-stirring  inquiry,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou 
have  me  to  do  ?  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " 
he  hired  a  room,  and  put  up  an  announcement  that  there 
would  be  a  prayer-meeting  held  there  at  such-and-such 
an  hour  of  the  day.  He  went  at  the  proper  hour,  and 
there  was  not  a  single  person  there;  he  began  to  pray, 
and  prayed  for  half  an  hour  alone.  One  came  in  at 
the  end  of  the  half  hour,  and  then  two  more,  and  I  think 
he  closed  with  six;  the  next  week  came  round,  and  there 
might  have  been  fifty  dropped  in  at  different  times. 
At  last  the  prayer-meeting  grew  to  a  hundred;  then 
others  began  to  start  prayer-meetings;  at  last  there  was 
scarcely  a  street  in  New  York  that  was  without  a  prayer- 
meeting.  Merchants  found  time  to  run  in,  in  the  middle 


i86     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

of  the  day,  to  pray.  The  prayer-meetings  became  daily 
ones,  lasting  for  about  an  hour;  petitions  and  requests 
were  sent  up:  these  were  simply  asked  and  offered  be 
fore  God,  and  the  answers  came;  and  many  were  the 
happy  hearts  that  stood  up  and  testified  that  the  prayer 
offered  last  week  had  been  already  fulfilled.  Then  it 
was  when  they  were  all  earnest  in  prayer,  suddenly  the 
Spirit  of  God  fell  upon  the  people,  and  it  was  rumored 
that  in  a  certain  village  a  preacher  had  been  preaching 
in  thorough  earnest,  and  there  had  been  hundreds  con 
verted  in  a  week.  The  matter  spread  into  and  through 
the  Northern  States.  These  revivals  of  religion  became 
universal,  and  it  has  been  sometimes  said,  that  a  quarter 
of  a  million  of  people  were  converted  to  God  through  the 
short  space  of  two  or  three  months. 

Praying  for  the  Lost.—  In  one  of  Krummacher's  beautiful 
little  parables  there  is  a  story  like  this :  "  Abraham  sat 
one  day  in  the  grove  at  Mamre,  leaning  his  head  on  his 
hand,  and  sorrowing.  Then  his  son  Isaac  came  to  him, 
and  said,  l  My  father,  why  mournest  thou  7  what  aileth 
theel'  Abraham  answered  and  said,  'My  soul  mourneth 
for  the  people  of  Canaan,  that  they  know  not  the  Lord, 
but  walk  in  their  own  ways,  in  darkness  and  foolishness/ 
4  Oh,  my  father/  answered  the  son,  'is  it  only  this?' 
Let  not  thy  heart  be  sorrowful;  for  are  not  these  their 
own  ways  ? '  Then  the  patriarch  rose  up  from  his  seat, 
and  said,  l  Come  now,  follow  me/  And  he  led  the  youth 
to  a  hut,  and  said  to  him,  '  Behold.'  There  was  a  child 
which  was  imbecile,  and  the  mother  sat  weeping  by  it. 
Abraham  asked  her,  'Why  weepest  thou?'  Then  the 
mother  said,  '  Alas,  this  my  son  eateth  and  drinketh,  and 
we  minister  unto  him;  but  he  knows  not  the  face  of  his 
father,  nor  of  his  mother.  Thus  his  life  is  lost,  and  this 
source  of  joy  is  sealed  to  him/ "  Is  not  that  a  sweet 
little  parable,  to  teach  us  how  we  ought  to  pray  for 


PRAYER  187 

the  many  sheep  that  are  not  yet  of  the  fold,  but  which 
must  be  brought  in?  We  ought  to  pray  for  them,  be 
cause  they  do  not  know  their  Father.  Christ  has  bought 
them,  and  they  do  not  know  Christ ;  the  Father  has  loved 
them  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  yet 
they  know  not  the  face  of  their  Father.  When  thou 
sayest  "  Our  Father,"  think  of  the  many  of  thy  brothers 
and  sisters  that  are  in  the  back  streets  of  London,  that 
are  in  the  dens  and  caves  of  Satan.  Think  of  thy  poor 
brother  that  is  intoxicated  with  the  spirit  of  the  devil; 
think  of  him,  led  astray  to  infamy,  and  lust,  and  per 
haps  to  murder,  and  in  thy  prayer  pray  thou  for  them 
who  know  not  the  Lord. 

A  Poor  Woman's  Throne. —  I  had  an  engraving  sent  to 
me  the  other  day  which  pleased  me  beyond  measure.  It 
was  an  engraving  simply  but  exquisitely  executed.  It 
represented  a  poor  girl  in  an  upper  room,  with  a  lean-to 
roof.  There  was  a  post  driven  in  the  ground,  on  which 
was  a  piece  of  wood,  standing  on  which  were  a  candle 
and  a  Bible.  She  was  on  her  knees  at  a  chair,  praying, 
wrestling  with  God.  Every  thing  in  the  room  had  on  it 
the  stamp  of  poverty.  There  was  the  mean  coverlet  to 
the  old  stump  bedstead;  there  were  the  walls  that  had 
never  been  papered,  and  perhaps  scarcely  whitewashed. 
It  was  an  upper  story  to  which  she  had  climbed  with 
aching  knees,  and  where,  perhaps,  she  had  worked  away 
till  her  fingers  were  worn  to  the  bone,  to  earn  her  bread 
at  needle-work.  There  it  was  that  she  was  wrestling 
with  God.  Some  would  turn  away  and  laugh  at  it;  but 
it  appeals  to  the  best  feelings  of  man,  and  moves  the 
heart  far  more  than  does  the  fine  engraving  of  the 
monarch  on  his  knees  in  the  grand  assembly. 

A  Spiritual  Birth-place.— I  knew  a  gray-headed  old  man, 
who  was  in  the  habit  of  doing  this.  He  once  took  a 
boy  to  a  certain  tree,  and  said,  "Now,  John,  you  kneel 


i88     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

down  at  that  tree,  and  I  will  kneel  down  with  you."  He 
knelt  down  and  prayed,  and  asked  God  to  convert  him 
and  save  his  soul.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  perhaps  you  will 
come  to  this  tree  again;  and  if  you  are  not  converted, 
you  will  remember  that  I  asked  under  this  tree  that  God 
would  save  your  soul."  That  young  man  went  away, 
and  forgot  the  old  man's  prayer;  but  it  chanced  as  God 
would  have  it  that  he  walked  down  that  field  again,  and 
saw  a  tree.  It  seemed  as  if  the  old  man's  name  was  cut 
in  the  bark.  He  recollected  what  he  prayed  for,  and 
that  the  prayer  was  not  fulfilled;  but  he  dare  not  pass 
the  tree  without  kneeling  down  to  pray  himself;  and 
there  was  his  spiritual  birthplace.  The  simplest  obser 
vation  of  the  Christian  shall  be  made  a  blessing,  if  God 
help  him.  "His  leaf  also  shall  not  wither"— the 
simplest  word  he  speaks  shall  be  treasured  up ;  "  and 
whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper." 

The  Pledge  of  Security.—  I  have  heard  an  anecdote  of  two 
gentlemen  travelling  together,  somewhere  in  Switzerland. 
Presently  they  came  into  the  midst  of  the  forests;  and 
you  know  the  gloomy  tales  the  people  tell  about  the  inns 
there,  how  dangerous  it  is  to  lodge  in  them.  One  of  them, 
an  infidel,  said  to  the  other,  who  was  a  Christian,  "  I 
don't  like  stopping  here  at  all;  it  is  very  dangerous  in 
deed."  "Well,"  said  the  other,  "let  us  try."  So  they 
went  into  a  house ;  but  it  looked  so  suspicious  that  neither 
of  them  liked  it;  and  they  thought  they  would  prefer 
being  at  home  in  England.  Presently  the  landlord  said, 
"  Gentlemen,  I  always  read  and  pray  with  my  family 
before  going  to  bed;  will  you  allow  me  to  do  so  to 
night?"  "  Yes,"  they  said,  "  with  the  greatest  pleasure." 
When  they  went  up-stairs,  the  infidel  said,  "  I  am  not  at 
all  afraid  now."  "Why?"  said  the  Christian.  "Be 
cause  our  host  has  prayed."  "  Oh ! "  said  the  other, 
"then  it  seems,  after  all,  you  think  something  of  re- 


PRAYER  189 

ligion;  because  a  man  prays,  you  can  go  to  sleep  in  his 
house."  And  it  was  marvelous  how  both  of  them  did 
sleep.  Sweet  dreams  they  had,  for  they  felt  that  where 
the  house  had  been  roofed  by  prayer,  and  walled  with 
devotion,  there  could  not  be  found  a  man  living  that 
would  commit  an  injury  to  them. 

Secret  Prayer.—  Mrs.  Berry  used  to  say,  "  I  would  not  be 
hired  out  of  my  closet  for  a  thousand  worlds."  Mr.  Jay 
said,  "  If  the  twelve  apostles  were  living  near  you,  and 
you  had  access  to  them,  if  this  intercourse  drew  you  from 
the  closet,  they  would  prove  a  real  injury  to  your  souls." 
Prayer  is  the  ship  which  bringeth  home  the  richest 
freight.  It  is  the  soil  which  yields  the  most  abundant 
harvest.  Brother,  when  you  rise  in  the  morning  your 
business  so  presses,  that  with  a  hurried  word  or  two, 
down  you  go  into  the  world,  and  at  night,  jaded  and 
tired,  you  give  God  the  fag  end  of  the  day.  The  conse 
quence  is,  that  you  have  no  communion  with  him. 

Won  Through  Prayer.— In  one  of  the  States  of  America 
there  was  an  infidel  who  was  a  great  despiser  of  God, 
a  hater  of  the  Sabbath  and  all  religious  institutions. 
What  to  do  with  him  the  ministers  did  not  know.  They 
met  together  and  prayed  for  him.  But  among  the  rest, 

one  Elder  B resolved  to  spend  a  long  time  in  prayer 

for  the  man;  after  that  he  got  on  horseback,  and  rode 
down  to  the  man's  forge,  for  he  was  a  blacksmith.  He 
left  his  horse  outside,  and  said,  "  Neighbor,  I  am  under 
very  great  concern  about  your  souFs  salvation;  I  tell 
you  I  pray  day  and  night  for  your  son's  salvation."  He 
left  him,  and  rode  home  on  his  horse.  The  man  went 
inside  to  his  house,  after  a  minute  or  two,  and  said  to 
one  of  his  infidel  friends,  "Here's  a  new  argument; 
here's  Elder  B—  -  been  down  here,  he  did  not  dispute, 
and  never  said  a  word  to  me  except  this,  '  I  say,  I  am 
under  great  concern  about  your  soul ;  I  can  not  bear  you 


igo     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

should  be  lost/  0!  that  fellow,"  he  said,  "I  can  not 
answer  him ; "  and  the  tears  began  to  roll  down  his 
cheeks.  He  went  to  his  wife,  and  said,  "I  can't  make 
this  out ;  I  never  cared  about  my  soul,  but  here's  an  elder, 
that  has  no  connection  with  me,  but  I  have  always 
laughed  at  him,  and  he  has  come  five  miles  this  morning 
on  horseback  just  to  tell  me  he  is  under  concern  about 
my  salvation."  After  a  little  while  he  thought  it  was 
time  he  should  be  under  concern  about  his  salvation  too. 
He  went  in,  shut  the  door,  began  to  pray,  and  the  next 
day  he  was  at  the  deacon's  house,  telling  him  that  he  too 
was  under  concern  about  his  salvation,  and  asking  him  to 
tell  him  what  he  must  do  to  be  saved. 

Culture  Through  Prayer.—  God's  grace  can  save  you,  and 
then  enlighten  you.  A  brother  minister  once  told  me  a 
story  of  a  man  who  was  known  in  a  certain  village  as  a 
simpleton,  and  was  always  considered  to  be  soft  in  the 
head ;  no  one  thought  he  could  ever  understand  any  thing. 
But  one  day  he  came  to  hear  the  gospel  preached.  He 
had  been  a  drunken  fellow,  having  wit  enough  to  be 
wicked,  which  is  a  very  common  kind  of  wit.  The  Lord 
was  pleased  to  bless  the  Word  to  his  soul,  so  that  he 
became  a  changed  character;  and  what  was  the  marvel 
of  all  was,  his  religion  gave  him  a  something  which  began 
to  develop  his  latent  faculties.  He  found  he  had  some 
thing  to  live  for,  and  he  began  to  try  what  he  could  do. 
In  the  first  place  he  wanted  to  read  his  Bible,  that  he 
might  read  his  Savior's  name;  and  after  much  ham 
mering  and  spelling  away,  at  last  he  was  able  to  read  a 
chapter.  Then  he  was  asked  to  pray  at  a  prayer-meet 
ing;  here  was  an  exercise  of  his  vocal  powers.  Five  or 
six  words  made  up  his  prayer,  and  down  he  sat  abashed. 
But  by  continually  praying  in  his  own  family  at  home, 
he  came  to  pray  like  the  rest  of  the  brethren,  and  he 
went  on  till  he  became  a  preacher,  and  singular  enough, 


PRAYER  191 


he  had  a  fluency  —  a  depth  of  understanding,  and  a 
power  of  thought,  such  as  are  seldom  found  among 
ministers  who  only  occasionally  occupy  pulpits.  Strange 
it  was,  that  grace  should  even  tend  to  develop  his  natural 
powers,  giving  him  an  object,  setting  him  devoutly  and 
firmly  upon  it,  and  so  bringing  out  all  his  resources  that 
they  were  fully  shown.  Ah,  ignorant  ones,  ye  need 
not  despair.  He  saved  them;  not  for  their  sakes  —  there 
was  nothing  in  them  why  they  should  be  saved.  He 
saved  them,  not  for  their  wisdom's  sake;  but,  ignorant 
tho  they  were,  understanding  not  the  meaning  of  his 
miracles,  "  he  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake." 

Weak  Through  Lack  of  Prayer.—  I  know  Christian  people 
who  used  to  spend  an  hour  a  day  in  prayer.  The  hour 
has  dwindled  into  five  minutes.  They  used  to  be  con 
stant  at  week-night  services.  They  very  seldom  glad 
den  us  with  their  presence  now;  and  they  are  not  as 
happy  as  they  once  were.  I  can  read  this  riddle.  If  a 
man  were  to  reduce  his  meals  to  eating  once  a  week, 
we  could  not  warrant  his  health.  I  would  not  guarantee 
that,  if  a  man  never  ate  except  on  Sundays,  he  would 
grow  strong.  So  I  do  not  think  that  people  who  neglect 
the  means  of  grace,  and  give  up  their  consecration,  can 
expect  to  be  lively,  happy,  or  vigorous.  When  the  razor 
gets  to  work,  and  the  hair  of  conscience,  resolute  de 
votion  to  God  begins  to  fall  on  the  floor,  lock  after  lock, 
the  strength  is  departing:  and  only  as  that  hair  begins 
to  grow  again,  and  spiritual  consecration  returns,  can 
these  people  expect  to  be  useful,  influential,  and  strong 
in  the  Lord. 

Led  by  the  Spirit  in  Prayer.—  I  was  speaking  to  a  brother 
yesterday  about  a  prayer  which  my  Lord  had  remark 
ably  answered  in  my  own  case,  and  I  could  not  help 
saying  to  him,  "But  I  cannot  always  pray  in  that 
fashion.  Not  only  can  I  not  so  pray,  but  I  would  not 


i92     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

dare  to  do  so,  even  if  I  could/*  Moved  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  we  sometimes  pray  with  a  power  of  faith  which 
can  never  fail  at  the  mercy-seat;  but  without  such  an 
impulse  we  must  not  push  our  own  wills  to  the  front. 
There  are  many  occasions  upon  which,  if  one  had  all  the 
faith  which  could  move  mountains,  he  would  most  wisely 
show  it  by  saying  nothing  beyond,  "Nevertheless,  not  as 
I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  Had  our  Lord  chosen  to  do 
so,  he  had  still  in  reserve  a  prayer-power  which  would 
have  effectually  saved  him  from  his  enemies.  He  did  not 
think  it  right  so  to  use  it;  but  he  could  have  done  so  had 
he  pleased. 

Scoffers  at  Prayer.-—  Those  philosophers  that  sneer  at 
prayer,  what  do  they  know  about  it?  They  are  strangers 
to  prayer,  and  therefore  unable  to  judge  of  its  power. 
Suppose  a  dozen  of  them  should  swear  that  they  have 
prayed,  and  that  God  has  not  heard  their  prayers,  we 
should  believe  it;  and  we  should  also  come  to  the  con 
clusion  that  prayers  from  men  of  their  order  ought  not 
to  be  heard.  Surely  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe 
that  he  is;  and  these  gentlemen  will  not  even  accept  that 
point  as  certain.  But  when  we  pray,  and  the  Lord  hears 
us,  can  any  form  of  argument  disprove  a  fact?  A  fact 
will  stand  against  all  reasoning :  it  is  an  unyielding  rock, 
against  which  the  waves  of  skepticism  hurl  themselves 
in  vain. 

Telling  Everything  to  Jesus.—  I  remember  when  once  my 
young  heart  ached  in  boyhood,  when  I  first  loved  the 
Savior.  I  was  far  away  from  father  and  mother,  and 
all  I  loved,  and  I  thought  my  soul  would  burst;  for  I 
was  an  usher  in  a  school,  in  a  place  where  I  could  meet 
with  no  sympathy  or  help.  Well,  I  went  to  my  cham 
ber,  and  told  my  little  griefs  into  the  ears  of  Jesus.  They 
were  great  griefs  to  me  then,  tho  they  are  nothing 
now.  When  I  just  whispered  them  on  my  knees  into  the 


PRAYER  193 

ear  of  him  who  had  loved  me  with  an  everlasting  love, 
oh!  it  was  so  sweet,  none  can  tell.  If  I  had  told  them 
to  somebody  else,  they  would  have  told  them  again;  but 
he,  my  blessed  confidant,  he  knows  my  secrets,  and  he 
never  tells  them.  Oh!  what  can  you  do  that  have  got 
no  Jesus  to  tell  your  troubles  to? 

Praying  for  Special  Things.— When  we  pray,  we  should 
make  a  point  of  praying  for  something  distinctly. 
There  is  a  general  kind  of  praying,  which  fails 
from  want  of  precision.  It  is  as  if  a  regiment  of  sol 
diers  should  all  fire  off  their  guns  anyhow ;  possibly  some 
body  would  be  killed,  but  the  majority  of  the  enemy 
would  be  missed.  I  believe  that  at  the  battle  of  Water 
loo,  there  were  no  arms  of  precision,  they  had  only  the 
old  Brown  Bass,  and  tho  the  battle  was  won,  it  has 
been  said  it  took  as  much  lead  to  kill  a  man  as  the 
weight  of  the  man's  body.  This  is  a  figure  of  the  com 
parative  failure  of  indistinct,  generalizing  prayer.  If 
you  pray  anyhow,  if  it  be  with  sincerity,  a  measure  of 
blessing  results  from  it;  but  it  will  take  a  great  deal 
of  such  praying  to  accomplish  much.  But  if  you  plead 
for  certain  mercies  definitely  and  distinctly,  with  firm 
unstaggering  faith,  you  shall  richly  succeed. 

Definite  Aim  ir»  Prayer.— If  a  man  were  using  his  rifle 
at  Wimbledon  in  a  contest  for  a  prize,  if  he  were  told, 
"  It  is  not  that  target  on  the  right,  but  this  upon  the  left 
which  must  be  aimed  at,"  if  he  would  continue  to  shoot 
towards  the  right,  even  tho  he  should  make  a  center, 
yet  he  would  not  have  scored;  inasmuch  as  that  was  not 
the  target  appointed  in  the  competition,  his  best  shots 
would  count  for  nothing.  When  a  man  does  not  pray  in 
the  Lord's  appointed  way,  nor  through  Jesus  Christ,  nor 
in  dependence  upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  does  not  pray 
at  all.  However  fine  his  prayer,  it  is  only  a  splendid  sin. 
If  yon  employ  a  servant  to  do  a  work,  and  he  obstinately 


194     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

persists  in  doing  another  thing,  he  will  not  earn  his 
wages.  However  industriously  he  works  at  what  you 
have  never  set  him  to  do,  he  will  receive  nothing  at  your 
hands.  So  if  you  pray  to  God  in  a  way  which  God  has 
never  ordained,  if  you  refuse  to  use  the  name  which  he 
has  appointed,  if  you  neglect  the  cultivation  of  that 
holy  and  humble  spirit  which  the  Lord  will  alone  accept, 
you  may  pray  till  your  tongue  cleaves  to  the  roof  of 
your  mouth;  but  in  God's  judgment  you  have  not  prayed 
at  all,  and  you  will  not  receive  anything  of  the  Lord. 

Prayer  About  Common  Mercies. —  Tho  your  prayer 
should  only  be  about  worldly  things,  and  be  nothing 
more  than  a  merely  natural  prayer,  yet  pray  it ;  for  "  He 
heareth  the  young  ravens  when  they  cry,"  and  I  am  sure 
they  do  not  pray  spiritual  prayers.  All  that  ravens  can 
ask  for  will  be  worms  and  flies,  and  yet  he  hears  them, 
and  feeds  them;  and  you,  a  man,  tho  you  may  but 
pray  at  this  time  for  a  very  commonplace  mercy,  one  of 
the  slighter  blessings,  yet  you  may  pray  with  confidence 
if  you  have  any  faith  in  the  gracious  Lord. 

Praying  for  Our  Friends. —  Does  it  astonish  you  that  a  man 
so  rich  in  grace  as  Paul  should  be  asking  prayers  of  these 
unknown  saints'?  It  need  not  astonish  you;  for  it  is 
the  rule  with  the  truly  great  to  think  most  highly  of 
others.  In  proportion  as  a  man  grows  in  grace  he  feels 
his  dependence  upon  God,  and,  in  a  certain  sense,  his 
dependence  upon  God's  people.  He  decreases  in  his  own 
esteem,  and  his  brethren  increase  in  his  estimation.  A 
flourishing  tradesman,  a  man  who  has  a  large  business,  is 
the  man  who  needs  others,  he  prospers  by  setting  others 
to  labor  on  his  behalf;  the  larger  his  trade,  the  more  he 
is  dependent  upon  those  around  him.  The  apostle  was, 
so  to  speak,  a  great  master-trader  for  the  Lord  Jesus;  he 
did  a  great  business  for  his  Lord,  and  he  felt  that  he 
could  not  carry  it  on  unless  he  had  the  cooperation  of 


PRAYER  195 

many  helpers.  He  did  not  so  much  want  what  employers 
harshly  call  "hands"  to  work  for  him,  but  he  did  need 
hearts  to  plead  for  him,  and  he  therefore  sent  all  the 
way  to  Rome  to  seek  such  assistance.  He  wrote  to  those 
whom  he  had  never  seen,  and  begged  their  prayers,  as  if 
he  pleaded  for  his  life. 

Frequent  Prayer.—  I  had  a  dear  friend  whose  company  I 
esteemed,  but  on  a  sudden  he  did  not  come  to  see  me. 
He  stayed  away ;  and  as  I  knew  he  had  not  ceased  to  love 
me,  I  wondered  why.  At  last  I  found  that  the  good 
brother  had  taken  it  into  his  head  that  he  might  outrun 
his  welcome:  he  had  read  those  words  of  Solomon, 
"  Withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy  neighbor's  house ;  lest  he 
be  weary  of  thee,  and  so  hate  thee."  I  admired  my 
friend's  prudence,  but  I  labored  hard  to  make  him  see 
that  Solomon  knew  nothing  of  me,  and  that  I  was  more 
wearied  when  he  stopped  away  than  when  he  came.  I 
hope  he  made  me  an  exception  to  a  very  sensible  rule. 
But  never  get  that  thought  into  your  head  concerning 
your  God.  Will  you  weary  my  God  also?  You  may 
weary  him  by  restraining  prayer,  but  never  by  abound 
ing  in  supplication.  Abide  with  your  God,  and  cry  to 
him  day  and  night,  and  let  this  be  the  music  of  your 
whole  life,  "  Whereunto  I  may  continually  resort." 

Heaven's  Gate  Always  Open  to  the  Praying  Christian. — 
The  Persian  kings  forbade  any  one  to  come  near  them; 
and  if  any  ventred  into  the  king's  court,  and  the  mon 
arch  did  not  stretch  out  the  silver  scepter,  the  guards 
cut  them  down  at  once.  Yet  there  were  certain  favored 
courtiers  who,  by  special  privilege,  had  the  right  to  ap 
proach  the  king  at  all  times,  guard  or  no  guard.  These 
were  the  noblest  in  the  king's  dominions.  Such  honor 
have  all  the  saints.  No  cherub  with  naming  sword  guards 
the  way  of  aproach  to  God  against  any  child  of  the  great 
Father. 


196     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

A  Futile  Prayer.—  It  has  been  well  observed  by  an  old 
divine,  that  the  man  who  pleads  his  own  merit  does  not 
pray,  but  demands  his  due.  If  I  ask  a  man  to  pay  me 
a  debt,  I  am  not  a  suppliant,  but  a  plaintiff  claiming 
my  rights.  The  prayer  of  a  man  who  thinks  he  is  meri 
torious  is  like  serving  the  Lord  with  a  writ:  it  is  not 
offering  a  request,  it  is  issuing  a  demand.  Merit  in  ef 
fect  says,  "  Pay  me  that  thou  owest."  Little  will  such 
a  man  get  of  God. 

Paying  and  Praying.—  I  was  reading  the  story  of  a  good 
old  deacon  in  Maine,  in  America,  who  came  in  to  a  meet 
ing  after  there  had  been  a  missionaiy  collection.  The 
minister  there  and  then  asked  "  our  good  brother  Sewell " 
to  pray.  Sewell  did  not  pray,  but  thrust  his  hand  in 
his  pocket  and  stood  fumbling  about.  "  Bring  the  box," 
he  said;  and  when  the  box  came,  and  he  had  put  his 
money  into  it,  the  minister  said,  "  Brother  Sewell,  I  did 
not  ask  you  to  give  anything,  I  only  wished  you  to  pray." 
"  Oh,"  said  he,  "  I  could  not  pray  till  I  had  first  given 
something."  He  felt  obliged  first  to  do  something  for 
the  great  mission  work,  and  having  done  that  he  could 
pray  for  it.  Oh,  that  all  Christ's  people  felt  the  justice 
of  that  course  of  conduct ! 

A  Prayerless  Man. —  You  may  be  a  very  rich  man,  and 
have  large  estates,  but  I  would  sooner  occupy  the  place 
of  the  poorest  believing  pauper  in  the  workhouse  than 
take  your  position  without  a  God  and  without  a  throne 
of  grace.  How  do  people  live  that  have  no  God  to  go 
to  ?  If  a  man  were  to  say  to  me,  ' '  I  never  get  a  morsel 
of  bread  to  eat  at  all,"  I  should  wonder  how  he  lived. 
But  when  a  man  says,  "  I  never  pray,  and  God  never 
hears  me,"  I  am  in  equal  wonder. 

God  Listening  to  Prayer.-  A  good  brother  of  my  ac 
quaintance,  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  going  to  preach 
from  the  text  that  God  will  hear  prayer,  called  upon  one 


PRAYER  197 

of  his  poor  people,  who  said  when  the  visit  was  over 
that  she  had  greatly  enjoyed  his  call.  He  thought  to 
himself,  "  I  have  scarcely  said  a  word,  and  yet  she  says 
that  I  have  done  her  good."  Turning  to  her,  he  inquired, 
"  Sister,  how  can  I  have  done  you  good,  for  I  have 
hardly  spoken  with  you  1 "  "  Ah,  sir,"  she  replied,  "  you 
have  listened  so  kindly:  you  have  heard  all  I  had  to  say, 
and  there  are  very  few  who  will  do  that."  Just  so. 
People  in  deep  trouble  like  somebody  to  hear  them  all 
through:  even  little  children  are  comforted  by  telling 
mother  all  about  it.  We  are  in  such  a  hurry  with  poor 
troubled  spirits  that  we  hasten  them  on  to  the  end  of  the 
sentence,  and  try  to  make  them  skip  the  dreary  details. 
But  to  them  this  seems  unkind,  for  their  story  is  sacred; 
and  therefore,  they  go  slowly  on  with  it,  till  we  are  quite 
tired.  I  have  often  hurried  on  a  poor  despondent  crea 
ture  till  I  have  seen  the  uselessness  of  it :  it  is  always  best 
to  let  them  spin  on.  It  does  them  good.  To  tell  out  the 
heart  to  a  patient  listener  is  a  great  relief  to  a  burdened 
spirit,  and  the  heart  must  do  it  in  its  own  way.  Here  is 
a  sweet  assurance,  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  I  may  be 
very  bad,  and  what  I  say  may  be  very  broken,  and  I  may 
groan  a  good  deal,  and  I  may  say  the  same  thing  over 
and  over  again,  and  my  whole  ditty  may  be  very  stupid ; 
but,  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  He  is  in  no  hurry :  he  is 
the  God  of  patience.  He  will  listen  to  my  dreary 
talk,  and  endure  each  gloomy  particular.  I  need  not 
hold  him  as  the  Ancient  Mariner  held  the  wedding  guest 
who  was  unwilling  to  hear  his  weary  rhyme  of  the  sea: 
my  God  will  willingly  listen  to  me  right  through,  from 
beginning  to  end,  groans  and  all.  "My  God  will  hear 
me." 

Persistent  Prayer.— "  Oh !"  say  you,  "I  have  been  pray 
ing."  Yes,  but  a  tree  does  not  always  drop  its  fruit  at 
the  first  shake  you  give  it.  Shake  it  again,  man ;  give  it 


198     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

another  shake!  And  sometimes  when  the  tree  is  loaded, 
and  is  pretty  firm  in  the  earth,  you  have  to  shake  it  to 
and  fro,  and  at  last  you  plant  your  feet,  and  get  hold  of 
it,  and  shake  it  with  might  and  main,  till  you  strain 
every  muscle  and  sinew  to  get  the  fruit  down.  And  that 
is  the  way  to  pray.  Shake  the  tree  of  life  until  the  mercy 
drops  into  your  lap.  Christ  loves  for  men  to  beg  hard. 
You  cannot  be  too  importunate.  That  which  might  be 
disagreeable  to  your  fellow-creatures  when  you  beg  of 
them,  will  be  agreeable  to  Christ.  Oh!  get  ye  to  your 
chambers;  get  ye  to  your  chambers,  ye  that  -have  not 
found  Christ!  To  your  bed-sides,  to  your  little  closets, 
and  "  seek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found ;  call  ye  upon 
him  while  he  is  near !  "  May  the  Spirit  of  God  constrain 
you  to  pray.  May  he  constrain  you  to  continue  in 
prayer.  Jesus  must  hear  you.  The  gate  of  heaven  is 
open  to  the  sturdy  knocker  that  affirms  he  will  not  take 
a  denial. 

Praying  far  Individuals.— I  remember  George  Whitfield 
says  when  he  began  to  pray,  his  first  prayer  was  that  God 
would  convert  those  with  whom  he  used  to  play  at  cards 
and  waste  his  Sundays.  "  And  blessed  be  God,"  he  says, 
"  I  got  every  one  of  them." 

PREACHER 

The  Power  of  a  Definite  Purpose.—  No  man  becomes  emi 
nent  in  any  pursuit  unless  he  gives  himself  up  to  it  with 
all  the  powers  and  passions  of  his  nature  —  body  and 
soul.  Michael  Angelo  had  never  been  so  great  a  painter 
if  his  love  of  art  had  not  become  so  enthusiastic  that  he 
frequently  did  not  take  off  his  garments  to  sleep  by  the 
week  together;  nor  had  Handel  ever  been  such  a  great 
musician  if  his  ardor  for  sounds  celestial  had  not  led  him 
to  use  the  keys  of  his  harpsichord  till,  by  constant  finger- 


PREACHER  199 

ing,  they  became  the  shape  of  spoons.  A  man  must  have 
one  pursuit,  and  consecrate  all  his  powers  to  one  pur 
pose,  if  he  would  excel  or  rise  to  eminence  among  his 
fellows. 

Meditation. —  Meditation  is  to  the  soul  what  oil  was  to  the 
body  of  the  wrestlers.  When  those  old  athletes  went  out 
to  wrestle,  they  always  took  care  before  they  went  to 
oil  themselves  well  —  to  make  their  joints  supple  and  fit 
for  labor.  Now,  meditation  makes  the  soul  supple  — 
makes  it  so  that  it  can  use  things  when  they  come  into 
the  mind.  Who  are  the  men  that  can  go  into  a  contro 
versy  and  get  the  mastery?  Why,  the  men  who  meditate 
when  they  are  alone.  Who  are  the  men  that  can  preach? 
Not  those  who  gad  about  and  never  commune  with  their 
own  hearts  alone;  but  those  who  think  earnestly,  as  well 
when  no  one  is  near  them  as  when  there  is  a  crowd  around 
them.  Who  are  the  authors  who  write  your  books,  and 
keep  up  the  constant  supply  of  literature?  They  are 
meditative  men.  They  keep  their  bones  supple  and  their 
limbs  fit  for  exercise  by  continually  bathing  themselves 
in  the  oil  of  meditation.  How  important,  therefore,  is 
meditation  as  a  mental  exercise,  to  have  our  minds  in 
constant  readiness  for  any  service. 

Saved  by  a  Stray  Sermon.—  Many  a  sailor  boy  has  been 
wild,  reckless,  Godless,  Christless,  and  at  last  has  got  into 
a  foreign  hospital.  Ah,  if  his  mother  knew  that  he  was 
down  with  the  yellow  fever,  how  sad  her  mind  would 
be,  for  she  would  conclude  that  her  dear  son  will  die 
away  at  Havana,  or  somewhere,  and  never  come  home 
again.  But  it  is  just  in  that  hospital  that  God  means 
to  meet  with  him.  A  sailor  writes  to  me  something  like 
that.  He  says,  "  My  mother  asked  me  to  read  a  chapter 
every  day,  but  I  never  did.  I  got  into  the  hospital  at 
Havana,  and,  when  I  lay  there,  there  was  a  man  near  to 
me  who  was  dying,  and  he  died  one  night;  but  before  he 


200     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

died  he  said  to  me,  '  Mate,  could  you  come  here?  I  want 
to  speak  to  you.  I  have  got  something  that  is  very 
precious  to  me  here.  I  was  a  wild  fellow,  but  reading 
this  packet  of  sermons  has  brought  me  to  the  Savior, 
and  I  am  dying  with  a  good  hope  through  grace.  Now, 
when  I  am  dead  and  gone,  will  you  take  these  sermons 
and  read  them,  and  may  God  bless  them  to  you.  And 
will  you  write  a  letter  to  the  man  that  preached  and 
printed  those  sermons,  to  tell  him  that  God  blessed  them 
to  my  conversion  and  that  I  hope  he  will  bless  them  to 
yourself  f '  "  It  was  a  packet  of  my  sermons  and  God  did 
bless  them  to  that  young  man  who,  I  have  no  doubt  what 
ever,  went  to  that  hospital  because  there  a  man  who  had 
been  brought  to  Christ  would  hand  to  him  the  words 
which  God  had  blessed  to  himself  and  would  bless  to  his 
friend.  You  do  not  know,  dear  mother,  you  do  not  know. 
The  worst  thing  that  can  happen  to  a  young  man  in  this 
world  is  sometimes  ^he  best  thing  that  can  happen  to 
him. 

The  True  Preacher.—  In  the  old  romance,  they  tell  us  that 
at  a  gate  of  a  certain  noble  hall  there  hung  a  horn,  and 
none  could  blow  that  horn  but  the  true  heir  to  the  castle 
and  its  wide  domains.  Many  tried  it.  They  could  make 
sweet  music  on  other  instruments;  they  could  wake  the 
echoes  by  other  bugles;  but  that  horn  was  mute,  let  them 
blow  as  they  might.  At  last,  the  true  heir  came,  and 
when  he  set  his  lips  to  the  horn,  shrill  was  the  sound 
and  indisputable  his  claim.  He  who  can  preach  Christ 
is  the  true  minister.  Let  him  preach  anything  else  in 
the  world,  he  has  not  proved  his  calling;  but  if  he  shall 
preach  Jesus  and  the  resurrection,  he  is  in  the  apostolical 
succession.  If  Christ  crucified  be  the  great  delight  of  his 
soul,  the  very  marrow  of  his  teaching,  the  fatness  of  his 
ministry,  he  has  proved  his  calling  as  an  ambassador  of 
Christ. 


PREACHER  201 

Magnifying  the  Ministry.— We  find  the  most  eminent  of 
God's  servants  frequently  magnifying  their  office  as 
preachers  of  the  gospel.  Whitfield  was  wont  to  call  his 
pulpit  his  throne;  and  when  he  stood  upon  some  rising 
knoll  to  preach  to  the  thousands  gathered  in  the  open 
air,  he  was  more  happy  than  if  he  had  assumed  the  im 
perial  purple,  for  he  ruled  the  hearts  of  men  more  glori 
ously  than  doth  a  king.  When  Dr.  Carey  was  laboring 
in  India,  and  his  son  Felix  had  accepted  the  office  of 
ambassador  to  the  king  of  Burmah,  Carey  said,  "  Felix 
has  drivelled  into  an  ambassador "—  as  tho  he  looked 
upon  the  highest  earthly  office  as  an  utter  degradation 
if  for  it  the  minister  of  the  gospel  forsook  his  lofty  vo 
cation.  Paul  blesses  God  that  this  great  grace  was  given 
to  him,  that  he  might  preach  among  the  Gentiles  the  un 
searchable  riches  of  Christ ;  he  looked  upon  it  not  as  toil, 
but  as  a  grace. 

Christ  in  the  Sermon, —  A  young  man  had  been  preaching 
in  the  presence  of  a  venerable  divine,  and  after  he  had 
done  he  went  to  the  old  minister,  and  said,  "  What  do 
you  think  of  my  sermon?"  "A  very  poor  sermon,  in 
deed,"  said  he.  "  A  poor  sermon  ?  "  said  the  young  man, 
"  it  took  me  a  long  time  to  study  it."  "  Ay,  no  doubt  of 
it."  "Why,  did  you  not  think  my  explanation  of  the 
text  a  very  good  one?  "  "  Oh,  yes,"  said  the  old  preacher, 
"  very  good,  indeed."  "  Well,  then,  why  do  you  say  it  is 
a  poor  sermon?  Didn't  you  think  the  metaphors  were 
appropriate,  and  the  arguments  conclusive  ? "  "  Yes, 
they  were  very  good  as  far  as  that  goes,  but  still  it  was 
a  very  poor  sermon."  "  Will  you  tell  me  why  you  think 
it  a  poor  sermon  ?  "  "  Because,"  said  he,  "  there  was  no 
Christ  in  it."  "  Well,"  said  the  young  man,  "  Christ  was 
not  in  the  text ;  we  are  not  to  be  preaching  Christ  always, 
we  must  preach  what  is  in  the  text."  So  the  old  man 
said,  "  don't  you  know,  young  man,  that  from  every  town, 


202     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

and  every  village,  and  every  little  hamlet  in  England, 
wherever  it  may  be,  there  is  a  road  to  London  1 "  "  Yes," 
said  the  young  man.  "  Ah !  "  said  the  old  divine,  "  and 
so  from  every  text  of  Scripture,  there  is  a  road  to  the 
metropolis  of  the  Scriptures,  that  is,  Christ.  And,  my 
dear  brother,  your  business  is,  when  you  get  to  a  text, 
to  say,  'Now  what  is  the  road  to  Christ?*  and  then 
preach  a  sermon,  running  along  the  road  towards  the 
great  metropolis  —  Christ.  And,"  said  he,  "  I  have  never 
yet  found  a  text  that  had  not  got  a  road  to  Christ  in  it, 
and  if  ever  I  do  find  one  that  has  not  got  a  road  to  Christ 
in  it,  I  will  make  one;  I  will  go  over  hedge  and  ditch  but 
I  would  get  at  my  Master,  for  the  sermon  cannot  do  any 
good  unless  there  is  a  savor  of  Christ  in  it." 
Lying  on  the  Promises.— 

None  but  Jesus!     None  but  Jesus 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good!  " 

It  is  simple  reliance  on  him  which  saves.  The  negro 
said,  "  Massa,  I  fall  flat  on  de  promise ; "  so  if  you  fall 
flat  on  the  promise  of  Jesus,  you  shall  not  find  him  fail 
you;  he  will  bind  up  your  heart,  and  make  an  end  to  the 
days  of  your  mourning. 

Sermons  Born  of  Feeling. —  It  is  a  long  time  since  I  have 
made  a  good  speech  at  a  public  meeting;  but  I  do  re 
member  doing  it  once.  I  stepped  out,  as  one  of  the 
speakers  was  delivering  a  very,  very  pretty  oration,  and 
I  went  into  a  neighboring  house  to  speak  with  a  woman 
who  wished  to  join  the  church.  It  was  not  in  London. 
When  I  stepped  into  the  house,  there  was  the  husband 
beastly  drunk;  he  had  got  his  wife  up  in  a  corner,  and 
was  with  all  his  might  trying  to  bruise  her  face,  and  tear 
her  arms  with  his  nails,  till  the  blood  flowed  from  her 
arms  and  face.  Two  or  three  rushed  in,  and  dragged  him 
away.  She  said  she  had  endeavored  with  all  her  meek- 


PREACHER  203 

ness  to  persuade  him  to  allow  her  to  go  to  the  house  of 
God  that  night ;  and  the  only  reason  why  he  ill-treated  her 
was,  because  he  said  she  would  always  be  going  to  that 
place  of  worship.  And  when  I  had  seen  this  sight,  and 
looked  on  the  poor  woman,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  I  went 
into  the  place,  and  spoke  like  a  man  who  had  got  his  face 
and  heart,  and  whole  body,  full  of  fire.  I  could  not  help 
it :  I  was  all  on  flame  against  the  sin  of  drunkenness,  and 
sought  with  all  my  might  to  urge  the  members  of  the 
church  to  do  all  they  could  to  scatter  the  light  of  the 
Gospel  into  a  neighborhod  which  was  so  dark  and  black 
and  filthy  and  abandoned.  And  I  think  it  would  do  all  of 
us  good,  when  we  preach,  if  we  were  sometimes  to  be 
dragged  through  some  of  the  worst  parts  of  London,  to 
let  us  see  the  wickedness  of  it. 

Keep  the  Light  Burning.— Truly,  the  minister  of  Christ 
will  feel  like  the  old  keeper  of  Eddystone  lighthouse ;  life 
was  failing  fast,  but  summoning  all  his  strength,  he  crept 
round  once  more  to  trim  the  lights  before  he  died.  0 
may  the  Holy  Spirit  enable  us  to  keep  the  beacon-fire 
blazing,  to  warn  you  of  the  rocks,  shoals,  and  quick 
sands,  which  surround  you.  and  may  we  ever  guide  you 
to  Jesus. 

A  Preacher  Converted.— You  remember  Rowland's  HilPs 
Story  in  "  The  Village  Dialogues,"  about  Mr.  Merriman. 
Mr.  Merriman  was  a  sad  scapegrace  of  a  preacher;  he 
was  to  be  seen  at  every  fair  and  revel,  and  used  seldom 
to  be  found  in  his  pulpit  when  he  should  have  been;  but 
when  he  was  converted,  he  began  to  preach  with  tears 
running  down  his  face  —  and  how  the  church  began  to 
be  crowded!  The  squire  would  not  go  and  hear  any  of 
that  stuff,  and  locked  up  his  pew;  and  Mr.  Merriman  had 
a  little  ladder  made  outside  the  door,  as  he  did  not  wish  to 
break  the  door  open;  and  the  people  used  to  sit  on  the 
steps,  up  one  side  and  down  the  other,  so  that  it  made 


204     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

twice  as  much  room  for  the  people  who  chose  to  come  as 
there  was  before. 

A  Child's  Religion.— A  dear  little  girl,  some  five  or  six 
years  old,  a  true  lover  of  Jesus,  requested  of  her  mother 
that  she  might  join  the  church.  The  mother  told  her 
she  was  too  young.  The  poor  little  thing  was  grieved 
exceedingly;  and  after  awhile  the  mother,  who  saw  that 
piety  was  in  her  heart,  spoke  to  the  minister  on  the 
subject.  The  minister  talked  to  the  child,  and  said  to  the 
mother,  "  I  am  thoroughly  convinced  of  her  piety,  but  I 
cannot  take  her  into  the  church,  she  is  too  young."  When 
the  child  heard  that,  a  strange  gloom  passed  over  her 
face;  and  the  next  morning  when  her  mother  went  to  her 
little  bed  she  lay  with  a  pearly  tear  or  two  on  each  eye, 
dead  for  very  grief;  her  heart  was  broken,  because  she 
could  not  follow  her  Savior,  and  do  as  he  had  bidden  her. 
I  would  not  have  murdered  that  child  for  a  world !  Take 
care  how  you  treat  young  piety.  Be  tender  of  it.  Be 
lieve  that  children  can  be  saved  as  much  as  yourselves. 
When  you  see  the  young  heart  brought  to  the  Savior, 
don't  stand  by  and  speak  harshly,  mistrusting  eveiything. 
It  is  better  sometimes  to  be  deceived  than  to  be  the  means 
of  ruining  one.  God  send  to  his  people  a  more  firm 
belief  that  little  buds  of  grace  are  worthy  of  all  care. 

Sad  Results  of  Careless  Conduct. —  There  was  a  young 
minister  once  preaching  very  earnestly  in  a  certain  chapel, 
and  he  had  to  walk  some  four  or  five  miles  to  his  home 
along  a  country  road  after  service.  A  young  man,  who 
had  been  deeply  impressed  under  the  sermon,  requested 
the  privilege  of  walking  with  the  minister,  with  an  earnest 
hope  that  he  might  get  an  opportunity  of  telling  out  his 
feelings  to  him,  and  obtaining  some  word  of  guidance  or 
comfort.  Instead  of  that,  the  young  minister  all  the  way 
along  told  the  most  singular  tales  to  those  who  were  with 
him,  causing  loud  roars  of  laughter,  and  even  relating 


PREACHER  205 

tales  which  bordered  upon  the  indecorous.  He  stopped 
at  a  certain  house,  and  this  young  man  with  him,  and  the 
whole  evening  was  spent  in  frivolity  and  foolish  talking. 
Some  years  after,  when  the  minister  had  grown  old,  he 
was  sent  for  to  the  bedside  of  a  dying  man.  He  hastened 
thither  with  a  heart  desirous  to  do  good.  He  was  re 
quested  to  sit  down  at  the  bedside;  and  the  dying  man, 
looking  at  him,  and  regarding  him  most  closely,  said  to 
him,  "  Do  you  remember  preaching  in  such  and  such  a 
village  on  such  an  occasion ?  "  "I  do,"  said  the  min 
ister.  "  I  was  one  of  your  hearers,"  said  the  man,  "  and 
I  was  deeply  impressed  by  the  sermon."  "  Thank  God 
for  that,"  said  the  minister.  "  Stop ! "  said  the  man, 
"  don't  thank  God  till  you  have  heard  the  whole  story ; 
you  will  have  reason  to  alter  your  tone  before  I  have 
done."  The  minister  changed  countenance,  but  he  little 
guessed  what  would  be  the  full  extent  of  that  mail's 
testimony.  Said  he,  "  Sir,  do  you  remember,  after  you 
had  finished  that  earnest  sermon,  I  with  some  others 
walked  home  with  you?  I  was  sincerely  desirous  of 
being  led  in  the  right  path  that  night;  but  I  heard  you 
speak  in  such  a  strain  of  levity,  and  with  so  much  coarse 
ness,  too,  that  I  went  outside  the  house,  while  you  were 
sitting  down  to  your  evening  meal;  I  stamped  my  foot 
upon  the  ground ;  I  said  that  you  were  a  liar,  that  Chris 
tianity  was  a  falsehood;  that  if  you  could  pretend  to  be 
so  in  earnest  about  it  in  the  pulpit,  and  then  come  down 
and  talk  like  that,  the  whole  thing  must  be  a  sham;  and 
I  have  been  an  infidel,"  said  he,  "a  confirmed  infidel, 
from  that  day  to  this.  But  I  am  not  an  infidel  at  this 
moment;  I  know  better;  I  am  dying,  and  I  am  about  to 
be  damned ;  and  at  the  bar  of  God  I  will  lay  my  damna 
tion  to  your  charge;  my  blood  is  on  your  head;"—  and 
with  a  dreadful  shriek,  and  one  demoniacal  glance  at  the 
trembling  minister,  he  shut  his  eyes  and  died. 


206     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

A  Sermon  That  Went  to  the  Mark.— - 1  have  heard  of  a 
woman,  who,  when  she  was  asked  what  she  remembered 
of  the  minister's  sermon,  said,  "I  don't  recollect  any 
thing  of  it.  It  was  about  short  weights  and  bad  meas 
ures,  and  I  didn't  recollect  anything  but  to  go  home  and 
burn  the  bushel." 

Hiding  Behind  Christ. —  I  recollect  a  story  told  by  William 
Dawson,  whom  our  Wesleyan  friends  used  to  call  Billy 
Dawson,  one  of  the  best  preachers  that  ever  entered  a 
pulpit.  He  once  gave  out  as  his  text,  "  Through  this 
man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  When 
he  had  given  out  his  text  he  dropped  down  to  the  bottom 
of  the  pulpit,  so  that  nothing  could  be  seen  of  him,  only 
there  was  a  voice  heard  saying,  "Not  the  man  in  the 
pulpit,  he  is  out  of  sight,  but  the  Man  in  the  Book. 
The  Man  described  in  the  Book  is  the  Man  through  whom 
is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins." 

Too  Much  Red  Tape.—  Mr.  Rowland  Hill  was  said  to  have 
ridden  on  the  back  of  all  order  and  decorum.  "No," 
he  said,  "  I  cannot  ride  on  the  back  of  two  horses,  but 
I  have  two  horses  to  my  carriage,  and  I  have  called  one 
of  them  '  Order/  and  the  other  '  Decorum/  to  make  the 
report  come  as  nearly  right  as  possible."  Order  and 
Decorum  were  never  put  to  a  better  use  than  when  they 
drew  Mr.  Rowland  Hill  from  town  to  town  preaching 
the  gospel;  and  I,  for  one,  am  glad  that  he  never  took 
those  horses  into  the  pulpit.  He  was  just  as  disorderly 
and  indecorous  as  a  Christian  man  ought  to  be  —  that 
is  to  say,  he  was  perfectly  natural,  and  spoke  the  truth 
from  his  heart,  and  men  that  heard  it  felt  the  power  of 
it;  and  so  he  became  a  blessing  to  this  part  of  London, 
and  indeed,  to  the  whole  world.  Shake  yourself  up  a 
little,  my  brother.  If  you  are  too  precise  may  the  Lord 
set  you  on  fire,  and  consume  your  bonds  of  red  tape! 
If  you  have  become  so  improperly  proper  that  you  cau^ 


PREACHER  207 

not  commit  a  proper  impropriety,  then  pray  God  to  help 
you  to  be  less  proper,  for  there  are  many  who  will  never 
be  saved  by  your  instrumentality  while  you  study  pro 
priety. 

A  Word  in  Season. —  A  smith  was  blowing  his  bellows  one 
day,  when  the  saintly  McCheyne  stepped  into  the  smithy 
for  shelter  from  a  shower  of  rain.  As  the  smith  was 
blowing  the  coals  and  they  were  at  a  great  heat,  he 
simply  said  to  him,  "What  does  that  fire  make  you 
think  of  f  "  He  never  waited  for  an  answer,  but  went 
his  way.  It  made  the  smith  think  of  the  wrath  to  come, 
and  it  made  him  flee  from  it  too.  We  cannot  tell  what 
may  be,  in  the  gracious  providence  of  God,  the  means 
of  bringing  you  to  decision.  He  that  used  an  angel's 
hand  with  Lot,  can  use  a  well-timed  observation  with 
you.  Therefore,  I  urge  all  Christian  people  that  they 
use  every  opportunity,  and  study  to  season  their  con 
versation  with  grace.  Sow  beside  all  waters,  for  you 
know  which  may  prosper,  this  or  that. 

A  Dumb  Dog.—  I  have  heard  of  a  minister  who  preached 
for  several  years  before  he  was  converted,  and  when 
converted  he  became  a  very  earnest  preacher  of  the  gos 
pel;  but  one  day  as  he  rode  along  the  street  he  was  ob 
served  to  stop  and  cane  a  dog  which  was  lying  in  front 
of  a  door.  When  they  said  to  him,  "  Mr.  McPhayle,  why 
did  you  beat  the  dog?  "  he  said,  "He  was  so  exactly  like 
myself,  lying  in  the  sun  sleeping  —  a  dumb  dog  that 
didn't  bark  —  that  I  could  not  but  give  him  a  touch  of 
the  rod;  tho  I  meant  it  all  the  while  for  myself." 

Fishing  but  Never  Catching.—  If  a  minister  can  be  content 
to  go  on  preaching  without  converts  or  baptisms,  the 
Lord  have  mercy  upon  his  miserable  soul!  Can  he  be 
a  minister  of  Christ  who  does  not  win  souls?  A  man 
might  as  well  be  a  huntsman  and  never  take  any  prey, 
a  fisherman  and  always  come  home  with  empty  nets,  a 


208     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

husbandman  and  never  reap  a  harvest!  I  wonder  at 
some  people's  complacency.  When  God  never  blesses 
them  they  never  fail  to  bless  themselves.  "  Divine  sover 
eignty  withholds  the  increase,"  they  say.  But  it  really 
is  their  idleness  that  tends  to  poverty.  The  promise  of 
God  is  to  the  diligent,  not  the  indolent.  Let  Paul  plant, 
and  let  Apollos  water,  God  will  give  the  increase.  It 
may  not  come  to-day,  nor  to-morrow,  nor  the  next  day, 
but  come  it  must.  The  word  cannot  return  unto  God 
void. 

A  Faithful  Messenger.—  Do  you  send  a  servant  to  the  door 
of  a  neighbor  with  a  message  ?  If  the  person  at  the  door 
should  be  angry,  the  servant  would  say,  "  It  is  of  no  use 
being  angry  with  me;  you  must  be  angry  with  my  master, 
for  I  have  given  you  the  message  just  as  he  gave  it  to 
me."  And  if  they  should  be  angry  with  him,  he  would 
say,  "  I  would  much  rather  that  the  stranger  at  the  door 
should  be  angiy  with  me  for  telling  the  message  than 
that  my  master  should  be  angry  with  me  for  keeping  it 
back,  for  to  my  master  I  stand  or  fall."  I  think  the 
minister  of  God,  if  he  has  preached  faithfully,  may  say, 
"  Well,  I  have  delivered  only  what  my  Master  told  me ; 
if  you  are  angry  with  me  you  must  remember  that  you 
ought  to  be  angry  with  my  Master,  for  it  was  my  Mas 
ter's  message,  and  it  is  better  for  you  to  be  angry  with 
me  than  for  my  Master  to  be  angry  with  me." 

The  Preacher  God's  Messenger  to  the  Conscience. —  I  am 
afraid,  there  are  some  ministers  who  hardly  think  that 
the  gospel  is  intended  to  come  personally  home  to  the 
people.  They  talk,  as  I  read  of  one  the  other  day,  who 
said,  that  when  he  preached  to  sinners  he  did  not  like 
to  look  the  congregation  in  the  face,  for  fear  they  should 
think  he  meant  to  be  personal,  so  he  looked  up  at  the 
ventilator,  because  there  was  no  fear  then  of  any  indi 
vidual  catching  his  eye.  Oh !  that  fear  of  man  has  been 


PRIDE  209 


the  ruin  of  many  ministers.  They  never  dared  to  preach 
right  at  the  people.  We  have  heard  of  sermons  being 
preached  before  this  and  that  honorable  company;  but 
preaching  sermons  before  people  is  not  God's  way;  we 
must  preach  sermons  at  the  people,  directly  to  them,- to 
show  that  it  is  not  the  waving  of  a  sword  in  the  air  like 
a  juggler's  sport,  but  it  is  the  getting  the  sword  right 
into  the  conscience  and  the  heart.  This,  I  take  it,  is 
the  true  mission  of  every  minister  of  Christ.  It  is  said 
of  Whitfcfield,  that  if  you  were  the  farthest  away  from 
him  in  a  throng,  where  you  could  but  hear  the  sound  of 
his  voice,  you  felt  persuaded  that  he  meant  to  speak  to 
you;  and  of  Rowland  Hill  it  is  said,  that  if  you  got  into 
Surrey  Chapel  you  could  not  hide  in  a  corner  there;  tho 
you  should  manage  to  get  into  a  back  seat,  or  were 
squeezed  tight  into  the  windows,  you  would  still  feel  per 
suaded  that  Mr.  Hill  was  addressing  you,  and  that  he 
had  singled  you  out  for  his  expostulations.  Surely  this 
is  the  perfection  of  preaching. 

PRIDE 

Insidious  Flattery. —  Praise  is  a  thing  we  all  love.  I  met 
with  a  man  the  other  day  who  said  he  was  impervious  to 
flattery;  I  was  walking  with  him  at  the  time,  and  turn 
ing  round  rather  sharply,  I  said,  "  At  any  rate,  sir,  you 
seem  to  have  a  high  gift  in  flattering  yourself,  for  you 
are  really  doing  so,  in  saying  you  are  impervious  to 
flattery."  "You  cannot  flatter  me,"  he  said.  I  replied, 
"  I  can,  if  I  like  to  try ;  and  perhaps  may  do  so  before 
the  day  is  out."  I  found  I  could  not  flatter  him  di 
rectly,  so  I  began  by  saying  what  a  fine  child  that  was 
of  his;  and  he  drank  it  in  as  a  precious  draught;  and 
when  I  praised  this  thing  and  that  thing  belonging  to 
him,  I  could  see  that  he  was  very  easily  flattered;  not 
directly,  but  indirectly.  We  are  all  pervious  to  flat- 


aio     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

tery;  we  like  the  soothing  cordial,  only  it  must  not  be 
labeled  flattery;  for  we  have  a  religious  abhorrence  of 
flattery  if  it  be  so  called ;  call  it  by  any  other  name,  and 
we  drink  it  in,  even  as  the  ox  drinketh  in  water. 

Wicked  Pride.— I  have  heard  of  a  lady  who  was  visited 
by  a  minister  on  her  deathbed,  and  she  said  to  him,  "  I 
want  to  ask  you  one  question,  now  I  am  about  to  die." 
"Well,"  said  the  minister,  "what  is  it?"  "Oh!"  said 
she,  in  a  very  affected  way,  "I  want  to  know  if  there 
are  two  places  in  heaven,  because  I  could  not  bear  that 
Betsy  in  the  kitchen  should  be  in  heaven  along  with 
me,  she  is  so  unrefined?"  The  minister  turned  round 
and  said,  "  0 !  don't  trouble  yourself  about  that,  madam. 
There  is  no  fear  of  that;  for,  until  you  get  rid  of  your 
accursed  pride,  you  will  never  enter  heaven  at  all."  We 
must  all  get  rid  of  our  pride.  We  must  come  down  and 
stand  on  an  equality  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  see  in 
every  man  a  brother,  before  we  can  hope  to  be  found  in 
glory." 

Danger  of  Self  Confidence.—  Did  you  ever  hear  of  a  cap 
tain  of  a  vessel  driven  about  by  rough  winds  who  wanted 
anchorage  and  tried  to  find  it  on  board  his  vessel?  He 
desires  to  place  his  anchor  somewhere  on  board  the  ship 
where  it  will  prove  a  hold-fast.  He  hangs  it  at  the 
prow,  but  still  the  ship  drives:  he  exhibits  the  anchor 
upon  deck,  but  that  does  not  hold  the  vessel;  at  last  he 
puts  it  down  into  the  hold;  but  with  no  better  success. 
Why,  man  alive,  anchors  do  not  hold  as  long  as  they 
are  on  board  a  ship.  They  must  be  thrown  into  the  deep, 
and  then  they  will  get  a  grip  of  the  sea-bottom,  and 
hold  the  vessel  against  wind  and  tide.  As  long  as  ever 
you  have  confidence  in  yourselves,  you  are  like  a  man 
who  keeps  his  anchor  on  board  his  boat,  and  you  will 
never  come  to  a  resting-place.  Over  with  your  faith  into 
the  great  deeps  of  eternal  love  and  power,  and  trust  in 


PRIDE  an 


the  infinitely  faithful  One.  Then  shall  you  be  glad  be 
cause  your  heart  is  quiet.  Stay  yourself  upon  your  God, 
because  he  commands  you  so  to  do.  Do  not  dare  to 
hesitate. 

Need  of  God's  Help. —  In  olden  times  a  warrior  was  going 
forth  to  battle  for  his  country,  and  a  certain  preacher  of 
the  word  said  to  him,  "  My  prayer  is  made  continually 
for  you  that  you  may  be  victorious."  The  warrior,  in 
his  philosophic  doubt,  replied  that  he  saw  no  use  in  the 
promised  prayers;  for  if  God  had  determined  to  give 
him  victory,  he  would  have  it  without  prayer;  and  if 
fate  had  decreed  that  he  should  be  defeated,  prayers 
could  not  prevent  it.  To  which  the  godly  man  very 
properly  replied,  "  Then  take  off  your  helmet  and  your 
coat  of  mail,  and  hang  up  your  sword  and  buckler.  Go 
not  forth  to  battle  at  all  with  your  men-at-arms;  for, 
indeed,  if  the  Lord  is  to  conquer  your  enemies  he  can 
do  it  without  your  weapons,  and  if  lie  will  not  prosper 
you,  it  will  then  be  in  vain  for  you  to  mount  your  war- 
horse." 

Danger  of  Pride.—  I  remember  a  story  told  me  by  a  dear 
brother,  who  is  present  with  us  now.  A  tradesman  who 
held  office  in  the  church  asked  him  for  a  loan  of  money. 
Tho  rather  inconvenient  he  was  about  to  comply,  and 
would  have  done  so  had  not  some  such  inducement  as 
this  been  offered  — "  You  know  you  may  safely  advance 
this  money  to  me,  for  I  am  incorruptible.  I  am  not 
young;  I  am  past  temptation."  Thereupon  my  friend 
promptly  declined,  as  he  did  not  like  the  security.  The 
result  justified  his  shrewdness.  At  that  very  time  the 
borrower  knew  he  was  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy,  and, 
ere  long,  was  actually  a  bankrupt,  and  yet  he  could 
pretend  to  say  he  was  above  temptation.  Above  all, 
avoid  those  men  who  think  themselves  immaculate,  and 
never  fear  a  fall. 


212     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 


THE  PROMISES 

Pleading  God's  Promises. —  Some  one  has  given  you  a 
promise,  that  if  you  are  in  need  and  go  to  him,  he  will 
give  whatever  you  want.  You  go  up  to  his  door,  you 
knock  timidly;  and  when  he  comes  to  meet  you,  you 
rush  into  the  street  and  hide  yourself,  for  you  are 
ashamed  that  he  should  see  you.  Driven  by  necessity, 
however,  you  knock  again;  at  last  he  comes,  and  you 
stand  trembling  before  him.  "  Well,"  says  he,  "  what 
do  you  want  ? "  "  You  have  given  me  a  promise,  sir, 
that  when  I  am  in  need  you  will  do  so-and-so  for  me, 
and  I  really  do  not  believe  it.  I  have  no  confidence  in 
you,  and  I  do  not  like  to  ask."  There  would  be  nothing 
honorable  in  that  to  any  man.  How  far  different  was 
the  example  of  Alexander's  courtier.  The  king  said  to 
him,  "  I  will  give  to  thee  whatever  thou  requesteth ; " 
and  the  man  asked  such  a  gift  as  almost  emptied  Alex 
ander's  coffers.  "  Ay,"  says  the  monarch,  "  it  was  a 
great  thing  for  him  to  ask,  but  it  is  only  a  little  thing 
for  Alexander  to  give.  I  like  the  man's  confidence  in 
me,  using  my  word  to  its  fullest  extent."  Now  when  the 
believer  goes  to  his  closet  and  bows  there  with  his  feeble 
knee,  and  asks  God  to  bless  him,  and  does  not  half 
believe  that  he  will,  he  dishonors  God.  But  when  a  man 
goes  up  to  his  chamber,  saying  in  his  heart,  "  There  is 
something  that  I  want,  and  I  am  going  to  get  it;"  and 
he  falls  on  his  knees,  and  cries,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  all 
things:  thou  knowest  that  such  a  thing  is  necessary  to 
me ;  there  is  thy  promise ;  '  do  as  thou  hast  said,'  Lord ; 
I  know  thou  wilt  give  it  me."  And  when  he  rises  from 
his  knees,  and  goes  down  and  says  to  his  friend,  "  The 
blessing  will  come;  I  have  asked  for  it;  I  have  prayed 
the  prayer  of  faith,  and  God  will  hear  me;"  why,  such 
a  man  honors  God.  I  would  remind  you  again  of  a 


THE  PROMISES  213 

great  proof  of  all  this.  Look  at  Mr.  Miiller,  at  Ashley- 
down,  near  Bristol.  Could  he  have  built  that  house  for 
orphans  if  he  had  a  weak  hand  and  a  feeble  knee?  No. 
But  he  had  a  strong  hand ;  he  meant  to  serve  his  God  by 
feeding  and  clothing  orphans.  On  the  other  hand  he 
had  a  strong  knee.  "  Lord,"  he  said,  "  I  will  do  this 
enterprise  —  give  me  the  means  to  do  it."  And  he  went  to 
God,  and  did  not  doubt  that  he  would  do  it.  And,  lo! 
thousands  have  rolled  into  his  treasury,  and  he  has  never 
known  lack;  and  now,  seven  hundred  children  live  under 
hio  care,  and  are  fed  and  clothed  to  the  honor  of  God. 
Let  us  also  seek  to  have  strong  hands  and  mighty  knees, 
and  so  shall  we  honor  God. 

God  Speaking  Through  the  Preacher.— A  City  Mission 
ary,  when  going  round  the  West  end  of  the  town,  met  a 
poor  man,  of  whom  he  asked  this  question :  "  Do  you 
know  Mr.  Spurgeon?"  He  found  him  reading  a  ser 
mon.  "Yes,"  he  said,  "I  have  every  reason  to  know 
him;  I  have  been  to  hear  him,  and  under  God's  grace  I 
have  become  a  new  man.  But,"  said  he,  "  shall  I  tell 
you  how  it  was?  I  went  to  the  Music  Hall,  and  took  my 
seat  in  the  middle  of  the  place,  and  the  man  looked  at  me 
as  if  he  knew  me,  and  deliberately  told  the  congregation 
that  I  was  a  shoemaker,  and  that  I  sold  shoes  on  a  Sun 
day;  and  I  did,  sir.  But,  sir,  I  should  not  have  minded 
that;  but  he  said  I  took  ninepence  the  Sunday  before, 
and  that  there  was  fourpence  profit;  and  so  I  did  take 
ninepence,  and  fourpence  was  just  the  profit,  and  how 
he  should  know  that  I'm  sure  I  cannot  tell.  It  struck 
me  it  was 'God  had  spoken  to  my  soul  through  him;  and 
I  shut  my  shop  last  Sunday,  and  was  afraid  to  open 
it  and  go  there,  lest  he  should  split  about  me  again."  I 
could  tell  as  many  as  a  dozen  authentic  stories  of  cases 
that  have  happened  in  this  Hall,  where  I  have  deliber 
ately  pointed  at  somebody,  without  the  slightest  knowl- 


214     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

edge  of  the  person,  or  ever  having  in  the  least  degree 
any  inkling  or  idea  that  what  I  said  was  right,  except 
that  I  was  moved  thereto  by  the  Spirit;  and  so  striking 
has  been  the  description,  that  the  persons  have  gone 
away  and  said,  "  Come,  see  a  man  that  told  me  all  things 
that  ever  I  did:  he  was  sent  of  God  to  my  soul,  beyond 
a  doubt,  or  else  he  could  not  have  painted  my  case  so 
clearly." 

God's  Promises.—  «  The  Lord  is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not 
want."  Climb  up  that  creaking  staircase  to  the  top  of 
thy  house,  lie  down  on  thy  hard  mattress,  wrap  thyself 
round  with  a  blanket,  look  out  for  the  winter  when  hard 
times  are  coming,  and  say,  "What  shall  I  do?"  But, 
then,  just  hum  over  to  thyself  these  words,  "  The  Lord 
is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want."  That  will  be  like 
the  hush  of  a  lullaby  to  your  poor  soul,  and  you  will  soon 
sink  to  slumber.  Go,  thou  business  man,  to  thy  count 
ing-house  again,  after  this  little  hor.r  of  recreation  in 
God's  house,  again  to  cast  up  those  wearisome  books. 
Thou  art  saying,  "  How  about  business  ?  These  prices 
may  be  my  rum.  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  When  thou  hast 
cast  up  thine  accounts,  put  this  down  against  all  thy 
fears,  and  see  what  a  balance  it  will  leave  — "  The  Lord 
is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want."  There  is  another 
man.  He  does  not  lack  anything,  but  still  he  feels  that 
some  great  loss  may  injure  him  considerably.  Go  and 
write  this  down  in  thy  cash-book.  If  thou  hast  made 
out  thy  cash-account  truly,  put  this  down :  "  The  Lord 
is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want;"  put  that  down  for 
something  better  than  pounds,  shillings  and  pence,  some 
thing  better  than  gold  and  silver.  "  The  Lord  is  my 
shepherd,  I  shall  not  want."  "  Ah !  "  says  the  cold,  cal 
culating  man,  "your  promise  is  not  worth  having,  sir." 
No;  it  would  not,  if  it  were  my  promise.  But  fortu 
nately  it  is  not.  It  is  God's  promise. 


PROPHECY  215 


PROPHECY 

A  Marvelous  Prophecy.—  I  wish  to  bear  a  personal  testi 
mony  by  narrating  an  incident  in  my  own  life.  I  have 
been  preaching  in  Essex  this  week,  and  I  took  the  op 
portunity  to  visit  the  place  where  my  grandfather 
preached  so  long,  and  where  I  spent  my  earliest  days. 
Last  Wednesday  was  to  me  a  day  in  which  I  walked 
like  a  man  in  a  dream.  Everybody  seemed  bound  to 
recall  some  event  or  other  of  my  childhood.  What  a 
story  of  divine  love  and  mercy  did  it  bring  before  my 
mind!  Among  other  things,  I  sat  down  in  a  place  that 
must  ever  be  sacred  to  me.  There  stood  in  my  grand 
father's  manse  garden  two  arbors  made  of  yew  trees,  cut 
into  sugar-loaf  fashion.  Tho  the  old  manse  has  given 
way  to  a  new  one,  and  the  old  chapel  has  gone  also,  yet 
the  yew  trees  nourish  as  aforetime.  I  sat  down  in  the 
right  hand  arbor  and  bethought  me  of  what  had  hap 
pened  there  many  years  ago.  When  I  was  a  young 
child  staying  with  my  grandfather,  there  came  to  preach 
in  the  village  Mr.  Knill,  who  had  been  a  missionary  at 
St.  Petersburg,  and  a  mighty  preacher  of  the  gospel. 
He  came  to  preach  for  the  London  Missionary  Society, 
and  arrived  on  the  Saturday  at  the  manse.  He  was  a 
great  soul-winner,  and  he  soon  spied  out  the  boy.  He 
said  to  me,  "  Where  do  you  sleep  ?  for  I  want  to  call  you 
up  in  the  morning."  I  showed  him  my  little  room.  At 
six  o'clock  he  called  me  up,  and  we  went  into  that  arbor. 
There,  in  the  sweetest  way,  he  told  me  of  the  love  of 
Jesus,  and  of  the  blessedness  of  trusting  in  him  and 
loving  him  in  our  childhood.  With  many  a  story  he 
preached  Christ  to  me,  and  told  me  how  good  God  had 
been  to  him,  and  then  he  prayed  that  I  might  know  the 
Lord  and  serve  him.  He  knelt  down  in  that  arbor  and 
prayed  for  me  with  his  arms  about  my  neck.  He  did  not 


216     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

seem  content  unless  I  kept  with  him  in  the  interval  be 
tween  the  services,  and  he  heard  my  childish  talk  with 
patient  love.  On  Monday  morning  he  did  as  on  the 
Sabbath,  and  again  on  Tuesday.  Three  times  he  taught 
me  and  prayed  with  me,  and  before  he  had  to  leave, 
my  grandfather  had  come  back  from  the  place  where  he 
had  gone  to  preach,  and  all  the  family  were  gathered 
to  morning  prayer.  Then,  in  the  presence  of  them  all, 
Mr.  Knill  took  me  on  his  knee,  and  said,  "  This  child 
will  one  day  preach  the  gospel,  and  he  will  preach  it  to 
great  multitudes.  I  am  persuaded  that  he  will  preach 
in  the  chapel  of  Rowland  Hill,  where  (I  think  he  said) 
I  am  now  the  minister."  He  spoke  very  solemnly,  and 
called  upon  all  present  to  witness  what  he  said.  Then 
he  gave  me  sixpence  as  a  reward  if  I  would  learn  the 
hymn, 

"  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way 
His   wonders    to   perform." 

I  was  made  to  promise  that  when  I  preached  in  Row 
land  Hill's  Chapel  that  hymn  should  be  sung.  Think  of 
that  as  a  promise  from  a  child!  Would  it  ever  be  other 
than  an  idle  dream1?  Years  flew  by.  After  I  had  begun 
for  some  little  time  to  preach  in  London,  Dr.  Alexander 
Fletcher  had  to  give  the  annual  sermon  to  children  in 
Surrey  Chapel,  but  as  he  was  taken  ill,  I  was  asked  in  a 
hurry  to  preach  to  the  children.  "Yes,"  I  said,  "I 
will,  if  the  children  will  sing,  '  God  moves  in  a  mys 
terious  way.'  I  have  made  a  promise  long  ago  that  so 
that  should  be  sung."  And  so  it  was:  I  preached  in 
Rowland  Hill's  Chapel,  and  the  hymn  was  sung.  My 
emotions  on  that  occasion  I  cannot  describe.  Still  that 
was  not  the  chapel  which  Mr.  Knill  intended.  All  un 
sought  by  me,  the  minister  at  Wotton-under-Edge,  which 
was  Mr.  Hill's  summer  residence,  invited  me  to  preach 


PROVIDENCE  217 


there.  I  went  on  the  condition  that  the  congregation 
should  sing,  "God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way"— which 
was  also  done.  After  that  I  went  to  preach  for  Mr. 
Richard  Knill  himself,  who  was  then  at  Chester.  What 
a  meeting  we  had!  Mark  this!  he  was  preaching  in  a 
theatre !  His  preaching  in  a  theatre  took  away  from  me 
all  fear  about  preaching  in  secular  buildings,  and  set 
me  free  for  the  campaigns  in  Exeter  Hall  and  the  Sur 
rey  Music  Hall.  How  much  this  had  to  do  with  other 
theatre  services  you  know. 

"God   moves  in  a   mysterious   way 
His  wonders   to  perform." 

After  more  than  forty  years  of  the  Lord's  loving-kind 
ness,  I  sat  again  in  that  arbor! 

PROVIDENCE 

A  Providence.—  I  shall  always  regard  the  fact  of  my  being 
here  to-day  as  a  remarkable  instance  of  providence.  I 
should  not  have  occupied  this  hall  probably,  and  been 
blessed  of  God  in  preaching  to  multitudes  if  it  had  not 
been  for  what  I  considered  an  untoward  accident.  I 
should  have  been  at  this  time  studying  in  college,  instead 
of  preaching  here,  but  for  a  singular  circumstance  which 
happened.  I  had  agreed  to  go  to  college:  the  tutor  had 
come  to  see  me,  and  I  went  to  see  him  at  the  house  of  a 
mutual  friend;  I  was  shown  by  the  servant  into  one 
drawing-room  in  the  house,  he  was  shown  into  another. 
He  sat  and  waited  for  me  for  two  hours;  I  sat  and 
waited  for  him  for  two  hours.  He  could  wait  no  longer, 
and  went  away  thinking  I  had  not  treated  him  well; 
I  went  away  and  thought  that  he  had  not  treated  me 
well.  As  I  went  away  this  text  came  into  my  mind, 
"  Seekest  thou  great  things  for  thyself?  Seek  them 
not."  So  I  wrote  to  say  that  I  must  positively  decline, 


ai8     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

I  was  happy  enough  amongst  my  own  country  people, 
and  got  on  very  well  in  preaching,  and  I  did  not  care 
to  go  to  college.  I  have  now  had  four  years  of  labor. 
But,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  those  who  have 
been  saved  during  that  time  would  not  have  been  saved, 
by  my  instrumentality  at  any  rate,  if  it  had  not  been 
for  the  remarkable  providence  turning  the  whole  tenor 
of  my  thoughts,  and  putting  things  into  a  new  track. 
You  have  often  had  strange  accidents  like  that.  When 
you  have  resolved  to  do  a  thing,  you  could  not  do  it 
any  how;  it  was  quite  impossible.  God  turned  you 
another  way,  and  proved  that  providence  is  indeed  the 
master  of  all  human  events. 

Look  at  Both  Sides.— Mrs.  Hannah  More,  I  think  it  is, 
says,  she  went  into  a  place  where  they  were  manufactur 
ing  a  carpet.  She  said :  "  There  is  no  beauty  there." 
The  man  said :  "  It  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  carpets 
you  ever  saw."  "  Why,  here  is  a  piece  hanging  out,  and 
is  all  in  disorder."  "  Do  you  know  why,  ina'am  ?  You 
look  at  the  wrong  side."  So  it  is  very  often  with  us. 
You  and  I  think  Providence  is  very  bad,  because  we 
are  looking  at  the  wrong  side.  We  do  look  at  the  wrong 
side  while  we  are  here,  but  when  we  get  to  heaven  we 
shall  see  the  right  side  of  God's  dealings;  and  when  we 
do  we  shall  say :  "  Lord,  how  wonderful  are  thy  works : 
in  wisdom  thou  hast  made  them  all:  glorious  are  thy 
works,  and  that  my  soul  knoweth  right  well." 

Special  Providences. —  I  remember  preaching  at  Halifax, 
in  a  huge  timber  building  which  was  erected  for  the 
purpose.  During  the  previous  day  the  snow  fell  heav 
ily,  and  it  lay  deep  upon  the  ground.  Nevertheless,  the 
people  came  in  their  thousands,  and  thronged  the  enor 
mous  edifice;  and  gratefully  do  I  remember  how  they 
-J-ut  away  to  their  homes  ia  safety.  They  had  no  sooner 
cleared  tue  building  *«  the  last  man,  than  it  fell  in  one 


PROVIDENCE  219 


gigantic  ruin.  Why  had  it  not  fallen  when  the  crowds 
were  there?  In  my  joy  that  no  one  was  harmed  I 
thought  that  God  was  there,  and  I  praised  his  holy  name. 
Was  that  a  piece  of  superstition? 

Take  another  instance.  I  was  one  day  in  great  per 
plexity  upon  a  certain  matter  of  great  importance  to 
the  cause  of  God.  I  laid  it  before  God  in  prayer,  but 
still  I  did  not  see  my  way:  I  could  get  no  direction  or 
guidance.  Having  to  preach  in  North  London,  a  friend 
kindly  drove  me  to  the  spot,  and  afterwards  I  asked  him 
to  take  me  to  the  house  of  one  of  our  people  whom  I 
wished  to  see.  I  scarcely  noticed  my  way,  till  at  last  I 
found  myself  in  a  street  unknown  to  me.  I  then  said, 
"  You  are  surely  going  wrong."  "  No,"  he  said,  "  I  am 
right  enough."  He  was  making  for  the  private  house 
of  the  person  I  had  named,  but  I  knew  that  he  would 
at  that  time  be  at  his  office  in  the  city,  and  I  had  in 
tended  to  go  there  after  him.  We  were  on  the  wrong 
track,  and  so  the  horse's  head  was  turned  down  at  a 
side-street  unknown  to  me,  and  as  we  passed  along  it,  I 
saw  the  only  man  in  all  the  world  who  could  assist  me 
out  of  my  difficulty.  How  he  came  to  be  there  I  could 
not  tell;  how  I  came  to  be  there  I  have  already  told  you. 
Strangely  had  the  Lord  guided  me,  and  the  information 
guided  the  affair  to  a  happy  issue.  God  was  near  me. 
Providence  as  a  Detective.—  Do  you  not  know  that  Provi 
dence  is  a  wonderful  detective?  There  are  hounds  upon 
the  track  of  every  thief,  and  murderer,  and  liar  —  in 
fact,  upon  every  sinner  of  every  kind.  Each  sin  leaves 
a  trail.  The  dogs  of  judgment  will  be  sure  to  scent  it 
out,  and  find  their  prey.  There  is  no  disentangling  your 
selves  from  the  meshes  of  guilt ;  no  possibility  of  evading 
the  penalty  of  transgression.  Very  wonderful  have  been 
the  ways  in  which  persons  who  have  committed  crimes 
have  been  brought  to  judgment.  A  trifle  becomes  a  tell- 


220     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

tale.  The  method  of  deceit  gives  a  clue  to  the  manner  of 
discovery.  "Wretched  the  men  who  bury  their  secrets  in 
their  own  bosom.  Their  conscience  plays  traitor  to  them. 
They  have  often  been  forced  to  betray  themselves.  We 
have  read  of  men  talking1  in  their  sleep  to  their  fellows, 
and  babbling  out  in  thir  dreams  the  crime  they  had  com 
mitted  years  before.  God  would  have  the  secret  dis 
closed.  No  eye  had  seen,  neither  could  any  other  tongue 
have  told,  but  the  man  turned  king's  evidence  against 
himself;  he  has  thus  brought  himself  to  judgment.  It 
has  often  happened,  in  some  form  or  other,  that  con 
science  has  thus  been  witness  against  men. 

PUNISHMENT 

The  Reckoning.—  You  desire  to  take  death  into  your  reck 
oning  that  it  may  not  surprise  you  unawares.  He  who 
should  go  upon  a  long  journey,  and  provide  for  every 
difficulty  on  the  road  but  one,  would  probably  find  the 
journey  a  failure.  If,  with  a  rolling  chariot  for  the 
solid  ways,  he  had  forgotten  to  find  the  means  of  cross 
ing  the  last  river  which  would  divide  him  from  the  coun 
try  which  he  sought,  he  would  be  disappointed  after  all 
his  pains.  If  you  have  provided  for  life,  but  have  not 
also  prepared  for  death,  what  better  will  you  be,  my 
hearer,  than  such  a  foolish  traveller?  We  have  heard 
of  one,  who,  going  into  a  tavern,  ordered  according  to 
his  wildest  wishes,  and  feasted  sumptuously  on  the  best 
the  house  afforded,  hour  after  hour;  but  when  the  host 
came  with  the  bill,  he  told  him  that  he  had  no  money, 
and  had  quite  forgotten  the  reckoning,  thinking  it  quite 
enough  to  attend  to  the  eating  and  drinking  while  these 
were  the  order  of  the  day,  without  perplexing  himself 
about  the  unknown  future.  Alas!  my  hearer,  are  you 
living  in  this  inn  of  life,  forgetting  the  reckoning?  Do 
go  from  cup  to  cup,  from  merriment  to  merriment, 


PUNISHMENT  221 


feasting  as  tho  there  were  no  day  of  account  appointed 
for  you?  If  so,  are  you  fool  or  knave,  or  both?  For 
a  man  who  would  enjoy  life,  and  yet  shirk  the  account 
of  his  responsibilities  with  which  the  scene  must  close, 
is  either  foolish,  or  knavish,  or  both.  Surely,  since  we 
must  die,  since  "  there  is  no  discharge  in  this  war,"  since 
every  man  must  be  a  conscript  to  the  army  of  death, 
since,  whether  it  be  to-morrow  or  the  next  day,  or  in  a 
few  years'  time,  every  one  of  us  must  pass  through  the 
iron  gate,  it  behoves  us,  knowing  the  fact,  to  take  it 
into  our  account,  to  be  diligent  in  forestalling  its  de 
mands,  and  providing  for  its  emergencies. 

The  Fate  of  the  Self-Righteous.—  I  have  heard  of  an  army, 
who,  being  defeated  in  battle,  endeavored  to  make  good 
a  retreat.  With  all  their  might  the  soldiers  fled  to  a 
certain  river,  where  they  expected  to  find  a  bridge  across 
which  they  could  retreat  and  be  in  safety.  But  when 
they  came  to  the  stream,  there  was  heard  a  shriek  of 
terror  — "  The  bridge  is  broken,  the  bridge  is  broken !  " 
All  in  vain  was  that  cry;  for  the  multitude  hurrying 
on  behind,  pressed  upon  those  that  were  before  and 
forced  them  into  the  river,  until  the  stream  was  glutted 
with  the  bodies  of  drowned  men.  Such  must  be  the 
fate  of  the  self-righteous. 

A  Lost  Soul. —  In  the  life  of  Benjamin  Keach  —  and  he 
also  was  one  of  my  predecessors  —  I  find  the  case  of  a 
man  who  had  been  a  professor  of  religion,  but  had  de 
parted  from  the  profession,  and  had  gone  into  awful  sin. 
When  he  came  to  die,  Keach,  with  many  other  friends 
went  to  see  him,  but  they  could  never  stay  with  him 
above  five  minutes  at  a  time ;  for  he  said,  "  Get  ye  gone ; 
it  is  of  no  use  your  coming  to  me;  I  have  sinned  away 
the  Holy  Ghost;  I  am  like  Esau,  I  have  sold  my  birth 
right,  and  tho  I  seek  it  carefully  with  tears,  I  can  never 
find  it  again."  And  then  he  would  repeat  dreadful 


222     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

words,  like  these :  "  My  mouth  is  filled  with  gravel- 
stones,  and  I  drink  wormwood  day  and  night.  Tell  me 
not,  tell  me  not  of  Christ!  I  know  he  is  a  Savior,  but 
I  hate  him,  and  he  hates  me.  I  know  I  must  die ;  I  know 
I  must  perish ! "  And  then  followed  doleful  cries,  and 
hideous  noises,  such  as  none  could  bear.  They  returned 
again  in  his  placid  moments,  only  to  stir  him  once  more, 
and  make  him  cry  out  in  his  despair,  "  I  am  lost !  I  am 
lost!  It  is  of  no  use  for  you  to  take  the  trouble  to  tell 
me  anything  about  it !  " 

The  Trifler's  Doom.—  Here  is  a  man,  who,  as  a  young  man, 
heard  the  gospel  and  grew  up  under  the  influence  of  it. 
He  is  an  intelligent  man,  a  Bible  reader,  and  somewhat 
of  a  theologian.  He  attended  a  Bible  class,  was  an  apt 
pupil,  and  could  explain  much  of  Scripture,  but  he  took 
to  lightness  and  frothiness.  He  made  an  amusement  of 
religion  and  a  sport  of  serious  things.  Sermons  he  fre 
quented  that  he  might  talk  of  them  and  say  that  he  had 
heard  the  preacher.  After  the  sermon,  when  others  were 
impressed,  he  was  merry.  He  had  discovered  some  mis 
take  in  the  preacher,  in  his  pronunciation,  in  the  gram 
matical  construction  of  a  sentence,  or  in  a  misquotation 
from  a  poet,  and  this  he  mentioned  with  gusto,  passing 
by  all  the  good  that  was  spoken.  That  was  only  his 
way :  he  did  not  mean  any  hurt  by  it ;  at  least,  he  would 
have  said  so  had  any  one  seriously  reproved  him. 

He  came  under  the  bond  of  this  religious  trifling,  but 
it  was  a  cord  of  vanity  small  as  a  packthread.  Years 
ago  he  began  to  be  bound  to  his  sin  by  this  kind  of 
trifling,  and  at  the  present  moment  I  am  not  sure  that 
he  ever  cares  to  go  and  hear  the  gospel  or  to  read  the 
word  of  God,  for  he  has  grown  to  despise  that  which 
he  sported  with.  The  wanton  witling  has  degenerated 
into  a  malicious  scoffer:  his  cord  has  become  a  cart- 
rope. 


PUNISHMENT  223 


Doom  of  the  Unstable. —  I  remember  one  that  fell  into  a 
gross  sin,  of  whom  a  brother  unwisely  said,  "  if  that  man 
is  not  a  Christian,  I  am  not."  His  prayers  had  certainly 
been  sweet.  Many  a  time  they  have  melted  me  down 
before  the  throne  of  grace,  and  yet  the  life  of  God  could 
not  have  been  in  his  soul,  for  he  lived  and  died  in 
flagrant  vice,  and  was  impenitent  to  the  last.  Such  cases 
I  can  only  attribute  to  a  sort  of  levity,  which  can  be 
charmed  with  a  sermon  or  a  play;  take  a  pew  at  the 
chapel  or  a  box  at  the  opera  with  equal  nonchalance; 
and  eagerly  follow  the  excitement  of  the  hour,  "  every 
thing  by  turns  and  nothing  long."  "  Unstable  as  water, 
they  shall  not  excel." 

The  Mocker's  Doom.— Ah!  it  was  not  long  ago  that  a 
man  who  had  laughed  and  mocked  at- me  full  many  a 
time,  went  down  one  Sabbath  day  to  Brighton,  to  spend 
his  day  in  the  excursion  —  he  came  back  that  night  to 
die!  On  Monday  morning,  when  he  was  dying,  who  do 
you  suppose  he  wanted?  He  wanted  Mr.  Spurgeon!  the 
man  he  had  laughed  at  always;  he  wanted  him  to  come 
and  tell  him  the  way  to  heaven,  and  point  him  to  the 
Savior.  And  altho  I  was  glad  enough  to  go,  it  was 
doleful  work  to  talk  to  a  man  who  had  just  been  Sab 
bath-breaking,  spending  his  time  in  the  service  of  Satan, 
and  had  come  home  to  die.  And  die  he  did,  without  a 
Bible  in  his  house,  without  having  one  prayer  offered 
for  him  except  that  prayer  which  I  alone  did  offer  at 
his  bedside.  Ah !  it  is  strange  how  the  sight  of  a  death 
bed  may  be  blessed  to  the  stimulating  of  our  zeal.  I 
stood  some  year  or  so  ago,  by  the  bedside  of  a  poor  boy, 
about  sixteen  years  of  age,  who  had  been  drinking  him 
self  to  death,  in  a  drinking  bout,  about  a  week  before, 
and  when  I  talked  to  him  afiout  sin  and  righteousness, 
and  judgment  to  come,  I  knew  he  trembled,  and  I  thought 
that  he  had  laid  hold  on  Jesus.  When  I  came  down 


224    SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

from  those  stairs,  after  praying  for  him  many  a  time, 
and  trying  to  point  him  to  Jesus,  and  having  but  a  faint 
hope  of  his  ultimate  salvation,  I  thought  to  myself,  0 
God !  I  would  that  I  might  preach  every  hour,  and  every 
moment  of  the  day,  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ; 
for  what  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  die  without  a  Savior. 

REGENERATION 

Need  of  a  New  Birth. —  I  was  staying  one  day  at  an  inn 

in  one  of  the  valleys  of  Northern  Italy,  where  the  floor 
was  dreadfully  dirty.  I  had  it  in  my  mind  to  advise 
the  landlady  to  scrub  it,  but  when  I  perceived  it  was 
made  of  mud,  I  reflected  that  the  more  she  scrubbed  the 
worse  it  would  be.  The  man  who  knows  his  own  heart 
soon  perceives  that  his  corrupt  nature  admits  of  no  im 
provement;  there  must  be  a  new  nature  implanted,  or 
the  man  will  be  only  "  washed  to  deeper  stains."  "  Ye 
must  be  born  again."  Ours  is  not  a  case  for  mend 
ing,  but  for  making  new.  The  meaning  of  the  prayer 
in  my  text  is,  "Lord,  do  not  chastise  me,  but  turn  me. 
Do  thou  do  it  thyself,  and  then  it  will  be  done.  '  Turn 
me,  and  I  shall  be  turned/  but  if  thou  dost  not  do  it  I 
am  past  hope."  0  troubled  soul,  if  the  Lord  shall  put 
his  hand  to  the  work  this  morning,  what  a  wonderful 
change  will  he  work  in  thee ;  but  only  his  own  right  hand 
can  do  it.  Pray,  then,  this  prayer :  "  Turn  me,  and  I 
shall  be  turned." 

"  No  outward  forms  can  make  you  clean, 
Your    leprosy    lies    deep    within." 

REPENTANCE 

Personal  Repentance.—  I  had  a  letter  a  few  days  ago  from 
a  young  man  who  heard  that  during  this  week  I  was 
going  to  a  certain  town.  Said  he,  "  Sir,  when  you  come 


REPENTANCE  225 


do  preach  a  sermon  that  will  fit  me;  for  do  you  know, 
sir,  I  have  heard  it  said  that  we  must  all  think  ourselves 
to  be  the  wickedest  people  in  the  world,  or  else  we  cannot 
be  saved.  I  try  to  think  so,  but  I  cannot,  because  I  have 
not  been  the  wickedest.  I  want  to  think  so,  but  I  can 
not.  I  want  to  be  saved,  but  I  do  not  know  how  to 
repent  enough."  Now,  if  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
him  I  shall  tell  him,  God  does  not  require  a  man  to 
think  himself  the  wickedest  in  the  world,  because  that 
would  sometimes  be  to  think  a  falsehood;  there  are  some 
men  who  are  not  so  wicked  as  others  are.  What  God 
requires  is  this,  that  a  man  should  say,  "  I  know  more 
of  myself  than  I  do  of  other  people;  I  know  little  about 
them,  and  from  what  I  see  of  myself,  not  of  my  actions, 
but  of  my  heart,  I  do  think  that  there  can  be  few  worse 
than  I  am.  They  may  be  more  guilty  openly,  but  then 
I  have  had  more  light,  more  privileges,  more  opportuni 
ties,  more  warnings,  and  therefore  I  am  still  guiltier." 
I  do  not  want  you  to  bring  your  brother  with  you  and 
say,  "  I  am  more  wicked  than  he  is ; "  I  want  you  to 
come  yourself,  and  say,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned ! "  you 
have  nothing  to  do  with  your  brother  William,  whether 
he  has  sinned  more  or  less ;  your  cry  should  be,  "  Father, 
I  have  sinned."  You  have  nothing  to  do  with  your 
cousin  Jane,  whether  or  not  she  has  rebelled  more  than 
you.  Your  business  is  to  cry,  "Lord  have  mercy  upon 
me  a  sinner !  " 

False  Repentance.— I  have  heard  of  a  woman  who  af 
fected  to  believe  that  she  was  a  sinner,  and  her  minister, 
convinced  that  she  did  not  know  what  she  meant,  thus 
exposed  her  folly.  He  said  to  her,  "Well,  if  you  are 
a  sinner,  of  course  you  have  broken  God's  laws;  let  us 
read  the  ten  commandments,  and  see  which  you  have 
broken."  So  turning  to  the  decalogue  he  began  to  read : 
"Thou  shalt  have  none  other  God  before  me;"  "Did 


226     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

you  ever  break  that?  "  "  Oh,  no,  not  that  she  knew  of." 
He  proceeded,  "Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself  any 
graven  image,"  and  so  on;  "Did  you  ever  break  that?" 
"  Never,  sir,"  said  she.  Then  "  Thou  shalt  not  take  the 
name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain."  "  Oh,  dear  no ; 
She  had  been  very  particular  on  that  point;  she  did 
not  know  that  she  had  ever  offended  in  that  respect  in 
her  life."  "  Remember  the  seventh  day  to  keep  it  holy." 
"  Oh,"  said  she,  "  I  never  do  any  work  on  a  Sunday ; 
everybody  knows  how  particular  I  am  about  that." 
"Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother."  "Yes,"  she  re 
plied,  "she  had  been  quite  perfect  in  this  matter;  you 
might  ask  her  friends  if  she  had  not  been."  "  Thou 
shalt  not  kill."  "  Kill  anybody !  She  wondered  how  the 
minister  could  ask  her  that."  Of  course,  "Thou  shalt 
not  commit  adultery,"  must  be  passed  without  a  ques 
tion.  "  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness."  Much  of  a 
gossip  tho  she  was,  she  protested  she  never  did  back 
bite  anybody  in  all  her  life.  And  as  to  the  idea  of  covet 
ing,  well,  she  might  sometimes  have  wished  that  she 
was  a  little  better  off,  but  she  never  wanted  any  of 
anybody  else's  goods,  she  only  wanted  a  little  more  of 
her  own.  So  it  turned  out  as  the  minister  expected, 
that  she  really  was  not  a  sinner  at  all  in  her  own  esti 
mation.  It  is  marvellous  how  people  who  indulge  in 
general  confessions  of  sin  attempt  to  exculpate  them 
selves  of  each  and  every  particular  offence.  Whatever 
the  indictment  is,  they  plead  "Not  Guilty." 

RESURRECTION 

The  Resurrection  Glory.— Old  Master  Spenser,  who  was 
a  rare  hand  at  making  metaphors,  says,  "  The  body  here 
is  like  an  old  rusty  piece  of  iron,  but  Death  shall  be  the 
blacksmith;  he  shall  take  it  and  he  shall  make  it  hot 
in  his  fire,  until  it  shall  sparkle  and  send  forth  burning 


RESURRECTION  227 

heat  and  look  bright  and  shining."  And  so  surely  is  it. 
We  are  thrust  into  the  earth  as  into  the  fire,  and  there 
shall  we  be  made  to  sparkle  and  to  shine  and  to  be  full 
of  radiance;  no  more  the  rusty  things  that  we  once  were, 
but  fiery  spirits,  like  the  cherubim  and  the  seraphim,  we 
shall  wear  a  power  and  a  glory  the  like  of  which  we 
have  not  even  yet  conceived. 

God's  Cup.— I  see  before  me  an  old  and  battered  cup, 
which  many  a  black  lip  hath  touched,  out  of  which  many 
a  villain's  throat  has  received  moisture.  It  is  marred 
and  covered  over  with  filth.  Who  could  tell  what  metal 
it  is?  It  is  brought  in  and  given  to  the  silversmith;  he 
no  sooner  receives  it,  than  he  begins  to  break  it  into 
pieces;  he  dashes  it  into  shivers  again  and  again;  he 
pounds  it  until  he  has  broken  it,  and  then  puts  it  into  his 
fining  pot  and  melts  it.  Now  you  begin  to  see  it  sparkle 
again,  and  by  and  by  he  beats  it  out  and  fashions  it  into 
a  goodly  chalice,  out  of  which  a  king  may  drink.  Is 
this  the  same?  the  very  same  thing.  This  glorious  cup, 
is  this  the  old  battered  silver  we  saw  just  now?  Yes, 
it  is  the  same,  and  we  who  are  here  below  like  vessels, 
alas!  too  unfit  for  the  Master's  use;  vessels  which  have 
even  given  comfort  to  the  evil  ones,  and  helped  to  do 
the  work  of  Satan,  we  shall  be  put  into  the  furnace  of 
the  grave,  and  be  there  melted  down  and  fused  and 
fashioned  into  a  glorious  wine  cup,  that  in  all  its  signifi 
cance,  shall  stand  upon  the  banqueting  table  of  the  Son 
of  God. 

Resurrection  of  the  Body.— The  certainty  of  the  resur 
rection  raises  us  above  the  dread  which  would  otherwise 
surround  the  dissolution  of  our  body.  A  child  sees  a 
man  throwing  precious  metal  into  a  melting  pot,  and  he 
is  sad  because  fair  silver  is  being  destroyed;  but  he 
that  knows  the  business  of  the  refiner  understands 
that  no  loss  will  come  of  the  process;  only  the 


228     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

dross  of  that  silver  will  be  taken  away,  and  the  pure 
molten  mass  poured  out  into  a  comely  mold  will  yet 
adorn  a  royal  table.  Well,  my  brethren,  are  we  assured 
that  to  lose  this  vile  body  is  clear  gain  since  it  will  be 
fashioned  according  to  the  glorious  body  of  the  Lord 
Jesus? 

SALVATION 

Free  Salvation  Suits  AH.—  Some  years  ago  I  had  a  very 
high  compliment  paid  me  by  a  gentleman  who  intended 
an  insult.  He  ridiculed  my  preaching,  and  remarked 
that  it  would  be  eminently  suited  to  the  lowest  class  of 
negroes.  This  I  accepted  as  an  honorable  admission, 
for  he  who  could  reach  and  bless  the  black  man  will  not 
preach  in  vain  to  white  people.  I  have  heard  of  a 
preacher  of  whom  his  detractors  said  that  he  might  do 
very  well  to  preach  to  old  women.  Ah,  then,  he  will 
do  for  anybody.  I  suppose  he  would  suit  old  women 
because  they  were  on  the  borders  of  the  grave,  and 
that  is  where  we  all  are,  for  we  are  all  much  nearer  to 
the  grave  than  we  imagine.  Free  salvation  suits  the 
vilest  of  the  vile,  and  it  is  equally  suitable  for  the  most 
moral. 

The  Day  of  Probation.— An  old  eastern  conqueror  when 
he  came  to  a  city  used  to  light  a  brazier  of  coals,  and, 
setting  it  high  upon  a  pole,  he  would,  with  sound  of  trum 
pet,  proclaim,  that  if  they  surrendered  while  the  lamp 
held  out  and  burned  he  would  have  mercy  upon  them, 
but  that  when  the  coals  were  out  he  would  storm  the 
city,  pull  it  stone  from  stone,  sow  it  with  salt,  and  put 
men,  and  women  and  children  to  a  bloody  death.  To- 
day  the  thunders  of  God  bid  you  to  take  like  warning. 
There  is  your  light,  the  lamp,  the  brazier  of  hot  coals, 
Year  after  year  the  fire  is  dying  out,  nevertheless  there 
is  coal  left. 


SALVATION  229 


The  Great  Salvation.—  The  narrow-minded  bigot  limits 
salvation  to  his  own  contracted  notions,  and  he  still  says, 
"  There  shall  none  be  saved,  except  they  walk  arm-in- 
arm  with  me."  Poor,  little,  miserable  soul!  he  cuts  his 
coat  according  to  his  own  fashion,  and  declares,  that  if 
men  do  not  all  cut  their  coats  in  the  same  way  they 
cannot  be  saved.  But  not  so  the  Bible.  The  Bible 
preaches  a  great  salvation. 

Salvation  Only  Through  Christ.—  The  shiner  in  his  nat 
ural  estate  reminds  me  of  a  man  who  has  a  strong  and 
well-nigh  impenetrable  castle  into  which  he  has  fled. 
There  is  the  outer  moat;  there  is  a  second  moat;  there 
are  the  high  walls;  and  then  afterward  there  is  the  dun 
geon  and  keep,  into  which  the  sinner  will  retire.  Now, 
the  first  moat  that  goes  round  the  sinner's  trusting  place 
is  his  good  works.  "  Ah ! "  he  says,  "  I  am  as  good  as 
my  neighbor;  twenty  shillings  in  the  pound  down,  ready 
money,  I  have  always  paid ;  I  am  no  sinner ;  *  I  tithe 
mint  and  cummin ; '  a  good  respectable  gentleman  I  am 
indeed."  Well,  when  God  comes  to  work  with  him,  to 
save  him,  he  sends  his  army  across  the  first  moat;  and 
as  they  go  through  it,  they  cry,  "  Salvation  is  of  the 
Lord ; "  and  the  moat  is  dried  up,  for  if  it  be  of  the 
Lord,  how  can  it  be  of  good  works'?  But  when  that  is 
done,  he  has  a  second  intrenchment  —  ceremonies. 
"  Well,"  he  says,  "  I  will  not  trust  in  my  good  works, 
but  I  have  been  baptized,  I  have  been  confirmed;  do  not 
I  take  the  sacrament  ?  That  shall  be  my  trust."  "  Over 
the  moat !  Over  the  moat ! "  And  the  soldiers  go  over 
again,  shouting,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  The  second 
moat  is  dried  up;  it  is  all  over  with  that.  Now  they 
come  to  the  next  strong  wall;  the  sinner,  looking  over 
it,  says,  "I  can  repent,  I  can  believe,  whenever  I  like; 
I  will  save  myself  by  repenting  and  believing."  Up  come 
the  soldiers  of  God,  his  great  army  of  conviction,  and 


230     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

they  batter  this  wall  to  the  ground,  crying,  "  *  Salvation  is 
of  the  Lord/  Your  faith  and  your  repentance  must  all 
be  given  you,  or  else  you  will  neither  believe  nor  repent 
of  sin."  And  now  the  castle  is  taken  ;  the  man's 
hopes  are  all  cut  off;  he  feels  that  it  is  not  of  self; 
the  castle  of  self  is  overcome,  and  the  great  banner 
upon  which  is  written  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord " 
is  displayed  upon  the  battlements.  But  is  the  battle 
over?  O  no;  the  sinner  has  retired  to  the  keep, 
in  the  center  of  the  castle;  and  now  he  changes  his  tac 
tics.  "I  cannot  save  myself,"  says  he,  "therefore  I 
will  despair;  there  is  no  salvation  for  me."  Now  this 
second  castle  is  as  hard  to  take  as  the  first,  for  the  sinner 
sits  down  and  says,  "I  can't  be  saved,  I  must  perish." 
But  God  commands  the  soldiers  to  take  this  castle,  too, 
shouting,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord ; "  tho  it  is  not  of 
man,  it  is  of  God;  u  he  is  able  to  save,  even  to  the  utter 
most,"  tho  you  can  not  save  yourself.  This  sword,  you 
see,  cuts  two  ways;  it  cuts  pride  down,  and  then  it 
cleaves  the  skull  of  despair.  If  any  man  say  he  can 
save  himself,  it  halveth  his  pride  at  once;  and  if  another 
man  say  he  cannot  be  saved,  it  dasheth  his  despair  to 
the  earth,  for  it  affirms  that  he  can  be  saved,  seeing, 
"  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  That  is  the  effect  this  doc 
trine  has  upon  the  sinner:  may  it  have  {Eat  effect  on 
you! 

The  Sinner's  Savior.— Kneeling  by  the  bed  of  an  appar 
ently  dying  saint,  last  night,  I  said,  "  Well,  sister,  he  has 
been  precious  to  you;  you  can  rejoice  in  his  covenant 
mercies,  and  his  past  loving-kindnesses."  She  put  out 
her  hand,  and  said,  "Ah!  sir,  do  not  talk  about  them 
now;  I  want  the  sinner's  Savior  as  much  now  as  ever; 
it  is  not  a  saint's  Savior  I  want;  it  is  still  a  sinner's 
Savior  that  I  am  in  need  of,  for  I  am  a  sinner  still."  I 
found  that  I  could  not  comfort  her  with  the  past;  so  I 


SALVATION  231 


reminded  her  of  the  golden  streets,  of  the  gates  of  pearl, 
of  the  walls  of  jasper,  of  the  harps  of  gold,  of  the  songs 
of  bliss;  and  then  her  eye  glistened;  she  said,  "Yes,  I 
shall  be  there  soon ;  I  shall  meet  them  by  and  by ; "  and 
then  she  seemed  so  glad! 

Sinners  Clothed  With  Christ. —  I  remember  well,  how  once 
God  preached  to  me  by  a  similitude  in  the  depth  of  win 
ter.  The  earth  had  been  black,  and  there  was  scarcely 
a  green  thing  or  a  flower  to  be  seen.  As  you  looked 
across  the  field,  there  was  nothing  but  blackness  —  bare 
hedges  and  leafless  trees,  and  black,  black  earth,  where- 
ever  you  looked.  On  a  sudden  God  spake,  and  unlocked 
the  treasures  of  the  snow,  and  white  flakes  descended 
until  there  was  no  blackness  to  be  seen,  and  all  was  one 
sheet  of  dazzling  whiteness.  It  was  at  that  time  that 
I  was  seeking  the  Savior,  and  it  was  then  I  found  him; 
and  I  remember  well  that  sermon  which  I  saw  before  me; 
"  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together ;  tho  your  sins 
be  as  scarlet  they  shall  be  as  snow,  tho  they  be  red  like 
crimson  they  shall  be  whiter  than  wool."  Shiner!  thy 
heart  is  like  that  black  ground;  thy  soul  is  like  that 
black  tree  and  hedgerow,  without  leaf  or  blossom;  God's 
grace  is  like  the  white  snow  —  it  shall  fall  upon  thee  till 
thy  doubting  heart  shall  glitter  in  whiteness  of  pardon, 
and  thy  poor  black  soul  shall  be  covered  with  the  spotless 
purity  of  the  Son  of  God.  He  seems  to  say  to  you, 
"  Sinner,  you  are  black,  but  I  am  ready  to  forgive  you ; 
I  will  wrap  my  heart  in  the  ermine  of  my  Son's  right 
eousness,  and  with  my  Son's  own  garments  on,  thou  shalt 
be  holy  as  the  Holy  One." 

The  Key  to  Salvation.— A  minister  was  one  day  going  to 
preach.  He  climbed  a  hill  on  his  road.  Beneath  him 
lay  the  villages,  sleeping  in  their  beauty,  with  the  corn 
fields  motionless  in  the  sunshine;  but  he  did  not  look  at 
them,  for  his  attention  was  arrested  by  a  woman  standing 


232     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

at  her  door,  and  who,  upon  seeing  him,  came  up  to  him 
with  the  greatest  anxiety,  and  said,  "  0,  sir,  have  you 
any  keys  about  you?  I  have  broken  the  key  of  my 
drawers,  and  there  are  some  things  that  I  must  get  di 
rectly."  Said  he,  "  I  have  no  keys."  She  was  disap 
pointed,  expecting  that  every  one  would  have  keys.  "  But 
suppose,"  he  said,  "  I  had  some  keys,  they  might  not  fit 
your  lock,  and  therefore  you  could  not  get  the  articles 
you  want.  But  do  not  distress  yourself,  wait  till  some 
one  else  comes  up.  But,"  said  he,  wishing  to  improve  the 
occasion,  "  have  you  never  heard  of  the  key  of  heaven  ?  " 
"  Ah !  yes,"  she  said,  "  I  have  lived  long  enough,  and 
have  gone  to  church  long  enough  to  know  that  if  we 
work  hard  and  get  our  bread  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow, 
and  act  well  toward  our  neighbors,  and  behave,  as  the 
catechism  says,  lowly  and  reverently  to  all  our  betters, 
and  if  we  do  our  duty  in  that  station  of  life  in  which  it 
has  pleased  God  to  place  us,  and  say  our  prayers  regu 
larly,  we  shall  be  saved."  "  Ah ! "  said  he,  "  my  good 
woman,  that  is  a  broken  key,  for  you  have  broken  the 
commandments,  you  have  not  fulfilled  all  your  duties. 
It  is  a  good  key,  but  you  have  broken  it."  "  Pray,  sir," 
said  she,  believing  that  he  understood  the  matter,  and 
looking  frightened,  "what  have  I  left  out?"  "Why," 
said  he,  ei  the  all-important  thing,  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Don't  you  know  it  is  said,  the  key  of  heaven  is 
at  his  girdle;  he  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth;  he 
shutteth,  and  no  man  openeth  ?  " 

Bread  Without  Price. —  I  know  a  brother  here  who  wanted 
to  take  a  certain  shop  in  a  wide  street,  but  his  wiser 
friend  said,  "Do  not  take  that  shop  for  a  baker's.  It 
is  not  a  good  eating  locality.  You  must  open  a  shop 
in  one  of  the  streets  where  there  are  plenty  of  poor  peo 
ple,  who  will  buy  the  bread  every  morning.  Make  it 
good  and  cheap,  and  it  will  not  stop  long  on  the  shelves." 


SALVATION  233 


I  noticed  in  the  newspaper  that  a  certain  drink-shop  was 
"in  a  good  drinking  locality."  I  am  sorry  that  there 
are  such  localities.  But,  assuredly,  a  good  eating  lo 
cality  must  be  the  very  place  for  vending  bread.  I  think 
that  this  Tabernacle  stands  in  a  good  eating  locality. 
Many  are  here  now  who  are  hungry  after  Christ,  and  it 
is  a  blessed  fact  that  they  may  have  him,  and  feed  upon 
him  without  stint.  And  what  is  the  price1?  The  price? 
The  difficulty  with  all  other  traders  is  to  get  you  up 
to  their  price;  but  my  difficulty  is  to  get  you  down  to 
mine  —  for  the  bread  of  heaven  is  without  price. 

Folly  of  Rejecting  Salvation. —  A  man  may  act  the  cripple 
till  he  grows  hopelessly  lame.  Mind  what  you  are  at. 
You  may  lock  a  door,  and  open  it  again  for  many  a 
year;  but  one  of  these  days  you  may  so  hamper  the 
lock  that  it  will  not  open  again.  Oh,  that  you  may  at 
once  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life ! 

Permanence  of  Grace.—  It  may  seem  somewhat  strange  to 
you,  but  that  form  of  loving  kindness  which  mainly  drew 
me  to  the  Lord  was  this  —  I  saw  a  good  deal  of  the  in 
stability  of  character  in  young  men  who  begin  life  with 
bright  prospects  and  fair  promises,  and  I  trembled  for 
my  own  future.  I  read  in  the  New  Testament  that  he 
that  believeth  in  Jesus  hath  everlasting  life.  I  saw  in 
the  language  of  Christ  himself  these  words  —"I  give 
unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish, 
neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hands." 
Oh,  how  I  longed  to  be  one  of  these  sheep,  in  the  hands 
of  Jesus!  I  had  known  schoolfellows  who  were  held  up 
as  patterns  to  me,  who  acted  very  disappointingly  after 
they  left  home ;  and  I  thought  within  myself :  Oh,  for  a 
spiritual  life  insurance!  Oh,  for  a  way  of  putting  my 
soul  into  secure  keeping,  so  that  I  shall  not  become  the 
prey  of  sin,  but  shall  be  kept  by  the  grace  of  God  even 
to  the  end!  The  belief  that  I  should  find  this  perma- 


334     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

nence  of  grace  in  Christ  Jesus  drew  me  more  than  any 
thing  else  to  Jesus. 

No  Condemnation  for  the  Saved.— When  Giant  Despair's 
head  was  cut  off,  Mr.  Bunyan  says  that  the  pilgrims 
danced;  and  well  they  might.  Mr.  Despondency  and 
Miss  Much-afraid  took  a  turn,  and  even  Ready-to-Halt 
with  his  crutches  must  needs  join  in.  I  warrant  you 
he  footed  it  well.  When  he  saw  the  monster's  head  upon 
the  pole  he  could  not  help  being  merry.  This  text  sticks 
the  giant's  head  up  on  the  pole  for  us.  "  There  is  there 
fore  now  no  condemnation."  Oh  for  the  loud-sounding 
cymbals!  Now  for  the  maidens  and  their  timbrels.  Let 
us  have  holy  merriment  over  this.  Poor  prodigal  sinners 
have  fled  to  Jesus  and  hidden  in  him,  and  there  is  now 
no  condemnation  to  them.  Poverty?  Yes,  but  no  con 
demnation.  Depression  of  spirit?  Yes,  sometimes;  but 
no  condemnation.  Infirmities  and  weaknesses,  and  things 
to  grieve  over?  Yes,  plenty  of  them,  but  no  condemna 
tion.  "  0  come,  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord :  let  us  make 
a  joyful  noise  to  the  rock  of  our  salvation ! " 

Not  by  Works  but  Grace.— Remember  how  Mr.  Bunyan 
says  that,  when  he  was  a  godless  man,  he  could  have 
kissed  the  earth  on  which  the  clergy  walked,  and  he 
thought  that  every  nail  in  the  church  door  was  sacred. 
Among  dissenters,  the  man  who  is  trying  to  save  himself 
usually  thinks  that  every  practice  of  the  little  com 
munity  with  which  he  is  united  is  infallibly  correct.  He 
has  no  real  love  to  Christ,  and  has  on  trust  in  Christ's 
righteousness:  but  how  he  will  work  at  his  favorite  self- 
salvation!  And  you  will  have  to  work  at  it,  sirs,  if  you 
are  going  to  heaven  by  your  works!  To  work  your 
fingers  to  the  bones  is  nothing.  You  might  as  well  try 
to  climb  to  the  stars  on  a  treadmill  as  to  get  to  heaven 
by  your  good  works;  and,  certainly,  you  might  more 
easily  sail  from  Liverpool  to  America  on  a  sere  leaf  than 


SALVATION  235 


ever  get  to  heaven  by  works  and  doings  of  your  own. 
There  is  more  wanted  than  will  ever  come  of  yourself. 
You  want  a  Savior.  You  must  be  born  again  from 
above.  You  want  a  salvation  that  shall  be  a  gift  of 
infinite  charity,  a  benison  of  the  boundless  mercy  of  the 
eternal  God;  and  nothing  else  will  save  you. 

Saved  by  Submission. —  You  have  heard  the  story  of  the 
English  king  who  was  wroth  with  the  burgesses  of  Calais, 
and  declared  that  he  would  hang  six  of  them.  They  came 
to  him  with  ropes  about  their  necks,  submitting  to  their 
doom.  That  is  the  way  in  which  I  came  to  Jesus.  I  ac 
cepted  my  punishment,  pleaded  guilty,  and  begged  for 
pardon.  Put  your  rope  upon  your  neck;  confess  that 
you  deserve  to  die,  and  come  to  Jesus.  Put  no  honeyed 
words  into  your  mouth;  turn  out  that  nonsense  of  self- 
righteousness  from  your  heart,  and  cry,  "  Save,  Lord, 
or  I  perish ! "  If  thus  you  plead  you  shall  never 
perish.  You  are  the  kind  of  man  for  whom  Christ 
died  —  the  sort  of  man  whom  he  never  did  spurn,  and 
never  will  spurn,  while  the  world  standeth. 

Knocking  far  Mercy.-— If  I  have  to  enter  in  by  a  door 
which  is  well  secured,  I  shall  need  tools  and  science.  I 
confess  I  do  not  understand  the  art;  you  must  send  for 
a  gentleman  who  understands  picklocks,  "  jemmies,"  and 
all  sorts  of  burglarious  instruments:  but  if  I  am  only 
told  to  knock,  fool  as  I  am  at  opening  doors,  I  know 
how  to  knock.  Any  uneducated  man  can  knock  if  that 
is  all  which  is  required  of  him.  Is  there  a  person  here 
who  cannot  put  words  together  in  prayer?  Never  mind, 
friend;  knocking  can  be  done  by  one  who  is  no  orator. 
Perhaps  another  cries,  "  I  am  no  scholar."  Never  mind, 
a  man  can  knock  tho  he  may  be  no  philosopher.  A  dumb 
man  can  knock.  A  blind  man  can  knock.  With  a 
palsied  hand  a  man  may  knock.  He  who  knows 
nothing  of  his  book  can  still  lift  a  hammer  and  let  it 


236     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

fall.  The  way  to  open  heaven's  gate  is  wonderfully 
simplified  to  those  who  are  lowly  enough  to  follow  the 
Holy  Spirit's  guidance,  and  ask,  seek,  and  knock  be- 
lievingly. 

Running  Into  God's  Arms. —  Some  years  ago  I  was  walk 
ing  in  the  garden  one  evening,  and  I  saw  a  stray  dog 
about  whom  I  had  received  information  that  he  was  in 
the  habit  of  visiting  my  grounds,  and  that  he  did  not  in 
the  least  assist  the  gardener,  and  therefore  his  attentions 
were  not  desired.  As  I  walked  along  one  Saturday 
evening  meditating  upon  my  sermon,  I  saw  this  dog 
busily  doing  mischief.  I  threw  my  stick  at  him,  and 
told  him  to  go  home.  But  what  do  you  think  he  did? 
Instead  of  grinding  his  teeth  at  me,  or  hurrying  off  with 
a  howl,  he  looked  at  me  very  pleasantly,  took  up  my 
stick  in  his  mouth,  and  brought  it  to  me  and  then,  wag 
ging  his  tail,  he  laid  the  stick  at  my  feet,  The  tears 
were  in  my  eyes :  the  dog  had  beaten  me.  I  said,  "  Good 
dog!  Good  dog;  you  may  come  here  when  you  like 
after  that."  Why  had  the  dog  conquered  me?  Because 
he  had  confidence  in  me,  and  would  not  believe  that  I 
could  mean  him  any  hurt.  To  turn  to  grander  things: 
the  Lord  himself  cannot  resist  humble  confidence.  Do 
you  not  see  how  a  sinner  brings,  as  it  were,  the  rod  of 
justice  to  the  Lord,  and  cries,  "  If  thou  smite  me,  I  de 
serve  it,  but  I  submit  to  thee."  The  great  God  cannot 
spurn  a  trustful  heart.  It  is  impossible.  He  were  not 
God  if  he  could  cast  the  soul  away  that  implicitly  relies 
on  him.  This  is  the  power  of  faith,  then,  and  I  marvel 
not  that  the  Lord  should  have  chosen  it,  for  believing  is 
a  thing  most  pleasing  to  God.  O  that  you  would  all 
trust  him !  God  lifts  his  sword  against  you  —  run  into 
his  arms.  He  threatens  you  —  grasp  his  promise.  He 
pursues  you  —  fly  to  his  dear  Son.  Trust  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross  in  his  full  atonement,  and  you  must  be  saved. 


SALVATION  237 


Hungry  for  Salvation. —  A  wretched  sinner  jumps  at  mercy 
like  a  hungry  fish  leaping  at  the  bait.  When  a  soul  is 
empty  then  it  longs  for  the  fulness  of  Christ,  but  not  till 
then.  Full  souls  quarrel  over  honeycombs,  they  are  not 
sweet  enough  for  them;  but  to  the  hungry  man  even 
every  bitter  thing  is  sweet.  A  man  who  is  conscious  of 
sin  will  not  quibble  about  the  way  of  grace,  but  if  par 
don  is  to  be  had  he  will  have  it  at  once :  whoever  may 
be  silent,  you  will  hear  his  voice  crying  aloud,  "  Thou 
Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me ! " 

Only  Candidates  Elected. —  Perhaps  you  have  read  the 
story  of  a  governor  of  one  of  the  American  States  who 
called  at  a  hotel  where  there  was  a  colored  waiter,  who 
was  well  known  to  hold  Calvinistic  opinions,  and  was, 
therefore,  made  the  butt  for  many  a  jest.  So  the  Gov 
ernor  said  to  him,  "  Sam,  you  do  not  really  believe  that 
doctrine  of  election,  do  you?"  "'Deed  I  do,  sah,"  said 
he.  "Well,  then,"  replied  the  Governor,  "tell  me 
whether  I  am  elect  or  not."  "  Sah,"  said  the  negro,  "  I 
did  not  know  you  were  a  candidate,  and  I  know  nothing 
about  a  man's  ever  being  elected  if  he  has  not  put  up 
for  it." 

Insecure  Foundations.—  Your  good  works  are  good  enough 
in  themselves  —  good  enough  in  your  generation  —  but 
they  will  never  do  for  a  foundation  to  rest  upon.  Do 
not  run  away  and  say  something  like  the  foolish  man 
who  went  to  a  place  where  there  was  a  house  being  built, 
and  seeing  the  chimney  pots  standing  there.,  he  took 
them,  and  laid  them  in  the  trench  to  make  the  founda 
tion.  "What  are  you  doing?"  said  one  of  the  work 
man.  "Why,  laying  the  foundation?"  "What,  i*ith 
the  chimney-pots?"  "I  did  not  know  that  it  war 
wrong,"  said  he.  "Well,  take  them  away;  they  i*on;» 
do  for  a  foundation."  "  Oh ! "  said  the  other,  "  vou  are 
finding  fault  with  them."  "No;  T  am  not  Ending  fp.r.H 


a38     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

with  them,  but  with  the  place  where  you  put  them;  they 
are  good  enough  on  the  top,  but  they  will  not  do  at  the 
bottom."  So  with  good  works;  they  will  do  at  tne  top, 
but  they  will  not  do  at  the  bottom.  As  a  foundation 
for  the  soul  to  rest  upon  nothing  will  suffice  but  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  and  his  finished  work.  This  is 
our  hope  of  salvation.  Our  good  works  are  good  enough 
afterwards,  when  God  the  Holy  Spirit  by  his  grace  works 
faith,  and  love,  and  all  good  things  in  us. 
The  Water  of  Life.—  As  I  walked  over  a  long  sandy  road 
one  day  last  week,  when  the  weather  was  sultry,  and  the 
heat,  far  beyond  our  common  expereince  in  this  country, 
was  almost  tropical,  I  saw  a  little  stream  of  cool  water, 
and  being  parched  with  thirst  I  stooped  down  and  drank. 
Do  you  think  I  asked  anybody's  leave  or  inquired 
whether  I  might  drink  or  not?  I  didn't  know  who  it  be 
longed  to,  and  I  didn't  care.  There  it  was,  and  I  felt 
if  it  was  there  it  was  enough  for  me.  Nobody  was  there 
to  call  out  "  Ho ! "  My  inward  craving  called  out 
"  Ho !  "  I  was  thirsty,  and  water  was  there  inviting  to  my 
taste.  I  noticed  after  I  had  drank  that  there  were  two 
poor  tramps  came  along,  and  they  went  down  and  drank 
in  like  manner.  I  didn't  find  anybody  marching  them 
off  to  prison.  There  was  the  stream.  The  stream  being 
there,  and  the  thirsty  men  being  there,  the  supply  was 
suited  to  their  need,  and  they  promptly  partook  of  it. 
How  strange  it  is  that  when  God  has  provided  the  gos 
pel,  and  men  want  it,  they  should  require  somebody  to 
call  out  to  them,  "  Ho !  ho !  ho ! "  and  then  they  will  not 
come  after  all.  Oh!  if  they  were  a  little  more  thirsty, 
if  they  did  but  know  their  need  more,  if  they  were  con 
vinced  more  of  their  sin,  then  they  would  scarcely  want 
an  invitation,  but  the  mere  fact  of  a  supply  would  be 
sufficient  for  them,  and  they  would  come  and  drink,  and 
satisfy  the  burning  thirst  within. 


SALVATION  330 


Our  Part  in  Salvation.— A  poor  simpleton  once  said, 
"  'Twas  God  and  I  did  the  work."  "  Well,  but  Charlie, 
what  part  did  you  take  in  it  ?  "  "  Sure,  then,"  said  he, 
"  I  did  all  I  could  to  stop  the  Lord,  and  he  beat  me." 
I  suppose,  did  we  tell  the  simple  truth  we  should  say 
much  the  same.  In  the  matter  of  our  salvation  we  do 
all  we  can  to  oppose  it  —  our  old  nature  does  —  and  he 
overcomes  our  evil  propensities.  From  first  to  last  Jesus 
Christ  has  to  be  the  Author  and  the  Finisher  of  our 
salvation,  or  it  never  would  have  been  begun  and  it  never 
would  have  been  completed. 

Universal  Amnesty.— When  Charles  II.  came  back  to 
England  there  was  an  amnesty,  except  for  certain  per 
sons,  and  these  were  mentioned  by  name  —  Hugh  Peters 
and  others  were  proscribed;  but  there  is  no  exception 
here.  I  find  not  any  traitors  singled  out  and  denounced 
by  name.  I  have  to  proclaim  an  indemnity  of  such  uni 
versal  import  that  it  is  indiscriminate,  "  Whosoever  be- 
lieveth  on  him  shall  never  perish,  but  shall  have  ever 
lasting  life." 

Safe  in  the  Ark.— We  never  read  that  Noah  called  up 
Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth  to  work  at  the  pumps,  nor  yet 
that  they  had  any,  for  there  was  not  a  bit  of  leakage 
about  her.  No  doubt  there  were  storms  during  that 
year;  but  we  do  not  hear  that  the  ship  was  ever  in  danger 
of  being  wrecked.  The  rocks,  it  is  true,  were  too  low 
down  to  touch  her  bottom;  for  fifteen  cubits  upwards 
did  the  waters  prevail,  and  the  mountains  were  covered. 
Rising  twenty-seven  feet  above  the  loftiest  mountains, 
she  had  no  quicksands  to  fear;  they  were  too  deep  below 
her  keel.  But  of  course  she  was  exposed  to  the  winds; 
sometimes  the  hurricane  might  have  rattled  against  her, 
and  driven  her  along.  Doubtless,  at  another  time,  the 
hail  beat  on  her  top,  and  the  lightnings  scarred  the  brow 
of  night;  but  the  ark  sailed  on,  not  one  was  cast  out 


240     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

from  her,  nor  were  her  sailors  wearied  with  constant 
pumping  to  keep  out  the  water,  or  frequent  repairs  to 
keep  her  secure.  Tho  the  world  was  inundated  and 
ruined,  that  one  ark  sailed  triumphantly  above  the 
waters.  The  ark  was  safe,  and  all  who  were  in  her  were 
safe,  too. 

SATAN 

Resist  the  Devil. —  I  remember  hearing  a  good  brother 
speak  about  courage  against  the  devil,  and  in  reference 
to  spiritual  power  he  said  that  he  believed  that  a  man 
of  God,  when  he  had  faith,  could  kick  his  way  through 
a  street  full  of  devils  from  one  end  to  the  other.  I  ad 
mired  his  simile.  It  was  worthy  of  Martin  Luther,  for 
it  was  the  kind  of  thing  that  Martin  Luther  would  have 
said.  Oh,  if  the  air  were  as  full  of  devils  as  it  is  of 
fogs,  a  man  that  has  God  within  him  might  laugh  them 
all  to  scorn.  Who  can  hurt  the  man  whom  God  pro 
tects? 

Defeating  the  Devil.— - 1  met  the  other  day  with  a  piece 
of  one  of  Christmas  Evans's  sermons  —  it  struck  me 
forcibly,  and  I  determined  to  repeat  it  — "  The  enemy  is 
ever  after  our  souls;  let  us  keep  our  hearts  with  all  dili 
gence;  let  us  store  our  hearts  with  texts  of  Scripture, 
in  the  things  given,  that  we  may  be  kept  out  of  the  way." 
Then  he  gives  this  parable  — "  Once  upon  a  time  the  devil 
determined  to  do  a  mighty  business.  Seeking  whom  he 
may  devour,  he  went  through  the  land,  determined  to 
devour  some  souls.  He  came  upon  a  ploughboy  stand 
ing  there,  and  he  said  to  himself,  '  I  will  tempt  the  boy 
to  rob  his  master;  then  he  will  get  into  prison;  t'will 
bring  him  into  bad  company,  so  that  he  will  get  worse, 
and  be  transported,  and  ultimately  get  to  the  gallows, 
and  I  shall  have  his  soul  forever/  The  devil  strode 


SATAN  34* 


across  the  moor,  and,  as  he  approached  the  ploughboy, 
he  heard  him  singing  — 

'  My  God,  the  spring  of  all  my  joys, 

The    life   of   my    delights, 
The  glory  of  my  brightest  days, 
And    comfort    of    my    nights.' 

'  Ah ! '  said  the  devil,  '  he  won't  answer  my  purpose,1 
and  off  he  went.  There  was  no  room  for  him  there;  it 
was  a  dry  place.  So,  flying  over  hill  and  dale,  he  came 
to  a  quiet  nook  in  a  valley  between  two  high  moun 
tains,  where  there  was  a  sweet  little  cottage  overgrown 
with  ivy,  with  its  porch  covered  with  eglantine.  There 
sat  beneath  the  porch  a  maiden  knitting.  *  I  will  entice 
her/  said  he,  '  away  to  the  big  town,  and  lead  her  into 
ways  of  folly,  and  sin,  and  shame.  She  shall  perish  in 
an  infirmary,  and  her  soul  will  be  mine  for  ever/  He 
stooped  to  whisper  in  her  ear  some  temptation,  but  he 
heard  her  singing  — 

*  Jesus,    I    love    thy    charming    name, 

'  Tis  music  to  mine  ear ; 
Fain  would  I  sound  it  out  so  loud 
That  earth  and  heaven  should  hear.' 

'  That  won't  answer/  said  he ;  and  he  went  his  way,  say 
ing,  '  I  should  have  done  better  to  have  been  with  old 
Williams  all  day;  I  could  have  tormented  the  old  fel 
low:  I  will  be  off  to  him  now/  So  he  flew  away,  and 
at  nightfall  alighted  in  a  village.  All  the  lamps  were 
out  save  one,  in  a  cottage,  where  he  saw  the  light  glim 
mering  in  an  upper  room.  It  seemed  to  be  a  rushlight 
dying  in  the  socket.  '  Here/  said  he,  '  old  Williams  lives. 
He  has  served  God  these  fifty  years,  and  if  I  could  get 
him  now,  what  a  trophy  he  would  be!  it  would  pay  me 
for  all  my  disappointments  if  I  could  get  old  Williams 
after  all  his  professions.  He  stepped  up  stairs,  and 


242     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

there  Williams  lay  dying.  l  Now,'  said  he,  i  I  will  make 
him  doubt,  and  die  in  despair,  and  perish ! '  The  crisis 
was  just  come;  his  friends  were  gathering  round  his  bed, 
expecting  his  departure.  Satan  stepped  lightly  across 
the  room,  to  get  at  the  dying  man's  ear;  and  as  he  came 
close  to  him,  Williams  stretched  out  his  hand,  and  said, 
'Yea,  tho  I  pass  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death  I  will  fear  no  evil;  for  thou  art  with  me,  thy  rod 
and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me ! '  l  Thou  hast  prepared 
a  table  before  me  in  the  presence  of  mine  enemies/ 
Satan  shrank  back  abashed,  and  went  away  howling.  He 
did  no  more  that  day,  and  never  had  he  done  such  a  sorry 
day's  work  before.  He  was  wholly  beaten,  entirely 
overcome,  because  the  minds  of  the  people  whom  he 
wished  to  attack  had  been  pre-occupied,  and  they  were 
feeding  on  God's  word." 

Satan  and  Our  Weak  Spot.— We  have  all  our  tender 
spots.  When  Thetis  dipped  Achilles  in  the  Styx,  you 
remember  she  held  him  by  the  heel;  he  was  made  in 
vulnerable  wherever  the  water  touched  him,  but  his  heel 
not  being  covered  with  the  water,  was  vulnerable,  and 
there  Paris  shot  his  arrow,  and  he  died.  It  is  even  so 
with  us.  We  may  think  that  we  are  covered  with  virtue 
till  we  are  totally  invulnerable,  but  we  have  a  heel  some 
where;  there  is  a  place  where  the  arrow  of  the  devil  can 
make  way:  hence  the  absolute  necessity  of  taking  to 
ourselves  "  the  whole  armor  of  God,"  so  that  there  may 
not  be  a  solitary  joint  in  the  harness  that  shall  be  un 
protected  against  the  arrows  of  the  devil.  Satan  is  very 
crafty;  he  knows  the  ins  and  outs  of  manhood.  There 
is  many  an  old  castle  that  has  stood  against  every  at 
tack,  but  at  last  some  traitor  from  within  has  gone  with 
out,  and  said,  "  I  know  an  old  deserted  passage,  a  sub 
terranean  back  way,  that  has  not  been  used  for  many  a 
day.  In  such  and  such  a  field  you  will  see  an  opening; 


SERVICE  243 

clear  away  a  heap  of  stones  there,  and  I  will  lead  you 
down  the  passage:  you  will  then  come  to  an  old  door  of 
which  I  have  the  key,  and  I  can  let  you  in;  and  so  "by 
a  back  way  I  can  lead  you  into  the  very  heart  of  the 
citadel,  which  you  may  then  easily  capture."  It  is  so 
with  Satan.  Man  knoweth  not  himself  so  well  as  Satan 
knows  him.  There  are  back  ways  and  subterranean  pas 
sages  into  man's  heart  which  the  devil  doth  well  under 
stand;  and  he  who  thinketh  that  he  is  safe,  let  him  take 
heed  lest  he  fall. 

The  Devil's  Advocate.—  They  used  to  have  in  Rome  when 
they  were  canonizing  saints  an  Advocatus  Diaboli^  or 
advocate  of  the  devil,  who  was  wont  to  plead  against  the 
person  being  canonized,  and  offer  all  the  objections  he 
could.  It  seems  strange  that  so  many  people  should 
turn  Advocati  Diaboli  against  themselves.  I  can  tell  you 
how  they  argue,  for  I  have  talked  to  them  by  the  hour, 
and  this  has  been  the  fashion  of  their  counter-pleading, 
"  But,  sir,  I  don't  feel  any  need  of  it."  We  reply,  "  If 
you  cannot  go  to  Christ  with  a  broken  heart,  go  to 
Christ  for  a  broken  heart."  "  Oh,  but,  sir,  I  don't  feel 
that  I  am  fit  to  go."  "Your  unfitness  is  the  only  evi 
dence  he  wants."  "But  I  don't  think  I  have  repented 
enough."  "  Granted ;  and  you  never  will  repent  enough, 
could  your  tears  forever  flow.  You  cannot  be  saved 
by  the  merit  of  your  repentance. 

SERVICE 

The  Blessedness  of  Service.— A  little  stream  flowed 
through  a  manufacturing  town ;  an  unhappy  little  stream 
it  was,  for  it  was  forced  to  turn  huge  wheels  and  heavy 
machinery,  and  it  wound  its  miserable  way  through  fac 
tories  where  it  was  dyed  black  and  blue,  until  it  became 
a  foul  and  filthy  ditch,  and  loathed  itself.  It  felt  the 
tyranny  which  polluted  its  very  existence.  Now,  there 


244     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

came  a  deliverer  who  looked  upon  the  streamlet  and 
said,  "  I  will  set  thee  free  and  give  thee  rest."  So  he 
stopped  up  the  water-course,  and  said,  "Abide  in  thy 
place,  thou  shalt  no  more  flow  where  thou  art  enslaved 
and  den* led/'  In  a  very  few  days  the  brooklet  found 
that  it  had  but  exchanged  one  evil  for  another.  Its 
waters  were  stagnating,  they  were  gathering  into  a  great 
pool,  and  desiring  to  find  a  channel.  It  was  in  its  very 
nature  to  flow  on,  and  it  foamed  and  swelled,  and  pressed 
against  the  dam  which  stayed  it.  Every  hour  it  grew 
more  inwardly  restless,  it  threatened  to  break  the  bar 
rier,  and  it  made  all  who  saw  its  angry  looks  tremble 
for  the  mischief  it  would  do  ere  long.  It  never  found 
rest  until  it  was  permitted  to  pursue  an  active  course 
along  a  channel  which  had  been  prepared  for  it  among 
the  meadows  and  the  corn  fields.  Then,  when  it  watered 
the  plains  and  made  glad  the  villages,  it  was  a  happy 
streamlet,  perfectly  at  rest.  So  our  souls  are  made  for 
activity,  and  when  we  are  set  free  from  the  activities  of 
our  self-righteousness  and  the  slavery  of  our  sin  we 
must  do  something,  and  we  shall  never  rest  until  we  find 
that  something  to  do. 

The  Joy  of  Service.—  Last  Monday  I  was  cheered  beyond 
all  I  can  tell  you  by  a  letter  from  a  brother  who  had 
been  restored  to  life,  light,  and  liberty  by  the  discourse 
of  last  Sabbath  morning.  I  know  no  greater  joy  than 
to  be  useful  to  your  souls.  For  this  reason,  I  have  tried 
to  preach  this  morning,  tho  I  am  quite  unfit  for  it 
physically.  Oh,  I  do  pray  I  may  hear  more  news  from 
saved  ones!  Oh,  that  some  spirit  that  has  wandered 
out  into  the  dark  moorland  may  spy  the  candle  in  my 
window,  and  find  its  way  home!  If  you  have  found 
my  Lord,  I  charge  you  never  let  him  go,  but  cleave  to 
him  till  the  day  shall  break,  and  the  shadows  themselves 
shall  flee  away. 


SERVICE  245 

Persevering  Service.—  You  know  the  story  of  the  man 
who  comes  riding  up  to  the  captain,  and  says,  "  Sir,  we 
have  taken  a  gun  from  the  enemy."  "  Go  and  take 
another,"  said  the  matter-of-fact  officer.  That  is  the 
best  advice  which  I  can  render  to  a  friend  who  is  elated 
with  his  own  success.  So  much  remains  to  be  accom 
plished  that  we  have  no  time  to  consider  what  has  been 
done.  If  we  have  done  holy  service,  let  us  do  it  a  sec 
ond  time,  and  do  it  a  third  time,  and  continue  to  do  it, 
ever  praying  the  Lord  to  accept  our  persevering  service. 
In  any  case  let  our  consecrated  life  be  for  our  Lord's 
eye  alone,  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed.  Any 
thing  like  sounding  a  trumpet  before  us  is  hateful  to  the 
lowly  Lord ;  secrecy  has  a  charm  for  Jesus,  and  the  more 
carefully  we  preserve  it  the  better. 

The  Service  of  Love.—  It  is  said  that  the  soldiers  of  Persia 
were  driven  into  battle,  and  that  the  sound  of  the  whips 
of  the  generals  could  be  heard  even  while  the  battle  was 
raging,  lashing  on  the  unwilling  ranks  to  fulfil  their 
part  in  the  fray.  Not  so  went  the  Greeks  to  battle. 
They  rushed  like  lions  amidst  a  flock  of  sheep  to  tear 
their  prey.  They  fought  for  their  country,  for  their 
temples,  for  their  lives,  for  all  that  they  held  dear,  and 
right  cheerfully  from  such  an  impulse  within  did  they 
engage  in  the  war.  The  difference  between  the  Greeks 
and  the  Persians  is  just  the  difference  I  want  to  describe 
among  the  professed  followers  of  our  Lord.  The  genu 
ine  Christian  serves  God  because  he  loves  him;  not  that 
he  fears  hell,  for  he  knows  that  he  has  been  delivered 
from  condemnation,  being  washed  in  Jesus'  blood;  not 
that  he  expects  to  earn  heaven,  he  scorns  the  idea. 
Heaven  is  not  to  be  merited  by  our  poor  paltry  works. 
And  besides,  heaven  is  his  inheritance,  since  Christ  has 
given  it  to  him,  having  made  his  title  sure.  But  he 
serves  God  because  he  loves  him.  He  is  drawn  by  a 


246     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

sense  of  the  love  of  God  towards  him  to  love  God  in 
return. 

SIN 

Time  Cannot  Cover  Sin.— When  the  trumpet  of  resur 
rection  sounds,  there  will  be  a  resurrection  of  characters, 
as  well  as  of  men.  The  man  who  has  been  foully 
slandered  will  rejoice  in  the  light  that  reflects  his  purity. 
But  the  man  whose  latent  vices  have  been  skilfully 
veneered  will  be  brought  to  the  light,  too.  His  acts  and 
motives  will  be  alike  exposed.  As  he  himself  looks  and 
sees  the  resuscitation  of  his  crimes,  with  what  horror 
will  he  face  that  day  of  judgment !  "  Ah !  ah !  "  says 
he ;  "  Where  am  I  ?  I  had  forgotten  these.  These  are 
the  sins  of  my  childhood,  the  sins  of  my  youth,  the 
sins  of  my  manhood,  and  the  sins  of  my  old  age. 
I  thought  they  were  dead  and  buried,  but  they  start 
from  their  tombs.  My  memory  has  been  quickened. 
How  my  brain  reels  as  I  think  of  them  all!  But  there 
they  are,  and,  like  so  many  wolves  around  me,  they 
seem  all  thirsting  for  my  destruction."  Beware,  oh  men ! 
Ye  have  buried  your  sins,  but  they  will  rise  up  from 
their  graves  and  accuse  you  before  God.  Time  cannot 
cover  them. 

The  Sting  of  Death.—  Imagine  a  conqueror's  deathbed. 
He  has  been  a  man  of  blood  from  his  youth  up.  Bred 
in  the  camp,  his  lips  were  early  set  to  the  bugle,  and 
his  hand,  even  in  infancy,  struck  the  drum.  He  had  a 
martial  spirit;  he  delighted  in  the  fame  and  applause 
of  men;  he  loved  the  dust  of  battle  and  the  garment 
rolled  in  blood.  He  has  lived  a  life  of  what  men  call 
glory.  He  has  stormed  cities,  conquered  countries,  rav 
aged  continents,  overrun  the  world.  See  his  banners 
hanging  in  the  hall,  and  the  marks  of  glory  on  his 
escutcheon.  He  is  one  of  earth's  proudest  warriors. 


SIN  247 

But  now  he  comes  to  die,  and  when  he  lies  down  to 
expire,  what  shall  invest  his  death  with  horror?  It 
shall  be  his  sin.  Methinks  I  see  the  monarch  dying;  he 
lies  in  state;  around  him  are  his  nobles  and  his  council 
lors;  but  there  is  somewhat  else  there.  Hard  by  his 
side  there  stands  a  spirit  from  Hades;  it  is  a  soul  of 
a  departed  woman.  She  looks  on  him  and  says,  "  Mon 
ster!  my  husband  was  slain  in  battle  through  thy  ambi 
tion:  I  was  made  a  widow,  and  my  helpless  orphans  and 
myself  were  starved."  And  she  passes  by.  Her  hus 
band  comes,  and  opening  wide  his  bloody  wounds,  he 
cries,  "  Once  I  called  thee  monarch ;  but,  by  thy  vile 
covetousness  thou  didst  provoke  an  unjust  war.  See 
here  these  wounds  —  I  gained  them  in  the  siege.  For 
thy  sake  I  mounted  first  the  scaling  ladder;  this  foot 
stood  upon  the  top  of  the  wall,  and  I  waved  my  sword 
in  triumph,  but  in  hell  I  lifted  up  my  eyes  in  torment. 
Base  wretch,  thine  ambition  hurried  me  thither ! " 
Turning  his  horrid  eyes  upon  him,  he  passes  by.  Then 
up  comes  another,  and  another,  and  another  yet:  wak 
ing  from  their  tombs,  they  stalk  around  his  bed  and 
haunt  him;  the  dreary  procession  still  marches  on,  look 
ing  at  the  dying  tyrant.  He  shuts  his  eyes,  but  he  feels 
the  cold  and  bony  hand  upon  his  forehead;  he  quivers, 
for  the  sting  of  death  is  in  his  heart.  "0  Death!" 
says  he;  "to  leave  this  large  estate,  this  mighty  realm, 
this  pomp  and  power  —  this  were  somewhat ;  but  to 
meet  those  men,  those  women,  and  those  orphan  children, 
face  to  face ;  to  hear  them  saying ;  '  Art  thou  become  like 
one  of  us?'  while  kings  whom  I  have  dethroned,  and 
monarchs  whom  I  have  cast  down  shall  rattle  their  chains 
in  my  ears,  and  say,  '  Thou  wast  our  destroyer,  but  how 
art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  0  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morn 
ing!  How  art  thou  brought  down  as  in  a  moment  from 
thy  glory  and  thy  pride ! ' '  There,  you  see,  the  sting 


348    SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

of  death  would  be  the  man's  sin.  It  would  not  sting  him 
that  he  had  to  die,  but  that  he  had  sinned,  that  he  had 
been  a  bloody  man,  that  his  hands  were  red  with  whole 
sale  murder  —  this  would  plague  him  indeed,  for  "  the 
sting  of  death  is  sin." 

Sin's  Cruel  Work. —  When  we  discover  that  our  iniquities 
put  our  dearest  and  best  friend  to  death,  we  vow  re 
venge  against  our  iniquities  and  henceforth  hate  them 
with  a  perfect  hatred.  Let  me  illustrate  this  very  sim 
ply.  Here  is  a  knife,  with  a  richly-carved  ivory  handle, 
a  knife  of  excellent  workmanship.  Yonder  woman,  we 
will  suppose,  has  had  a  dear  child  murdered  by  a  cruel 
enemy.  This  knife  is  hers,  she  is  pleased  with  it,  and 
prizes  it  much.  How  can  I  make  her  throw  that  knife 
away?  I  can  do  it  easily,  for  that  is  the  knife  with 
which  her  child  was  killed.  Look  at  it;  there  is  blood 
still  upon  the  handle.  She  drops  it  as  tho  it  were  a 
scorpion ;  she  cannot  bear  it.  "  Put  it  away,"  saith  she, 
"it  killed  my  child!  Oh,  hateful  thing!"  Now,  sin  is 
such  a  thing:  we  play  with  it  till  we  are  told  it  was  sin 
that  killed  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  died  out  of  love  to  us  — 
pure,  disinterested  love.  Then  we  say,  "Hateful  thing, 
get  thee  gone !  How  can  I  endure  thee  f  "  Remember 
how  Mark  Antony  stirred  up  the  Romans  to  a  fury 
against  Caesar's  murderers.  Holding  up  the  mantle  of 
dead  Caesar,  he  pointed  to  the  rents  and  gashes  in  the 
garment  — 

"In  this  place  ran  Cassius'  dagger  through; 
Through  this  the  well-beloved  Brutus  stabbed." 

And  thus  he  inflamed  the  multitude  to  such  a  pitch  of 
fury  that  they  snatched  up  the  seats  around  them,  and 
away  they  went  to  the  houses  of  the  conspirators  to  set 
them  on  a  blaze.  Ah!  if  my  lips  could  speak  as  my 
heart  bids  them,  I  would  cry,  See  there  the  wounds  of 


SIN  249 

the  Son  of  God;  behold  the  crimson  stains  which  mark 
his  blessed  body:  mark  the  thorn-crown;  gaze  upon  the 
pierced  hands;  weep  over  the  nailed  feet;  see  the  deep 
gash  which  the  lance  made  in  his  side!  Sin  did  this 
cruel  work,  this  bloody  deed !  Down  with  our  sins ;  drag 
them  to  the  cross;  slay  them  at  Calvary;  let  not  one  of 
them  escape,  for  they  are  the  murderers  of  Christ! 

Afraid  of  Sin.— Ulysses  Androvaldus  tells  us  that  a  dove 
is  so  afraid  of  a  hawk,  that  she  will  be  frightened  at  the 
sight  of  one  of  its  feathers.  Whether  it  be  so  or  not, 
I  cannot  tell;  but  this  I  know,  that  when  a  man  has  had 
a  thorough  shaking  over  the  jaws  of  hell,  he  will  be  so 
afraid  of  sin,  that  even  one  of  the  feathers  of  it,  any 
one  sin,  will  alarm  and  send  a  thrill  of  fear  through  his 
soul.  This  is  a  part  of  the  way  by  which  the  Lord  turns 
us  when  we  are  turned  indeed. 

A  True  Sight  of  Sin. —  We  have  all  seen  bears  in  a  pit, 
and  lions  in  stone,  and  have  seen  them  without  alarm; 
but  I  can  readily  imagine  that  if  a  lion  were  suddenly 
to  leap  from  my  platform  into  the  midst  of  this  throng, 
you  would  regard  it  with  a  very  different  eye.  A  wild 
beast  let  loose  among  you  would  be  a  very  different  thing 
from  what  it  is  in  a  picture  or  a  statue.  Now,  sin,  as 
the  preacher  talks  of  it,  is  to  most  of  you  like  a  painted 
lion;  but  when  a  man  feels  it  in  his  own  soul  as  a  living 
evil  full  of  mischief,  it  is  a  very  different  thing.  We 
are  like  the  man  in  the  fable,  who  warmed  a  frozen 
viper  in  his  bosom;  but  when  it  came  to  life  he  knew 
its  poisonous  nature,  for  he  felt  the  venom  in  his  veins. 
Men,  before  God  quickens  them,  nurse  the  viper  of  sin  in 
their  bosom,  and  say,  "Look  at  its  azure  scales;  how 
fair  it  is  to  look  upon!  Do  you  suppose  so  harmless  a 
creature  could  ever  do  me  injury?"  They  put  it  in 
their  bosoms  with  much  fondness;  but  when  it  bites 
them,  and  the  hot  poison  runs  through  their  veins,  and 


aso     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

conscience  is  thoroughly  awakened,  then  they  loathe  it 
and  cast  it  from  them,  or  rather  would  do  so  if  they 
could;  but  as  Laocoon,  in  the  old  story,  tried  in  vain 
to  tear  the  serpent's  coils  from  his  limbs,  so  is  it  with 
them  until  grace  comes  to  their  aid.  At  any  rate,  a 
true  sight  of  sin  soon  turns  a  man  most  thoroughly  from 
his  former  love  of  it. 

Sin  Must  be  Abandoned.—  I  know  that  there  are  some 
here,  and  there  always  have  been  some  few  attending 
my  ministry,  who  have  a  personal  affection  for  me,  and 
who  listen  to  the  Word  with  very  great  attention,  and 
who,  moreover,  are  very  greatly  moved  by  it,  but  who 
have  some  besetting  sin  which  they  either  cannot  or  will 
not  give  up.  They  do  renounce  it  for  a  time;  but  either 
bad  associates,  or  else  the  strength  of  their  passions, 
take  them  away  again.  Oh,  sirs!  I  would  ye  would  take 
warning.  There  was  one  of  whom  we  had  some  sort  of 
hope,  who  listened  to  our  ministry.  There  came  a  turn 
ing-point  with  him.  It  was  this:  either  that  he  must 
give  up  sin,  or  else  give  up  coming  to  the  Tabernacle. 
And  what,  oh!  what  became  of  him?  I  could  indicate 
the  place  where  he  sat.  He  died  of  delirium  tremens! 
And  I  do  not  wonder. 

Danger  of  Little  Sins. —  St.  Augustine  gives  a  picture  of 
how  far  men  will  go  when  they  once  begin  to  sin. 
There  was  a  man  who  in  argument  declared  that  the 
devil  made  flies ;  "  Well,"  said  the  man  with  whom  he 
was  arguing,  "  if  the  devil  made  flies,  then  it  is  but  little 
more  to  say  the  devil  made  worms ! "  "  Well,"  said  the 
other,  "I  believe  it."  "Well,"  said  the  man,  "if  the 
devil  made  worms,  how  do  you  know  but  what  he  made 
small  birds?"  "Well,"  said  the  other,  "it  is  likely  he 
did ! "  "  Well,"  resumed  the  man  with  whom  he  was 
arguing,  "  but  if  he  made  small  birds,  why  may  he  not 
have  made  big  ones?  And  if  he  made  big  birds,  why 


SIN  a$i 

may  he  not  have  made  man  ?  And  if  he  made  man,  why 
may  he  have  not  made  the  world  ?  "  "  You  see,"  says 
St.  Augustine,  "by  one  admission,  by  once  permitting 
the  devil  to  be  thought  the  creator  of  a  fly,  the  man 
came  to  believe  that  the  devil  was  the  Creator."  Just 
get  one  small  error  into  your  minds,  get  one  small  evil 
into  your  thoughts,  commit  one  small  act  of  sin  in  your 
life,  permit  these  things  to  be  dandled,  and  fondled, 
favored,  petted,  and  treated  with  respect,  and  you  can 
not  tell  whereunto  they  may  grow.  They  are  small  in 
their  infancy;  they  will  be  giants  when  they  come  to 
their  full  growth.  Thou  little  knowest  how  near  thy 
soul  may  be  to  destruction,  when  thou  wantonly  in- 
dulgest  in  the  smallest  act  of  sin ! 

Secret  Love  for  Sin. —  Rowland  Hills  tells  a  curious  tale 
of  one  of  his  hearers  who  sometimes  visited  the  theater. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  church.  So  going  to  see  him, 
he  said,  I  understand  Mr.  So  and  so,  you  are  very  fond 
of  frequenting  the  theater.  No,  sir,  he  said,  that's  false. 
I  go  now  and  then  just  for  a  great  treat,  still  I  don't 
go  because  I  like  it;  it  is  not  a  habit  of  mine.  Well, 
said  Rowland  Hill,  suppose  some  one  should  say  to  me, 
Mr.  Hill,  I  understand  you  eat  carrion,  and  I  should 
say,  No,  no,  I  don't  eat  carrion.  It  is  true,  I  now  and 
then  have  a  piece  of  carrion  for  a  great  treat.  Why, 
he  would  say,  you  have  convicted  yourself,  it  shows  that 
you  like  it  better  than  most  people,  because  you  save  it 
up  for  a  special  treat.  Other  men  only  take  it  as  com 
mon  daily  food,  but  you  keep  it  by  way  of  a  treat.  It 
shows  the  deceitfulness  of  your  heart,  and  manifests 
that  in  spite  of  what  you  may  think  you  still  love  the 
ways  and  wages  of  sin. 

The  Thistle-Seed.— Years  ago  there  was  not  a  single 
thistle  in  the  whole  of  Australia.  Some  Scotchman  who 
very  much  admired  thistles  —  rather  acre  than  I  do  — 


252     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

thought  it  was  a  pity  that  a  great  island  like  Australia 
should  be  without  that  marvellous  and  glorious  symbol 
of  his  great  nation.  He,  therefore,  collected  a  packet  of 
thistle-seeds,  and  sent  it  over  to  one  of  his  friends  in 
Australia.  Well,  when  it  was  landed,  the  officers  might 
have  said,  "Oh,  let  it  in;  '  is  it  not  a  little  one?7  Here 
is  but  a  handful  of  thistle-down,  oh,  let  it  come  in;  it 
will  be  but  sown  in  a  garden  —  the  Scotch  will  grow  it 
in  their  gardens;  they  think  it  a  fine  flower,  no  doubt, — 
let  them  have  it,  it  is  but  meant  for  their  amusement." 
Ah,  yes,  it  was  but  a  little  one;  but  now  whole  districts 
of  country  are  covered  with  it,  and  it  has  become  the 
farmer's  pest  and  plague.  It  was  a  little  one;  but,  all 
the  worse  for  that,  it  multiplied  and  grew.  If  it  had 
been  a  great  evil,  all  men  would  have  set  to  work  to 
crush  it.  This  little  evil  is  not  to  be  eradicated,  and 
of  that  country  it  may  be  said  till  doomsday,—"  Thorns 
and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth."  Happy  would  it  have 
been  if  the  ship  that  brought  that  seed  had  been 
wrecked.  No  boon  is  it  to  those  of  our  countrymen 
there  on  the  other  side  of  the  earth,  but  a  vast  curse. 
Take  heed  of  the  thistle-seed;  little  sins  are  like  it.  Take 
care  they  are  not  admitted  into  your  heart.  Endeavor 
to  shun  them  as  soon  as  Satan  presents  them.  Go,  seek 
by  the  grace  of  God  and  his  Holy  Spirit  to  keep  them 
away;  for  if  not,  these  little  sins  will  multiply  so  fast, 
that,  altho  you  remain  wholly  unconscious  of  it,  they 
will  be  your  ruin  and  destruction. 

Hidden  Sin. —  Some  people  I  know  of  are  like  inns,  which 
have  an  angel  hanging  outside  for  a  sign,  but  they  have 
a  devil  within  for  a  landlord.  There  are  many  men  of 
that  kind;  they  take  good  care  to  have  an  excellent  sign 
hanging  out;  they  must  be  known  by  all  men  to  be 
strictly  religious;  but  within,  which  is  the  all-important 
matter,  they  are  full  of  wickedness. 


SIN  253 

Sin  Will  Not  Stay  Hidden.—  There  is  a  singular  poem  by 
Hood,  called  "  The  Dream  of  Eugene  Aram " —  a  most 
remarkable  piece  it  is  indeed,  illustrating  the  point  on 
which  I  am  now  dwelling.  Aram  has  murdered  a  man 
and  cast  his  body  into  the  river  —"a  sluggish  water, 
black  as  ink,  the  depth  was  so  extreme."  The  next  morn 
ing  he  visited  the  scene  of  his  guilt, 

"  And    sought  the   black   accursed   pool, 

With    a   wild   misgiving   eye; 
And  he  saw  the  dead  in  the  river  bed, 
For  the  faithless  stream  was  dry." 

Next  he  covered  the  corpse  with  heaps  of  leaves,  but  a 
mighty  wind  swept  through  the  wood  and  left  the  secret 
bare  before  the  sun. 

"  Then  down  I  cast  me  on  my  face, 

And  first  began  to  weep, 
For  I  knew  my  secret  then  was  one 

That    earth    refused    to   keep, 
On  land  or  sea,  though  it  should  be 

Ten  thousand  fathoms  deep." 

In  plaintive  notes  he  prophesies  his  own  discovery.  He 
buried  his  victim  in  a  cave,  and  trod  him  down  with 
stones,  but  when  years  had  run  their  weary  round  the 
foul  deed  was  discovered  and  the  murderer  put  to  death. 
Sin  Will  Out.—-  Sin  cannot  be  held  in  with  bit  and  bridle. 
"  But  I  am  going  to  have  a  little  drink  now  and  then. 
I  am  only  going  to  be  intoxicated  once  a  week  or  so. 
Nobody  will  see  it;  I  shall  be  in  bed  directly."  You 
will  be  drunk  in  the  streets  soon.  "  I  am  only  just  going 
to  read  one  lascivious  book;  I  will  put  it  under  the  sofa- 
cover  when  anyone  comes  in."  You  will  keep  it  in  your 
library  yet,  sir.  "  I  am  only  going  into  that  company 
now  and  then."  You  will  go  there  every  day,  such  is 
the  bewitching  character  of  it;  you  cannot  help  it.  You 


254     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

may  as  well  ask  the  lion  to  let  you  put  your  head  into 
his  mouth.  You  cannot  regulate  his  jaws,  neither  can 
you  regulate  sin.  Once  go  into  it,  you  cannot  tell  when 
you  will  be  destroyed.  You  may  be  such  a  fortunate 
individual,  that,  like  Van  Amburgh,  you  may  put  your 
head  in  and  out  a  great  many  times;  rest  assured  that 
one  of  these  days  it  will  be  a  costly  venture.  Again, 
you  may  labor  to  conceal  your  vicious  habit,  but  it  will 
come  out,  you  cannot  help  it.  You  keep  your  little  pet 
sin  at  home;  but  mark  this,  when  the  door  is  ajar  the 
dog  will  be  out  in  the  street. 

Presumptuous  Sins.— You  remind  me,  some  of  you,  of 
that  story  of  Dionysius  the  tyrant,  who,  wishing  to  pun 
ish  one  who  had  displeased  him,  invited  him  to  a  noble 
feast.  Rich  were  the  viands  that  were  spread  upon  the 
table,  and  rare  the  wines  of  which  he  was  invited  to 
drink.  A  chair  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  table, 
and  the  guest  was  seated  within  it.  Horror  of  horrors! 
The  feast  might  be  rich,  but  the  guest  was  miserable, 
dreadful  beyond  thought.  However  splendid  might  be 
the  array  of  the  servants,  and  however  rich  the  dainties, 
yet  he  who  had  been  invited  sat  there  in  agony.  For 
what  reason?  Because  over  his  head,  immediately  over 
it,  there  hung  a  sword,  a  furbished  sword,  suspended  by 
a  single  hair.  He  had  to  sit  all  the  time  with  this  sword 
above  him,  with  nothing  but  a  hair  between  him  and 
death.  You  may  conceive  the  poor  man's  misery.  He 
could  not  escape;  he  must  sit  where  he  was.  How  could 
he  feast?  How  could  he  rejoice!  But  0,  my  uncon 
verted  hearer,  thou  art  there  this  morning,  man,  with  all 
thy  riches  and  thy  wealth  before  thee,  with  the  com 
forts  of  a  home  and  the  joys  of  a  household;  thou  art 
there  this  day,  in  a  place  from  which  thou  canst  not 
escape;  the  sword  of  death  above  thee,  prepared  to  de 
scend;  and  woe  unto  thee,  when  it  shall  cleave  thy  soul 


SIN  255 

from  thy  body.  Canst  thou  yet  make  mirth,  and  yet 
procrastinate?  If  thou  canst,  then1  verily  thy  sin  is 
presumptuous  in  a  high  degree.  "  Keep  back  thy  servant 
also  from  presumptuous  sins." 

The  Bravado  of  Sin. —  A  mouse  was  caught  in  a  trap,  the 
other  day,  by  its  tail,  and  the  poor  creature  went  on 
eating  the  cheese.  Many  men  are  doing  the  same;  they 
know  they  are  guilty,  and  they  dread  their  punishment, 
but  they  go  on  nibbling  at  their  beloved  sins.  They 
remind  me  of  the  soldier  in  the  old  classic  story.  The 
army  marched  through  a  certain  country,  and  the  com- 
mander-in-chief  ordered  that  there  should  be  no  plunder 
ing;  not  a  man  must  touch  a  bunch  of  grapes  in  going 
through  the  vineyards,  or  he  should  die  for  his  diso 
bedience.  One  soldier,  tempted  by  a  bunch  of  grapes, 
must  needs  pluck  it,  and  begin  to  eat  it.  He  was 
brought  before  the  captain,  who  declared  that  the  law 
must  be  carried  out  and  the  thief  must  die.  He  was 
taken  out  to  die;  and  tho  he  knew  his  head  would  be  cut 
off,  he  went  on  eating  the  grapes  as  he  walked  along. 
A  comrade  wondered  that  he  should  do  this;  but  the 
condemned  man  answered  that  no  one  ought  to  grudge 
him  his  grapes,  for  they  cost  him  dear  enough. 

Such  are  the  bravados  of  sinners.  The  breasts  of 
wicked  men  are  steeled  rather  than  softened  by  a  sense 
of  condemnation;  but  once  let  the  Holy  Spirit  remove 
the  burden  of  their  guilt,  and  they  will  be  dissolved  by 
love.  Free  pardon  is  a  great  conqueror.  The  love  of 
Jesus  soon  makes  men  turn  from  sin  with  burning  ha 
tred.  Forgiving  love  is  a  main  instrument  in  transform 
ing  men  from  rebels  into  friends. 

Cutting  Sin's  Traces.— I  remember  reading  a  famous 
writer's  description  of  a  wretched  cab-horse  which  was 
old  and  worn  out  and  yet  kept  on  its  regular  round  of 
toil.  They  never  took  him  out  of  harness  for  fear  they 


256     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

should  never  be  able  to  get  his  poor  old  carcass  into  it 
again.  He  had  been  in  the  shafts  for  so  many  years 
that  they  feared  if  they  took  him  out  of  them  he  would 
fall  to  pieces,  and  so  they  let  him  keep  where  he  was 
accustomed  to  be.  Some  men  are  just  like  that.  They 
have  been  in  the  shafts  of  sin  so  many  years  that  they 
fancy  that  if  they  were  once  to  alter  they  would  drop 
to  pieces.  But  it  is  not  so,  old  friend.  We  are  per 
suaded  better  things  of  you,  and  things  that  accompany 
salvation.  The  Lord  will  make  a  new  creature  of  you. 
When  he  cuts  the  traces  and  brings  you  out  from  be 
tween  those  shafts  which  have  so  long  held  you,  you  will 
not  know  yourself.  When  old  things  have  passed  away 
you  will  be  a  wonder  unto  many. 

The  Wolves  of  Sin.— In  the  heyday  of  youth  man  finds 
beaded  bubbles  about  the  brim  of  his  cup  of  sin,  the  wine 
moveth  itself  aright,  it  giveth  its  color  in  the  cup,  but 
as  he  grows  older  and  drinks  deeper  he  comes  nearer  to 
the  dregs,  and  those  dregs  are  as  gall  and  wormwood. 
An  old  man  with  his  bones  filled  with  the  sin  of  his  youth 
is  a  dreadful  sight  to  look  upon;  he  is  a  curse  to  oth 
ers,  and  a  burden  to  himself.  A  man  who  has  fifty 
years  of  sin  behind  him  is  like  a  traveler  pursued  by 
fifty  howling  wolves.  Do  you  hear  their  deep  bay  as 
they  pursue  the  wretch?  Do  you  see  their  eyes  glaring 
in  the  dark,  and  flaming  like  coals  of  fire?  Such  a  man 
is  to  be  pitied  indeed :  whither  shall  he  flee,  or  how  shall 
he  face  his  pursuers? 

Breaking  the  Cart  Ropes  of  Sin.— We  have  seen  pictures 
of  the  Arabs  dragging  those  great  Ninevah  bulls  for  Mr. 
Leyard,  hundreds  of  them  tugging  away;  and  I  have 
imagined  how  Pharaoh's  subjects,  the  Egyptians,  must 
have  sweated  and  smarted  when  they  had  to  drag  some 
of  the  immense  blocks  of  which  his  obelisks  were  com 
posed,—  thousands  of  men  dragging  one  block  of  mason- 


SIN  257 

ry;  and  I  seemed  to  have  just  such  a  load  as  that  behind 
me,  and  it  would  not  stir.  I  prayed,  and  it  would  not 
stir.  I  took  to  reading  my  Bible,  but  my  load  would 
not  stir.  It  seemed  stuck  in  the  mire,  and  no  struggling 
would  move  the  awful  weight.  Deep  ruts  the  wheels 
were  in.  My  load  would  not  be  moved,  and  I  did  not 
know  what  to  do.  I  cried  to  God  in  my  agony,  and  I 
thought  I  must  die  if  I  did  not  get  delivered  from  my 
monstrous  cumber:  but  it  would  not  stir.  I  have  no 
drag  behind  me  now.  Glory  be  to  God,  I  am  not  bound 
with  a  cart-rope  to  the  old  wagon.  I  have  no  hamper 
behind  me,  and  as  I  look  back  for  the  old  ruts  where 
the  cart  stopped  so  long  I  cannot  even  see  their  traces. 
The  enormous  weight  is  not  there!  It  is  clean  gone! 
There  came  One  by  who  wore  a  crown  of  thorns :  I  knew 
him  by  the  marks  in  his  hands  and  in  his  feet:  and  he 
said,  "Trust  me,  and  I  will  set  thee  free."  I  trusted 
him  and  the  enormous  weight  behind  me  was  gone.  It 
disappeared.  As  I  was  told,  it  sank  into  his  sepulchre, 
and  it  lies  buried  there,  never  to  come  out  again.  My 
cart-rope  snapped,  my  cords  of  vanity  melted,  I  was  out 
of  harness.  Then  I  said,  "  The  snare  is  broken,  and 
my  soul  hath  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of  the 
fowler.  I  will  tell  the  story  of  my  deliverance  as  long 
as  I  live."  I  can  say  to-night, 

"  E'er  since  by  faith  I  saw  the  stream 

His  flowing  wounds  supply, 
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme, 
And  shall  be  till  I  die." 

Hiding  Sin  From  God. —  I  can  imagine  a  man  in  business 
calling  himself  a  Christian  about  to  engage  in  a  doubtful 
transaction:  how  is  he  to  discern  the  danger?  Let  him 
ask  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  come  while  he  is  doing  it. 
"  Oh,  dear  no ; "  cries  one,  "  I  had  rather  he  should  not 


258     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

come  until  that  matter  had  been  finished  and  forgotten." 
Then  be  you  sure  that  you  are  moving  in  the  wrong 
direction.  Suppose  you  think  of  going  to  a  certain  place 
of  amusement  about  which  you  have  a  question,  it  is 
easy  to  decide  it  thus:—  When  you  take  your  seat  your 
first  thing  should  be  to  bow  your  head  and  ask  for  a 
blessing,  and  then  say,  "Lord,  here  I  sit  waiting  for 
thine  appearing."  "  Oh,"  say  you,  "  I  should  not  want 
the  Lord  to  come  there."  Of  course  you  would  not. 
Then  do  not  go  where  you  could  not  wish  your  Lord  to 
find  you. 

Sin  a  Poison  of  the  Blood.— A  man  has  a  bad  malady 
upon  him,  and  it  breaks  out  in  his  flesh.  He  goes  to  a 
quack,  who  gives  him  an  ointment,  which  he  applies 
outwardly  to  heal  the  sore  till  the  morbid  appearances 
vanish,  and  he  congratulates  himself  on  the  cure,  and 
commends  the  charlatan  for  his  skill.  "  What  a  capital 
doctor  he  is,  and  how  well  my  money  was  expended,"  he 
says;  "he  has  taken  away  all  that  eruption."  By  and 
by  the  man  is  lying  so  grievously  sick  and  ill  that  he 
does  not  know  what  to  do.  "  Oh,"  thinks  he  to  himself, 
"  have  I  made  a  mistake  ?  "  And  when  the  true  physi 
cian  comes  he  says,  "  What  have  been  your  symptoms  ?  " 
He  tells  the  tale  of  an  eruption  on  his  skin,  and  the 
remedies  he  resorted  to.  "  Ah,"  says  the  physician,  "  the 
disease  is  driven  inwards;  you  have  taken  the  wrong 
course;  your  present  symptoms  are  fatal;  you  will  die. 
It  was  well  that  it  should  come  out  on  your  flesh,  seeing 
it  lurked  in  your  constitution.  When  you  have  a  disease, 
you  had  need  lay  the  axe  at  the  root,  and  not  at  the 
branches.  It  is  not  the  disfigurement  of  the  skin  that 
should  be  seriously  thought  of  as  so  alarming  as  the  blood- 
poisoning  that  caused  it."  Forthwith  he  begins  to  deal 
with  the  real  evil. 


SIN  259 

The  Weight  of  Sin. —  A  very  simple  observation  was  once 
the  means  of  deciding  a  man.  He  was  a  mechanic,  and 
a  man  of  a  mathematical  turn  of  mind.  He  had  attended 
a  meeting.  The  meeting  was  held  in  an  upper  room  and 
on  going  below  stairs,  his  attention  was  attracted  by  the 
beam  that  had  supported  the  people,  and  he  said  to  him 
self,  "  What  a  weight  there  must  have  been  upon  that ! " 
Just  at  that  very  minute,  into  his  mind  there  flashed, 
"  And  what  a  weight  there  is  resting  upon  you !  "  How 
that  thought  should  have  followed  the  other,  I  cannot 
tell,  but  as  he  turned  it  over,  it  did  seem  to  him  that 
he  had  a  weight  of  sin  enough  to  crush  him;  that  he 
could  not  bear  up  under  such  a  weight;  and  that  his 
soul  would  come  down  in  ruin  like  many  a  building 
whose  beams  have  not  been  strong  enough;  after  en 
during  awhile  in  a  condition  more  or  less  uncertain,  it  has 
given  away  at  last. 

Sin  Must  be  Given  Up.-—  When  you  land  in  France,  there 
stands  the  gendarme  who  wants  to  see  what  you  are 
carrying  in  that  basket.  If  you  attempt  to  push  by 
you  will  soon  find  yourself  in  custody.  He  must  know 
what  is  there;  contraband  goods  cannot  be  taken  in.  So 
at  the  gate  of  mercy  —  which  is  Christ  —  no  man  can 
be  saved  if  he  desire  to  keep  his  sins.  He  must  give  up 
every  false  way.  "  Oh,"  saith  the  drunkard,  "  I'd  like 
to  get  to  heaven,  but  I  must  smuggle  in  this  bottle  some 
how."  "  I  would  like  to  be  a  Christian,"  says  another, 
"  I  do  not  mind  taking  Dr.  Watts's  Hymns  with  me, 
but  I  should  like  sometimes  to  sing  a  Bacchanalian  song, 
or  a  lightsome  serenade."  "Well,"  cries  another,  "I 
enjoy  myself  on  Sunday  with  God's  people,  but  you  must 
not  deny  me  the  amusements  of  the  world  during  the 
week;  I  cannot  give  them  up."  "Well,  then,  you  can 
not  enter,  for  Jesus  Christ  never  saves  us  in  our  sins; 
he  saves  us  from  our  sins.  "Doctor,"  says  the  fool, 


260     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

"  make  me  well,  but  I'd  like  to  keep  my  fever."  "  No," 
saith  the  doctor,  "how  can  you  be  well  while  you  keep 
the  fever?"  How  can  a  man  be  saved  from  his  sins 
while  he  clings  to  his  sins?  What  is  salvation  but  to 
be  delivered  from  sin?  Sin-lovers  may  seek  to  be  saved, 
but  they  shall  not  be  able.  While  they  hug  their  sins 
they  cannot  have  Christ. 

Sin  Means  Anarchy.—  Sin,  if  we  rightly  consider  it,  is  an 
upsetting  of  the  entire  order  of  the  universe.  In  your 
family  you  feel  as  a  father  that  nothing  can  go  smoothly 
unless  there  is  a  head  whose  discretion  shall  regulate  all 
the  members.  If  your  child  should  say,  "  Father,  I  am 
determined  as  one  of  this  family  that  whatever  your 
will  is  I  will  resist  it,  and  whatever  my  will  is  I  will 
abide  by  it,  and  always  carry  it  out  if  I  can."  What 
a  family  that  would  be!  How  disorganized!  What  a 
household!  might  we  not  say,  what  a  hell  upon  earth! 
There  sails  to-morrow  a  ship  from  the  Thames  under 
command  of  a  captain,  wise  and  good,  who  understands 
the  seas;  but  he  has  scarcely  reached  the  Nore  before  a 
sailor  tells  him  he  shall  not  obey,  that  he  does  not  in 
tend  either  to  reef  a  sail  or  to  do  anything  aboard  the 
vessel  that  he  is  bidden.  "  Put  the  fellow  in  irons ! " 
Everybody  says  it  is  right.  Or  a  passenger  coming  up 
from  the  saloon  informs  the  captain  that  he  does  not 
approve  of  his  authority,  and  throughout  the  whole  of 
the  voyage  he  intends  to  thwart  him  all  he  can.  If 
there  is  a  boat  within  hail  put  that  fellow  on  shore,  and 
do  not  be  particular  if  he  lands  in  a  muddy  place;  but 
get  rid  of  him  somehow.  Everybody  feels  it  must  be. 
You  might  as  well  scuttle  the  ship,  cut  holes  in  her  sides, 
as  tolerate  for  a  moment  that  the  rightful  central  au 
thority  should  be  unshipped,  or  that  every  man  should 
determine  to  do  what  is  right  in  his  own  eyes.  The 
happiness  of  everybody  on  board  that  vessel  will  depend 


SIN  261 

upon  order  being  kept.  If  one  man  do  this  and  another 
do  that,  you  might  almost  as  well  be  shut  up  in  a  cage 
with  tigers  as  be  in  such  a  vessel.  Now,  look  at  this 
world,  it  is  but  a  floating  ship  on  a  larger  scale,  and 
say,  who  ought  to  be  captain  here  but  he  that  made  it? 
His  mighty  hand  alone  can  grasp  that  awful  tiller.  Who 
can  steer  this  gigantic  vessel  over  the  waves  of  Provi 
dence  —  who  but  he  ?  And  who  am  I,  and,  my  hearer, 
who  are  you,  that  you  say,  "  I  will  ignore  the  Lord  High 
Admiral;  I  will  oppose  the  Captain;  I  will  rebel  against 
him?"  Why,  if  all  do  as  you  do,  what  is  to  become  of 
the  whole  vessel,  what  of  the  whole  world? 
The  Scar  of  Sin.— A  boy  once  went  into  his  father's  or 
chard,  and  there,  in  his  rough  play,  he  broke  a  little  tree 
which  his  father  valued.  But,  rapidly  putting  it  to 
gether  again,  he  managed  to  conceal  the  fact,  for  the 
disunited  parts  of  the  tree  took  kindly  to  each  other, 
and  the  tree  stood  as  before.  It  so  happened  that  more 
than  forty  years  afterwards  he  went  into  that  garden 
after  a  storm  had  blown  across  it  in  the  night,  and  he 
found  the  tree  had  been  riven  in  two,  and  it  had  snapped 
precisely  in  the  place  where  he  had  broken  it  when  it  was 
but  a  sapling.  So  there  may  come  a  crash  to  your  char 
acter  precisely  in  that  place  where  you  sinned  when  yet 
a  lad.  Ah,  how  often  the  transgressions  of  our  youth 
remain  within  our  bosoms.  There  lie  the  eggs  of  our 
young  sin,  and  they  hatch  when  men  come  into  riper 
years.  Don't  be  so  sure  that  the  lapse  of  time  will  con 
sign  your  faults  and  follies  to  oblivion.  You  sow  your 
wild  oats,  sir;  you  have  got  to  reap  them.  The  time 
that  has  intervened  has  only  operated  to  make  that  evil 
seed  spring  up,  and  you  are  so  much  the  nearer  to  the 
harvest.  Time  does  not  change  the  hue  of  sin  in  the 
sight  of  God.  If  a  man  could  live  a  thousand  years, 
•  the  sins  of  his  first  year  would  be  as  fresh  in  the  memory 


262     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

of  the  Almighty  as  those  of  the  last.  Eternity  itself 
will  never  wash  out  a  sin. 

Recklessness  of  Sin.—  Have  you  never  heard  the  story  of 
Archaeus,  the  Grecian  despot,  who  was  going  to  a  feast, 
and  on  the  way  a  messenger  brought  him  a  letter,  and 
seriously  importuned  him  to  read  it.  It  contained  tid 
ings  of  a  conspiracy  that  had  been  formed  against  him, 
that  he  should  be  killed  at  the  feast.  He  took  the  letter, 
and  put  it  into  his  pocket.  In  vain  the  messenger  urged 
that  it  was  concerning  serious  matters.  "  Serious  mat 
ters  to-morrow,"  said  Archseus,  "  feasting  to-night." 
That  night  the  dagger  reached  his  heart  while  he  had 
about  him  the  warning  which,  had  he  heeded  it,  would 
have  averted  the  peril.  Alas !  too  many  men  say,  "  Seri 
ous  things  to-morrow ! "  They  have  no  misgiving,  but 
when  their  sport  is  over  they  will  have  alike  the  leisure 
and  the  inclination  for  these  weighty  matters.  Were  it 
not  wiser,  sirs,  to  let  these  grave  affairs  come  first? 

Breaking  Off  Sin.—  I  have  heard  of  one  who  kept  a  tame 
leopard  in  his  house.  It  had  been  nursed  from  the  time 
it  was  a  cub,  and  it  gambolled  about  like  a  cat.  But  one 
day,  while  the  master  was  asleep,  it  licked  his  hand.  As 
it  licked  a  place  where  the  skin  was  thin  and  broken, 
the  blood  began  to  flow.  Then  all  the  wild  instincts  of 
the  beast  of  the  forest  flashed  from  its  furious  eyes.  The 
man  suddenly  woke,  and  saw  the  situation.  His  end  was 
near  —  unless  he  should  be  quick  and  skilful  enough  to 
destroy  the  animal.  Do  you  think  he  paused  or  hesi 
tated?  No;  a  loaded  pistol  was  within  his  reach;  so  he 
stretched  out  his  hand  quietly,  grasped  it  firmly,  aimed 
it  steadily,  fired  it  instantly,  and  the  creature  lay  dead 
at  his  feet.  It  had  come  to  this ;  that  he  must  either  kill 
it,  or  it  would  kill  him.  It  is  so  with  you.  Your  sins 
begin  to  draw  blood  from  you  already.  Those  stings  of 
conscience,  that  empty  purse,  those  red  eyes  —  all  are 


SIN  263 

beginning  to  tell  what  sin  can  do.  Not  yet  do  you  know 
all  its  horror.  Before  the  leopard  springs  upon  you 
and  speedily  tears  you  in  pieces,  God  help  you  to  give 
it  up! 

Secret  Sin. —  It  is  vain  to  think  that  ye  can  conceal  your 
transgressions.  Before  high  heaven,  disguise  is  futile. 
Yea,  the  darkness  hideth  not;  the  night  shineth  as  the 
day.  I  have  known  persons  who  have  harbored  a  sin  in 
their  breast  until  it  has  prayed  upon  their  constitution. 
They  have  been  like  the  Spartan  boy  who  had  stolen  a 
fox,  and  was  ashamed  to  have  it  known,  so  he  kept  it 
within  his  garment,  till  it  ate  through  his  flesh,  and  he 
fell  dead.  He  suffered  the  fox  to  gnaw  his  heart  ere 
he  would  betray  himself.  There  are  those  who  have  got 
a  sin,  if  not  a  lie  in  their  right  hand,  yea,  a  lie  in  their 
heart;  and  it  is  eating  into  their  very  life.  They  dare 
not  confess  it.  If  they  would  confess  it  to  their  God, 
and  make  restitution  to  those  whom  they  have  offended, 
they  would  soon  come  to  peace;  but  they  vainly  hope 
that  they  can  cover  the  sin,  and  hide  it  from  the  eyes 
of  God  and  man.  He  that  covereth  his  sin  in  this  fash 
ion  shall  not  prosper. 

The  Wages  of  Sin.—-  A  certain  tyrant  sent  for  one  of  his 
subjects,  and  said  to  him,  "What  is  your  employment?" 
He  said,  "I  am  a  blacksmith."  "Go  home,"  said  he, 
"  and  make  me  a  chain  of  such  a  length."  He  went 
home;  it  occupied  him  several  months,  and  he  had  no 
wages  all  the  while  he  was  making  the  chain,  only  the 
trouble  and  the  pains  of  making  it.  Then  he  brought 
it  to  the  monarch,  and  he  said,  "  Go  and  make  it  twice 
as  long."  He  gave  him  nothing  to  do  it  with,  but  sent 
him  away.  Again  he  worked  on,  and  made  it  twice  as 
long.  He  brought  it  up  again,  and  the  monarch  said, 
"  Go  and  make  it  longer  still."  Each  time  he  brought 
it,  there  was  nothing  but  the  command  to  make  it  longer 


264     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

still.  And  when  he  brought  it  up  at  last,  the  monarch 
said,  "  Take  it,  bind  him  hand  and  foot  with  it,  and  cast 
him  into  a  furnace  of  fire."  There  were  his  wages  for 
making  the  chain.  Here  is  a  meditation  for  you  to 
night,  ye  servants  of  the  devil!  Your  master  the  devil 
is  telling  you  to  make  a  chain.  Some  of  you  have  been 
fifty  years  welding  the  links  of  the  chain;  and  he  says, 
"  Go  and  make  it  longer  still.  Next  Sunday  morning 
you  will  open  that  shop  of  yours,  and  put  another  link 
on;  next  Saturday  night  you  will  be  drunk,  and  put 
another  link  on;  next  Monday  you  will  do  a  dishonest 
action,  and  so  you  will  keep  on  making  fresh  links  to 
this  chain;  and  when  you  have  lived  twenty  more  years, 
the  devil  will  say,  "  More  links  on  still ! "  And  then, 
at  last,  it  will  be,  "Take  him,  and  bind  him  hand  and 
foot,  and  cast  him  into  a  furnace  of  fire."  "For  the 
wages  of  sin  is  death." 

Insincere  Conviction  of  Sin. —  There  was  a  monk  who,  on 
a  certain  occasion,  described  himself  as  great  a  hypo 
crite  as  Judas ;  and  a  gentleman  at  once  said,  "  I  knew 
it  long  ago;  you  are  just  the  fellow  I  always  thought." 
When  up  jumped  the  monk,  and  said,  "  Don't  be  saying 
such  things  as  those  of  me !  "  His  humility  was  feigned, 
not  felt.  Thus  people  may  make  such  a  general  con 
fession  as  this,  "  I  am  a  great  sinner,"  who  would  resist 
any  special  charge  brought  home  to  their  consciences, 
however  true.  Say  to  such  a  one,  "You  are  a  rogue," 
and  he  replies,  "  No,  Pm  not  a  rogue."  "  What  are  you, 
then?  Are  you  a  liar?"  "Oh,  no!"  Are  you  a  Sab 
bath-breaker?  "No;  nothing  of  the  kind."  And  so, 
when  you  come  to  sift  it,  you  find  them  sheltering  them 
selves  under  the  general  term  sinner,  not  for  the  purpose 
of  making  confession,  but  in  order  to  evade  it.  This 
result,  as  you  will  see,  is  very  different  from  a  real  con 
viction  of  sin. 


SINNERS  265 


SINNERS 

Keep  Out  of  Temptation.—  You  may  have  heard  the  story 
—  but  it  is  so  good  it  will  bear  repeating  —  of  the  lady 
who  advertised  for  a  coachman  and  was  waited  upon  by 
three  candidates  for  the  situation.  She  put  to  the  first 
one  this  question:  "I  want  a  really  good  coachman  to 
drive  my  pair  of  horses,  and,  therefore,  I  ask  you  how 
near  you  can  drive  to  danger  and  yet  be  safe?" 
"  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  could  drive  very  near  indeed ;  I 
could  go  within  a  foot  of  a  precipice,  without  fear  of 
any  accident  so  long  as  I  held  the  reins."  She  dismissed 
him  with  the  remark  that  he  would  not  do.  To  the  next 
one  who  came  she  put  the  same  question,  "  How  near 
could  you  drive  to  danger?"  Being  determined  to  get 
the  place,  he  said,  "  I  could  drive  within  a  hair's  breadth, 
and  yet  skilfully  avoid  any  mishap."  "  You  will  not 
do,"  said  she.  When  the  third  one  came  in,  his  mind 
was  cast  in  another  mold,  so  on  the  question  being  put 
to  him,  "  How  near  could  you  drive  to  danger?  "  he  said, 
"  Madam,  I  never  tried.  It  has  always  been  a  rule  with 
me  to  drive  as  far  from  danger  as  I  possibly  can."  The 
lady  engaged  him  at  once.  In  like  manner  I  believe  that 
the  man  who  is  careful  to  run  no  risks  and  to  refrain 
from  all  equivocal  conduct,  having  the  fear  of  God  in 
his  heart,  is  most  to  be  relied  upon.  If  you  are  really 
built  upon  the  Rock  of  Ages,  you  may  meet  the  ques 
tion  without  dismay,  "  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  "  and  you 
can  reply  without  presumption,  "  No,  Lord,  I  cannot  and 
I  will  not  leave  thee;  for  to  whom  should  I  go,  Thou 
hast  the  words  of  eternal  life." 

The  Greatest  Loss  of  AH.—  You  do  not  see  the  loveliness 
of  Christ,  yet  "he  is  altogether  lovely."  Now,  I  will 
not  say  one  hard  word,  but  I  will  tell  you  sorrowfully 
what  pitiable  creatures  you  are.  I  hear  enchanting 


266     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

music,  which  seems  more  a  thing  of  heaven  than  of  earth : 
it  is  one  of  Handel's  half-inspired  oratorios.  Yon 
der  sits  a  man,  who  says,  "  I  hear  nothing  to  commend." 
He  has  not  the  power  to  perceive  the  linked  sweetness, 
the  delicious  harmonies  of  sounds.  Do  you  blame  him? 
No,  but  you  who  have  an  ear  for  music,  say,  "  How  I 
pity  him :  he  misses  half  the  joy  of  life !  "  Here,  again, 
is  a  glorious  landscape,  hills  and  valleys,  and  flowing 
rivers,  expansive  lakes  and  undulating  meadows.  I 
bring  to  the  point  of  view  a  friend,  whom  I  would  grat 
ify,  and  I  say  to  him,  "  is  not  that  a  charming  scene  ?  " 
Turning  his  head  to  me,  he  says,  "I  see  nothing."  I 
perceive  that  he  cannot  enjoy  what  is  so  delightful  to 
me:  he  has  some  little  sight,  but  he  sees  only  what  is 
very  near,  and  he  is  blind  to  all  beyond.  Now,  do  I 
blame  him  ?  Or  if  he  proceed  to  argue  with  me,  and  say, 
"  You  are  very  foolish  to  be  so  enthusiastic  about  a  non 
existent  landscape,  it  is  merely  your  excitement,"  shall 
I  argue  with  him?  Shall  I  be  angry  with  him?  No, 
but  I  shall  shed  a  tear,  and  whisper  to  myself,  "  Great 
are  the  losses  of  the  blind."  Now,  you  who  have  never 
heard  music  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  you  are  to  be  greatly 
pitied,  for  your  loss  is  heavy.  You  who  never  saw 
beauty  in  Jesus,  and  who  never  will  forever,  you  need 
all  our  tears.  It  is  hell  enough  not  to  love  Christ!  It 
is  the  lowest  abyss  of  Tartarus,  and  its  fiercest  flame, 
not  to  be  enamored  of  the  Christ  of  God.  There  is  no 
heaven  that  is  more  heaven  than  to  love  Christ  and  to 
be  like  him,  and  there  is  no  hell  that  is  more  hell  than 
to  be  unlike  Christ  and  not  to  want  to  be  like  him,  but 
even  to  be  averse  to  the  infinite  perfections  of  the  "  al 
together  lovely." 

Too=late!  —  Have  you  never  heard  of  the  Indian  in  his 
boat  upon  one  of  the  great  rivers  of  America?  Some 
how  his  moorings  had  broken  and  his  canoe  was  in  the 


SINNERS  267 


power  of  the  current.  He  was  asleep,  while  his  canoe 
was  being  borne  rapidly  along  by  the  stream.  He  was 
sound  asleep,  and  yet  had  good  need  to  have  been  awake, 
for  there  was  a  tremendous  cataract  not  far  ahead. 
Persons  on  shore  saw  the  canoe  —  saw  that  there  was  a 
man  in  it  asleep;  but  their  vigilance  was  of  no  use  to 
the  sleeper:  it  needed  that  he  himself  should  be  aware 
of  his  peril.  The  canoe  quickened  its  pace,  for  the 
waters  of  the  river  grew  more  rapid  as  they  approached 
the  cataract;  persons  on  shore  began  to  cry  out,  and 
raise  alarm  on  all  sides,  and  at  last  the  Indian  was 
aroused.  He  started  up,  and  began  to  use  his  paddle, 
but  his  strength  was  altogether  insufficient  for  the  strug 
gle  with  the  gigantic  force  of  the  waters  around  him. 
He  was  seen  to  spring  upright  in  the  boat  and  disap 
pear  —  himself  and  the  boat  —  in  the  fall.  He  had  per 
ished,  for  he  woke  too  late!  Some  persons  on  their  dy 
ing  beds  just  wake  up  in  time  to  see  their  danger,  but 
not  escape  from  it:  they  are  carried  right  over  the  cat 
aract  of  judgment  and  wrath. 

Hope  for  Sinners. —  The  sailors  have  been  pumping  the 
vessel,  the  leaks  are  gaining,  she  is  going  down,  the  cap 
tain  is  persuaded  she  must  be  a  wreck.  Depressed  by 
such  evil  tidings,  the  men  refuse  to  work;  and  since  the 
boats  are  all  stove  in  and  they  cannot  make  a  raft,  they 
sit  down  in  despair.  Presently  the  captain  has  better 
news  for  them.  "  She  will  float,"  he  says ;  "  the  wind 
is  abating  too,  the  pumps  tell  upon  the  water,  the  leak 
can  be  reached  yet."  See  how  they  work;  with  what 
cheery  courage  they  toil  on,  because  there  is  hope !  Soul, 
there  is  hope!  There  is  hope!  THERE  is  HOPE!  To  the 
harlot,  to  the  thief,  to  the  drunkard. 

The  Sinner  Seeing  Double.— Do  not,  I  pray  you,  play 
with  time  any  longer.  Say  not  "  There  is  time  enough ;  " 
for  the  wise  man  knows  that  time  enough  is  little  enough. 


268     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Be  not  like  the  foolish  drunkard  who,  staggering  home 
one  night,  saw  his  candle  lit  for  him.  "  Two  candles ! " 
said  he,  for  his  drunkenness  made  him  see  double,  "  I 
will  blow  out  one,"  and  as  he  blew  it  out,  in  a  moment 
he  was  in  the  dark.  Many  a  man  sees  double  through 
the  drunkenness  of  sin  —  he  thinks  that  he  has  one  life 
to  sow  his  wild  oats  in,  and  then  the  last  part  of  life  in 
which  to  turn  to  God;  so,  like  a  fool,  he  blows  out  the 
only  candle  that  he  has,  and  in  the  dark  he  will  have  to 
lie  down  forever.  Haste  thee,  traveller,  thou  hast  but 
one  sun,  and  when  that  sets,  thou  wilt  never  reach  thy 
home.  God  help  thee  to  make  haste  now! 
Deceiving  One's  Own  Soul. —  Whenever  you  have  heard  an 
earnest,  powerful  sermon,  you  have  gone  home  and  la 
bored  to  get  rid  of  it.  A  tear  has  stolen  down  your 
cheek  now  and  then,  and  you  have  despised  yourself  for 
it.  "  Oh ! "  you  say,  "  it  is  not  manly  for  me  to  think 
of  these  things."  There  have  been  a  few  twitches  at 
times  which  you  could  not  help,  but  the  moment  after 
you  have  your  heart  like  a  flint,  impenetrably  hard  and 
stony.  Well,  sir,  I  will  give  you  a  picture  of  yourself. 
There  is  a  foolish  farmer  yonder  in  his  house.  It  is  the 
dead  of  night :  the  burglars  are  breaking  in  —  men  who 
will  neither  spare  his  life  nor  his  treasure.  There  is  a 
dog  down  below,  chained  in  the  yard;  it  barks  and  barks, 
and  howls  again.  "  I  cannot  be  quiet,"  says  the  farmer, 
"my  dog  makes  too  much  noise."  Another  howl,  and 
yet  another.  He  creeps  out  of  bed,  gets  his  loaded  gun, 
opens  the  window,  fires  it,  and  kills  the  dog.  "  Ah !  it  is 
all  right  now,"  he  mutters;  he  goes  to  bed,  lies  down,  and 
quietly  rests.  "  No  hurt  will  come,"  he  says,  "  now ;  for 
I  have  made  that  dog  quiet."  Ah!  but  would  that  he 
could  have  listened  to  the  warning  of  the  faithful  crea 
ture.  Ere  long  he  shall  feel  the  knife,  and  rue  his  fatal 
folly.  So  you,  when  God  is  warning  you  —  when  your 


SINNERS  269 


faithful  conscience  is  doing-  its  best  to  save  you  —  you 
try  to  kill  your  only  friend,  while  Satan  and  Sin  are 
stealing  up  to  the  bedside  of  your  slothfulness,  ready  to 
destroy  your  soul  forever.  What  should  we  think  of 
the  sailor  at  sea,  who  should  seek  to  kill  all  the  stormy 
petrels,  that  there  might  be  an  end  to  all  storms?  Would 
you  not  say,  "  Poor  foolish  man !  why  those  birds  are 
sent  by  a  kind  providence  to  warn  him  of  the  tempest. 
Why  needs  he  injure  them?  They  cause  not  the  tumult; 
it  is  the  raging  sea."  So  it  is  not  your  conscience  that 
is  guilty  of  the  disturbance  in  your  heart,  it  is  your  sin ; 
and  your  conscience,  acting  true  to  its  character,  as 
God's  index  in  your  soul,  tells  you  that  all  is  wrong. 
Oh,  that  ye  would  arise,  and  take  the  warning,  and  fly 
to  Jesus  while  the  hour  of  mercy  lasts. 

Heathen  in  Cities. —  In  London,  the  city  missionaries  will 
bear  witness  that  while  they  can  sometimes  get  at  the 
wives,  yet  there  are  thousands  of  husbands,  who  are 
necessarily  away  at  the  time  of  the  missionary's  visit, 
who  have  not  a  word  of  rebuke,  or  exhortation,  or  invi 
tation,  or  encouragement  ever  sounding  in  their  ears  at 
all,  from  the  day  of  their  birth  to  the  day  of  their  death ; 
and  they  might,  for  all  practical  purposes,  as  well  have 
been  born  in  the  centre  of  Africa  as  in  the  city  of  Lon 
don;  for  they  are  without  God,  without  hope,—  aliens 
from  the  commonwealth  of  Isreal ;  far  off,  not  by  wicked 
works  only,  but  by  dense  ignorance  of  God. 

A  Hospital  for  Sinners.—  We  know  of  a  place  in  England, 
still  existing,  where  there  is  a  dole  of  bread  served  to 
every  passer-by  who  chooses  to  ask  for  it.  Whoever 
he  may  be,  he  has  but  to  knock  at  the  door  of  St.  Cross 
Hospital,  and  there  is  the  dole  of  bread  for  him.  Jesus 
Christ  so  loveth  sinners  that  he  has  built  a  St.  Cross 
Hospital,  so  that,  whenever  a  sinner  is  hungry,  he  has 
but  to  knock  and  have  his  wants  supplied.  Nay,  he  has 


270     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

done  better;  he  has  attached  to  this  hospital  of  the  cross 
a  bath;  and  whenever  a  soul  is  black  and  filthy,  it  has 
but  to  go  there  and  be  washed.  The  fountain  is  always 
full,  always  efficacious.  There  is  no  sinner  who  ever 
went  into  it  and  found  it,  could  not  wash  away  his 
stains.  Sins  which  were  scarlet  and  crimson  have  all 
disappeared,  and  the  sinner  has  been  whiter  than  snow. 
As  if  this  were  not  enough,  there  is  attached  to  this  hos 
pital  of  the  cross  a  wardrobe;  and  a  sinner,  making 
application  simply  as  a  sinner,  with  nothing  in  his  hand, 
but  being  just  empty  and  naked,  he  may  come  and  be 
clothed  from  head  to  foot.  And  if  he  wishes  to  be  a 
soldier,  he  may  not  merely  have  an  under-garment,  but 
he  may  have  armor  which  shall  cover  him  from  the  sole 
of  his  foot  to  the  crown  of  his  head.  Nay,  if  he  wants 
a  sword  he  shall  have  that  given  to  him,  and  a  shield 
too.  There  is  nothing  that  his  heart  can  desire,  that  is 
good  for  him,  which  he  shall  not  receive.  He  shall  have 
spending-money  so  long  as  he  lives,  and  he  shall  have  an 
eternal  heritage  of  glorious  treasure  when  he  enters  into 
the  joy  of  his  Lord. 

Secret  Sinners.—  There  is  the  table  set  for  secret  sinners, 
and  here  the  old  rule  is  observed.  At  that  table,  in  a 
room  well  darkened,  I  see  a  young  man  sitting  to-day, 
and  Satan  is  the  servitor,  stepping  in  so  noiselessly,  that 
no  one  would  hear  him.  He  brings  in  the  first  cup  — 
and  0  how  sweet  it  is!  It  is  the  cup  of  secret  sin. 
"  Stolen  waters  are  sweet,  and  bread  eaten  in  secret  is 
pleasant."  How  sweet  that  morsel,  eaten  all  alone! 
Was  there  ever  one  that  rolled  so  delicately  under  the 
tongue?  That  is  the  first;  after  that,  he  brings  in  an 
other  —  the  wine  of  an  unquiet  conscience.  The  man's 
eyes  are  opened.  He  says,  "What  have  I  done?  What 
have  I  been  doing?  Ah,"  cries  this  Achan,  "the  first 
cup  you  brought  me,  I  saw  sparkling  in  that  a  wedge  of 


SINNERS  271 


gold,  and  a  goodly  Babylonish  garment;  and  I  thought, 
'  0,  I  must  have  that ; '  but  now  my  thought  is,  What 
shall  I  do  to  hide  this,  where  shall  I  put  it?  I  must 
dig.  Ay,  I  must  dig  deep  as  hell  before  I  shall  hide  it, 
for  sure  enough  it  will  be  discovered." 

The  grim  governor  of  the  feast  is  bringing  in  a  mas 
sive  bowl,  filled  with  a  black  mixture.  The  secret  sin 
ner  drinks,  and  is  confounded;  he  fears  his  sin  will  find 
him  out.  He  has  no  peace,  no  happiness,  he  is  full  of 
uneasy  fear;  he  is  afraid  that  he  shall  be  detected.  He 
dreams  at  night  that  there  is  some  one  after  him;  there 
is  a  voice  whispering  in  his  ear,  and  telling  him,  "  I 
know  all  about  it;  I  will  tell  it."  He  thinks,  perhaps, 
that  the  sin  which  he  has  committed  in  secret  will  break 
out  to  his  friends;  the  father  will  know  it,  the  mother 
will  know  it.  Ay,  it  may  be  even  the  physician  will 
tell  the  tale,  and  blab  out  the  wretched  secret.  For 
such  a  man  there  is  no  rest.  He  is  always  in  dread  of 
arrest. 

A  Houseless  Soul. —  Have  you  ever  seen  a  poor  girl  at 
midnight  sitting  down  on  a  doorstep  crying?  Somebody 
passes  by,  and  says,  "  Why  do  you  sit  here ?  "  "I  have 
no  house,  sir.  I  have  no  home."  "Where  is  your  fa 
ther?"  "My  father's  dead,  sir."  "Where  is  your 
mother?"  "I  have  no  mother,  sir."  "Have  you  no 
friends?"  "No  friends  at  all."  Have  you  no  house?" 
"No;  I  have  none.  I  am  houseless."  And  she  shivers 
in  the  chill  air,  and  gathers  her  poor  ragged  shawl 
around  her,  and  cries  again,  "  I  have  no  house  —  I  have 
no  home."  Would  you  not  pity  her?  Would  you  blame 
her  for  her  tears  ?  Ah !  there  are  some  of  you  that  have 
houseless  souls  here  this  morning.  It  is  something  to 
have  a  houseless  body ;  but  to  think  of  a  houseless  soul ! 
Methinks  I  see  you  in  eternity  sitting  on  the  door-step 
of  heaven.  An  angel  says,  "What!  have  you  no  house 


27«  SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

to  live  in?"  "No  house,"  says  the  poor  soul.  "Hare 
you  no  father?  "  "  No;  God  is  not  my  father;  and  there 
is  none  beside  him."  "  Have  you  no  mother  ?  "  "  No ; 
the  church  is  not  my  mother;  I  never  sought  her  ways, 
nor  loved  Jesus.  I  have  neither  father  nor  mother." 
"Have  you  no  house,  then?"  "No;  I  am  a  houseless 
soul." 

Transient  Feeling.— I  know  there  are  some  of  you  that 
can  scarcely  keep  your  seats  at  the  thought  of  your  in 
iquities;  and  you  have  almost  vowed,  some  of  you,  that 
this  day  you  will  seek  God,  and  the  first  thing  you  will 
do,  will  be  to  climb  to  your  chamber,  and  shut  the  door, 
and  seek  the  Lord.  Ah,  but  I  remember  a  story  of  one, 
who  remarked  to  a  minister,  what  a  wonderful  thing  it 
was  to  see  so  many  people  weeping.  "  Nay,"  said  he, 
"  I  will  tell  you  something  more  wonderful  still,  that 
so  many  will  forget  all  they  wept  about  when  they  get 
outside  the  door."  And  you  will  do  this.  Still,  when 
you  have  done  it,  you  will  recollect  that  you  have  not  been 
without  the  strivings  of  God's  Spirit. 

True  Religion  Only  Safeguard  of  Character.— A  great 
number  of  those  who  perish  were  once  just  the  very  peo 
ple  whom,  if  natural  disposition  had  any  thing  to  do 
with  it,  we  should  have  expected  to  see  in  heaven.  Why, 
there  is  one  here  who  in  his  youth  was  a  child  of  many 
follies.  Often  did  his  mother  weep  over  him,  and  cry 
and  groan  over  her  son's  wanderings;  for  what  with  a 
fierce  high  spirit  that  could  brook  neither  bit  nor  bridle, 
what  with  perpetual  rebellions  and  ebullitions  of  hot 
anger,  she  said,  "  My  son,  my  son,  what  wilt  thou  be  in 
thy  riper  years?  Surely  thou  wilt  dash  in  pieces  law 
and  order,  and  be  a  disgrace  to  thy  father's  name."  He 
grew  up;  in  youth  he  was  wild  and  wanton,  but,  wonder 
of  wonders,  on  a  sudden  he  became  a  new  man,  changed, 
altogether  changed;  no  more  like  what  he  was  before 


SINNERS  273 


than  angels  are  like  lost  spirits.  He  sat  at  her  feet,  he 
cheered  her  heart,  and  the  lost,  fiery  one  became  gentle, 
mild,  humble  as  a  little  child,  and  obedient  to  God's  com 
mandments.  You  say,  wonder  of  wonders!  But  there 
is  another  here.  He  was  a  fair  youth :  when  but  a  child 
he  talked  of  Jesus;  often  when  his  mother  had  him  on 
her  knee  he  asked  her  questions  about  heaven;  he  was 
a  prodigy,  a  wonder  of  piety  in  his  youth.  As  he  grew 
up,  the  tear  rolled  down  his  cheek  under  any  sermon; 
he  could  scarcely  bear  to  hear  of  death  without  a  sigh; 
sometimes  his  mother  caught  him,  as  she  thought,  in 
prayer  alone.  And  what  is  he  now?  He  has  just  this 
very  morning  come  from  sin;  he  has  become  the  de 
bauched  desperate  villain,  has  gone  far  into  all  manner 
of  wickedness  and  lust,  and  sin,  and  has  become  more 
damnably  corrupt  than  other  men  could  have  made  him; 
only  his  own  evil  spirit,  once  confined,  has  now  developed 
itself;  he  has  learned  to  play  the  lion  in  his  manhood, 
as  once  he  played  the  fox  in  his  youth. 
The  Point  of  View. —  Some  men  seem  to  be  born  with  two 
characters.  I  remarked  when  in  the  library  at  Trinity 
College,  Cambridge,  a  very  fine  statue  of  Lord  Byron. 
The  librarian  said  to  me,  "  Stand  here,  sir."  I  looked, 
and  I  said,  "  what  a  fine  intellectual  countenance !  What 
a  grand  genius  he  was ! "  "  Come  here,"  he  said,  "  to 
the  other  side."  Ah!  what  a  demon!  There  stands  the 
man  that  could  defy  the  deity."  He  seemed  to  have  such 
a  scowl  and  such  a  dreadful  leer  in  his  face;  even  as  Mil 
ton  would  have  painted  Satan  when  he  said  —  "  Better 
to  reign  in  hell  than  to  serve  in  heaven."  I  turned  away 
and  said  to  the  librarian,  "  Do  you  think  the  artist  de 
signed  this  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  he  wished  to  picture 
the  two  characters  —  the  great,  the  grand,  the  almost 
superhuman  genius  that  he  possessed,  and  yet  the  enor 
mous  mass  of  sin  that  was  in  his  soul." 


274      SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Three  Fools. —  I  will  show  you  three  fools.  One  is  yon 
der  soldier,  who  has  been  wounded  on  the  field  of  battle, 
grievously  wounded,  well  nigh  unto  death;  the  surgeon 
is  by  his  side,  and  the  soldier  asks  him  a  question.  Lis 
ten,  and  judge  of  his  folly.  What  question  does  he  ask* 
Does  he  raise  his  eyes  with  eager  anxiety  and  inquire  if 
the  wound  be  mortal,  if  the  practitioner's  skill  can  sug 
gest  the  means  of  healing,  or  if  the  remedies  are  within 
reach  and  the  medicine  at  hand?  No,  nothing  of  the 
sort ;  strange  to  tell,  he  asks,  "  Can  you  inform  me  with 
what  sword  I  was  wounded,  and  by  what  Russian  I  have 
been  thus  grievously  mauled?  I  want,"  he  adds,  "to 
learn  every  minute  particular  respecting  the  origin  of  my 
wound."  The  man  is  delirious  or  his  head  is  affected. 
Surely  such  questions  at  such  a  time  are  proof  enough 
that  he  is  bereft  of  his  senses. 

There  is  another  fool.  The  storm  is  raging,  the  ship 
is  flying  impetuous  before  the  gale,  the  dark  scud  moves 
swiftly  over  head,  the  masts  are  creaking,  the  sails  are 
rent  to  rags,  and  still  the  gathering  tempest  grows  more 
fierce.  Where  is  the  captain?  Is  he  busily  engaged  on 
the  deck,  is  he  manfully  facing  the  danger,  and  skill 
fully  suggesting  means  to  avert  it?  No,  sir,  he  has  re 
tired  to  his  cabin,  and  there  with  studious  thoughts  and 
crazy  fancies  he  is  speculating  on  the  place  where  this 
storm  took  its  rise.  "  It  is  mysterious,  this  wind ;  no  one 
ever  yet,"  he  says,  "  has  been  able  to  discover  it."  And, 
so  reckless  of  the  vessel,  the  lives  of  the  passengers,  and 
his  own  life,  he  is  careful  only  to  solve  his  curious  ques 
tions.  The  man  is  mad,  sir;  take  the  rudder  from  his 
hand;  he  is  clean  gone  mad!  If  he  should  ever  run  on 
shore,  shut  him  up  as  a  hopeless  lunatic. 

The  third  fool  I  shall  doubtless  find  among  yourselves. 
You  are  sick  and  wounded  with  sin,  you  are  in  the  storm 
and  hurricane  of  Almighty  vengeance,  and  yet  the 


SINNERS  275 


question  which  you  would  ask  of  me,  this  morning,  would 
be,  "  Sir,  what  is  the  origin  of  evil  ?  "  You  are  mad,  sir, 
spiritually  mad. 

Serving  Against  Light. —  The  late  lamented  murder  of 
Williams  at  Erromanga,  was  brought  about  by  the  evil 
doings  of  a  trader  who  had  gone  to  the  island,  and  who 
was  also  the  son  of  a  missionary.  He  had  become  reck 
less  in  his  habits,  and  treated  the  islanders  with  such 
barbarity  and  cruelty,  that  they  revenged  his  conduct 
upon  the  next  white  man  who  put  his  foot  on  their  shore ; 
and  the  beloved  Williams,  one  of  the  last  of  the  martyrs, 
died  a  victim  of  the  guilt  of  those  who  had  gone  before 
him.  The  worst  of  men  are  those  who,  having  much  light, 
still  run  astray. 

The  Lost. —  Now  I  will  tell  you  the  people  whom  Christ 
will  save  —  they  are  those  who  are  lost  to  themselves. 
Just  imagine  a  ship  at  sea  passing  through  a  storm :  the 
ship  leaks,  and  the  captain  tells  the  passengers  he  fears 
they  are  lost.  If  they  are  far  away  from  shore,  and  have 
sprung  a  leak,  they  pump  with  all  their  might  as  long 
as  they  have  any  strength  remaining;  they  seek  to  keep 
down  the  devouring  element;  they  still  think  that  they 
are  not  quite  lost  while  they  have  the  power  to  use  the 
pumps.  At  last  they  see  the  ship  cannot  be  saved;  they 
give  it  up  for  lost,  and  leap  into  the  boats.  The  boats 
are  floating  for  many  a  day,  full  of  men  who  have  but 
little  food  to  eat,  "  They  are  lost,"  we  say,  "  lost  out  at 
sea."  But  they  do  not  think  so;  they  still  cherish  a 
hope  that  perhaps  some  stray  ship  may  pass  that  way 
and  pick  them  up.  There  is  a  ship  in  the  horizon;  they 
strain  their  eyes  to  look  at  her;  they  lift  each  other  up; 
they  wave  a  flag ;  they  rend  their  garments  to  make  some 
thing  which  shall  attract  attention;  but  she  passed  away; 
black  night  comes,  and  they  are  forgotten.  At  length 
the  very  last  mouthful  of  food  has  been  consumed; 


276    SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

strength  fails  them,  and  they  lay  down  their  oars  in  the 
boat,  and  lay  themselves  down  to  die.  You  can  imagine 
then  how  well  they  understand  the  awful  meaning  of 
the  term  —"  lost."  As  long  as  they  had  any  strength 
left  they  felt  they  were  not  lost;  as  long  as  they  could 
see  a  sail  they  felt  there  was  yet  hope;  while  there  was 
yet  a  mouldy  biscuit  left,  or  a  drop  of  water,  they  did 
not  give  up  all  for  lost.  Now  the  biscuit  is  gone,  and 
the  water  is  gone;  now  strength  is  departed,  and  the 
oar  lies  still:  they  lie  down  to  die  by  each  other's  side, 
mere  skeletons;  things  that  should  have  been  dead  days 
ago,  if  they  had  died  when  all  enjoyment  of  life  had 
ceased.  Now  they  know,  I  say,  what  it  is  to  be  lost, 
and  across  the  shoreless  waters  they  seem  to  hear  their 
death-knell  pealing  forth  that  awful  word,  Lost!  lost! 
lost!  Now,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  these  are  the  people 
Christ  came  to  save. 

The  Sinner's  Emancipation.—  In  the  bad  old  times  in  the 
south  a  free  negro  was  forced  to  carry  his  papers  about 
with  him,  but  in  that  blessed  day  when  the  Jubilee  trum 
pet  sounded,  and  every  African  throughout  the  States 
was  free,  I  can  hardly  imagine  some  little  squire  or 
country  judge  saying  to  the  emancipated  negro,  "  Sam, 
I  will  make  out  papers  for  you,  and  for  your  consola 
tion  I  will  put  my  name  '  Jeremiah  Stiggins '  at  the  bot 
tom."  Why,  the  emancipated  negro  would  have  said, 
"  I  have  seen  the  proclamation  which  has  the  name  Ab 
raham  Lincoln,  the  President  of  the  United  States,  at 
its  foot,  and  I  do  not  care  a  button  for  your  name  or 
anybody  else's."  Having  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  I 
have  salvation  upon  the  authority  of  the  Word  of  God, 
and  on  the  Holy  Ghost's  authority  I  know  that  there  is 
therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  therefore  I  would  not  thank  an  angel  for 
his  oath  if  he  tendered  it  in  confirmation. 


SINNERS  277 


God's  Message  Through  Mothers.— The  first  messenger 
that  some  of  us  had  was  that  fond  woman,  upon  whose 
breast  in  infancy  we  hung.  We  should  never  breathe  the 
word  "  mother "  without  grateful  emotions.  How  can 
we  forget  that  tearful  eye  when  she  warned  us  to  es 
cape  from  the  wrath  to  come?  We  thought  her  lips 
right  eloquent;  others  might  not  think  so,  but  they  cer 
tainly  were  eloquent  to  us.  How  can  we  ever  forget 
when  she  bowed  her  knee,  and  with  her  arms  about  our 
neck,  prayed  for  us :  "  Oh !  that  my  son  might  live  be 
fore  Thee."  Nor  can  her  frown  be  effaced  from  our 
memory,  that  solemn,  loving  frown  when  she  rebuked 
our  budding  iniquities;  and  her  smiles  have  never  faded 
from  our  recollection,  the  beaming  of  her  countenance 
when  she  rejoiced  to  see  some  good  thing  in  us  toward 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  Mothers  often  become  potent 
messengers  from  God,  and  I  think  each  Christian  mother 
should  ask  herself  in  secret  whether  the  Lord  hath  not 
a  message  to  give  through  her  to  her  sons  and  to  her 
daughters.  And  did  you  despise  that  messenger?  Had 
you  the  hardihood  to  reject  God  when  he  spoke  in  this 
way,  when  he  selected  one  so  near  and  so  dear,  who  could 
speak  so  well,  and  could  talk  to  that  tender  instinct, 
which  respects  and  hallows  a  mother's  love? 

Be  Sure  of  the  Foundation.—  Certain  parts  of  the  South 
of  France  are  marvellously  like  Palestine,  and  perhaps 
at  the  present  moment  they  are  more  like  what  the  Holy 
Land  was  in  Christ's  day  than  the  Holy  Land  now  is. 
When  I  reached  Cannes  last  year  I  found  that  there  had 
been  a  flood  in  the  town.  This  flood  did  not  come  by 
reason  of  a  river  being  swollen,  but  through  a  deluge 
of  rain.  A  waterspout  seems  to  have  burst  upon  the 
hill-side,  tearing  up  earth,  and  rocks,  and  stones,  and 
then  huriying  down  to  the  sea.  It  rushed  across  the 
railway  station  and  poured  down  the  street  which  led 


278     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

to  it,  drowning  several  persons  in  its  progress.  When  I 
was  there  a  large  hotel  —  I  should  think  five  stories 
high  —  was  shored  up  with  timber,  and  was  evidently 
doomed;  for  when  this  stream  rushed  down  the  narrow 
street  it  undermined  the  lower  courses  of  the  building, 
and  as  there  were  no  foundations  at  all  able  to  bear 
such  a  test  the  whole  erection  was  rendered  unsafe.  The 
Savior  had  some  such  case  in  his  mind's  eye.  A  torrent 
of  water  would  come  tearing  down  the  side  of  the  moun 
tain,  and  if  a  house  was  built  on  the  mere  earth,  it 
would  be  carried  away  directly,  but  if  it  were  fastened 
into  the  rock  so  that  it  became  part  and  parcel  of  it, 
then  the  flood  might  rush  all  around  it,  but  it  would 
not  shake  the  walls.  Beloved  builder  of  a  house  for 
your  soul,  your  house  is  so  situated  fhat  one  of  these 
days  there  must  come  great  pressure  upon  it.  "  How  do 
you  know?"  Well,  I  know  that  the  house  wherein  my 
soul  lives  is  pitched  just  where  winds  blow,  and  waves 
rise,  and  storms  beat.  Where  is  yours?  Do  you  live 
in  a  snug  corner?  Yes,  but  one  of  these  times  you  will 
find  that  the  snug  corner  will  be  no  more  shielded  than 
the  open  riverside;  for  God  so  orders  providence  that 
every  man  has  his  test  sooner  or  later.  It  may  be  that 
you  think  yourself  past  temptation,  but  the  idea  is  a  de 
lusion,  as  time  will  show.  Perhaps  from  the  very  fact 
that  you  seem  quite  out  of  the  way,  a  peculiar  tempta 
tion  may  befall  you.  Therefore,  I  do  pray  you,  because 
of  the  exposed  condition  of  your  life's  building,  build 
upon  a  good  foundation. 

Foolish  Objections.— You  see  a  man  put  into  the  con 
demned  cell  at  Newgate,  and  you  go  in  and  tell  him  that 
Her  Majesty  presents  him  with  a  free  pardon.  I  war 
rant  you  he  will  not  put  his  hand  to  his  brow,  and  say, 
"  Well,  but  I  think  there  is  this  or  that  objection  to  my 
accepting  it."  "No,"  thinks  he,  "  if  there  is  any  ob- 


SINNERS  279 


jeetion,  let  those  find  it  out  that  like;  it  is  no  business  of 
mine."  And  so  with  the  soul  that  is  bidden  to  come  to 
Christ;  I  say,  let  it  come,  objections  or  no  objections, 
and  if  there  be  objections,  let  somebody  else  find  them 
out,  but  as  for  thee,  poor  sinner,  don't  cover  thy  face 
from  Jesus,  but  come  as  thou  art,  just  as  thou  art,  and 
say,  "  Here  I  am,  my  Savior :  if  thou  canst  save  —  and 
I  believe  thou  canst  —  save  me.  At  any  rate,  if  I  per 
ish,  I  will  perish  trusting  in  thee." 

Christ  Drawing  the  Sinner.— There  are  times  with  men, 
before  conversion,  when  a  sort  of  softness  steals  over 
them,  when  they  feel  as  if  they  could  not  hold  out  much 
longer  against  appeals  so  reasonable  and  so  gracious.  A 
mother's  prayers  come  up,  perhaps  her  dying  words  are 
heard  again;  or  the  death  of  a  little  child  touches  the 
parent's  heart  as  nothing  else  has  done.  The  man  is 
under  holy  influences,  he  knows  not  how;  there  are  an 
gels  in  the  air  around  him,  tho  there  are  devils  in  the 
heart  within  him.  The  man  cannot  be  at  peace  in  sin; 
he  is  restless  till  he  finds  rest  in  Jesus.  It  is  the  Lord 
drawing  all  the  while:  and  after  the  Lord  has  appeared 
to  us  we  see  it  to  be  so. 

The  Hypocrite.— Look  at  the  hypocrite:  he  is  afraid  of 
being  found  out.  He  has  to  do  everything  most  primly 
and  demurely,  lest  he  should  be  suspected.  If  you  paint 
your  face,  you  must  take  care  neither  to  cry  nor  lough, 
lest  you  crack  the  enamel.  If  you  wear  shoddy  clothing, 
you  must  not  run  or  jump,  for  your  garments  might 
split.  Accidents  must  be  guarded  against  when  you  deal 
with  shams.  A  hypocrite  will  censure  you  very  severely 
for  having  smiled  just  now;  and  he  will  condemn  me 
outright  for  being  so  wicked  as  to  make  you  smile  on  a 
Sunday.  Poor  soul,  he  must  keep  up  his  propriety,  for 
it  is  all  he  has.  In  these  times  of  bad  trade  many  who 
are  ready  to  fail  are  afraid  to  lower  their  expenditure 


*8o  SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

for  fear  their  poverty  should  be  suspected,  and  eo  they 
keep  up  a  good  appearance  to  stave  off  bankruptcy  as 
long  as  they  may.  If  they  were  solvent  they  would  not 
be  so  fearful.  If  your  conscience  condemn  you  not,  then 
you  enjoy  a  blessed  ease  of  spirit,  because  the  truth  is 
in  you. 

A  Note  of  Warning.— A  buoy  off  the  Mumbles  in  South 
Wales  bears  a  bell  which  is  meant  to  warn  mariners  of 
a  dangerous  rock.  This  bell  is  quiet  enough  in  ordinary 
weather;  but  when  the  winds  are  out,  and  the  great 
waves  rush  in  towards  the  shore,  its  solemn  tones  are 
heard  for  miles  around  as  it  swings  to  and  fro  in  the 
hands  of  the  sea.  I  believe  there  are  true  men  who  are 
silent  when  everything  is  calm,  who  will  be  forced  to 
speak  when  the  wild  winds  are  out.  Permit  me  to  assure 
you  that  a  storm  is  raging  now,  and  it  is  growing  worse 
and  worse.  If  I  rightly  read  the  signs  of  the  times,  it 
is  meet  that  every  bell  should  ring  out  its  warning  note 
lest  souls  be  lost  upon  the  rocks  of  error. 

The  Sinner's  Down  Hill.—  In  the  town  where  I  was 
brought  up  there  is  a  very  steep  hill.  You  could  scarcely 
get  out  of  the  town  without  going  down  a  hill,  but  one 
is  specially  precipitous,  and  I  remember  once  hearing 
a  cry  in  the  streets,  for  a  huge  wagon  had  rolled  over 
the  horses  that  were  going  down  the  hill  with  it.  The 
load  had  crushed  the  creatures  that  were  supposed  to 
draw  it.  There  comes  a  time  with  a  man  when  it  is  not 
so  much  he  that  consumes  the  drink  as  the  drink  that 
consumes  him;  he  is  drowned  in  his  cups,  sucked  down 
by  that  which  he  himself  sucked  in.  A  man  was  vo 
racious,  perhaps,  in  food,  and  at  last  his  gluttony  swal 
lowed  him;  at  one  grim  morsel  he  went  down  the  throat 
of  the  old  dragon  of  selfish  greed.  Or  the  man  was 
lustful,  and  at  last  his  vice  devoured  him.  It  is  an 
awful  thing  when  it  is  not  the  man  that  follows  the 


SINNERS  a8i 


devil,  but  the  devil  that  drives  the  man  before  him  as 
iho  he  were  his  laden  ass.  The  man's  worst  self, 
that  had  been  kept  in  the  rear  and  put  under  restraint, 
at  last  gets  up  and  comes  to  the  front,  and  the  better 
self,  if  ever  he  had  such,  is  dragged  on  an  unwilling 
captive  at  the  chariot  wheels  of  its  destroyer. 

The  Folly  of  the  Caviller. —  To  be  always  using  the  sieve 
but  never  to  be  using  the  mill  is  starving  work :  to  be  al 
ways  searching  after  adulterations,  but  never  to  drink 
of  the  genuine  milk,  is  a  foolish  habit.  Caviling  is  a 
curse,  and  carping  is  a  crime.  Escape  from  it  while  yet 
it  is  but  as  a  cord  of  vanity,  lest  it  come  to  be  a  cart- 
rope  which  shall  bind  you  fast. 

Ingratitude  of  the  Sinner.— The  Lord  saith,  "Hear,  O 
heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth:  I  have  nourished  and 
brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me. 
The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib: 
but  these  my  creatures  do  not  know,  my  favored  ones 
do  not  consider."  Why,  you  have  no  such  forbearance 
with  others  as  God  has  had  with  you.  You  would  not 
keep  a  dog  if  it  never  followed  at  your  heel,  but  snarled 
at  you:  you  would  not  even  keep  a  potter's  vessel  if  it 
held  no  water,  and  was  of  no  service  to  you;  you  would 
break  it  in  pieces,  and  throw  it  on  the  dunghill.  As  for 
yourself,  you  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  both 
as  to  your  body  and  as  to  your  soul,  and  yet  you  have 
been  of  no  service  to  your  Maker,  nor  even  thought  of 
being  of  service  to  him.  Still,  he  has  spared  you  all  these 
years,  and  it  has  never  occurred  to  you  that  there  has 
been  any  wonderful  forbearance  in  it.  Assuredly,  O 
man,  thou  despisest  the  long-suffering  of  thy  God. 

The  Foolish  Builder.—  The  foolish  builder  had  nothing  to 
resist  outward  circumstances.  On  summer  days  his  house 
was  a  favorite  resort,  and  was  considered  to  be  quite  as 
good  as  his  neighbor's  in  all  respects.  Frequently  he 


282     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

rubbed  his  hands  and  said,  "  I  do  not  see  but  what  my 
house  is  quite  as  good  as  his,  and  perhaps  a  little  bet 
ter:  the  fact  is,  I  had  a  few  pounds  to  spare  which  I 
did  not  bury  in  the  ground  as  he  did,  and  with  it  I  have 
bought  many  a  little  ornament,  so  that  rny  habitation  has 
a  finer  look  than  his  building."  So  it  seemed;  but  when 
the  torrent  came  raging  down  the  mountain  side,  his 
building,  having  nothing  wherewith  to  resist  the  violence 
of  the  flood,  fell  down  at  once,  and  not  a  trace  of  it  re 
mained,  when  the  storm  had  ceased.  Thus  do  men  fail 
because  they  offer  no  resistance  to  forces  which  drive 
them  into  sin;  the  great  current  of  evil  finds  in  them 
victims,  and  not  opponents. 

The  Sinner's  Refuge.— A  man  has  by  accident  killed  his 
fellow-man.  The  next  of  kin  to  the  murdered  man  will 
be  sure  to  kill  the  man-slayer  out  of  revenge,  if  he  can  get 
at  him.  Therefore  the  poor  homicide  takes  flight  as  quick 
ly  as  he  can  towards  the  city  of  refuge.  How  his  heart 
beats,  how  his  footsteps  bound,  how  he  flies  with  all  his 
might.  There  is  a  handpost  with  the  word  "  Refuge " 
upon  it,  and  on  he  continues  his  way.  But,  presently, 
while  he  is  running,  he  turns  his  head,  and  finds  that 
the  avenger  of  blood  is  after  him.  He  sees  that  he  is 
gaining  upon  him,  he  feels  that  he  will  probably  over 
take  him.  Oh !  how  he  picks  his  steps  lest  he  should  trip 
against  a  stone,  how  he  skims  the  ground,  swift  as  a 
doe.  He  runs  until  he  can  see  the  city  gates.  "That 
is  the  fair  CITY  OF  REFUGE,"  saith  he.  But,  he  does  not 
rest  then,  for  a  sight  of  the  city  will  not  secure  him,  so 
he  quickens  his  speed,  as  if  he  would  outstrip  the  wind, 
till  he  shoots  through  the  archway,  and  he  is  in  the  broad 
street  of  the  city.  Now  he  stops.  Now  he  breathes. 
Now  he  wipes  the  hot  sweat  from  his  brow.  a  Now  I  am 
safe,"  saith  he,  "for  no  avenger  of  blood  dares  cross 
that  threshold;  he  that  once  escapes  here  is  delivered." 


SINNERS  283 


So  with  the  sinner  when  sin  pursues  him,  when  he  dis 
covers  that  he  has  offended  God.  He  hears  the  furious 
coursers  of  divine  vengeance  coming  on  swiftly  behind 
him,  and  his  conscience  flies,  and  his  soul  speeds  towards 
the  cross.  He  gets  a  little  hope.  He  hears  of  a  Savior; 
but  that  is  not  enough.  He  will  never  rest,  he  will  never 
say  he  is  at  peace,  until  he  has  passed  the  gate  of  faith, 
and  can  say,  "  Now  I  do  believe  that  Jesus  died  for  me." 

The  Sinner's  Folly.— What  shall  it  profit  any  man  what 
fortune  soever  he  may  have  amassed,  if  he  lose  his  soul? 
Think  ye  that  riches  possessed  in  this  world  will  procure 
any  respect  in  the  nether  rgions?  I  have  heard  that  in 
the  old  Fleet  Prison  the  swell  who  was  put  in  jail  for 
ten  thousand  pounds  thought  himself  a  gentleman  in 
comparison  with  those  common  fellows  who  were  put  in 
for  some  paltry  debt  of  twenty  or  five-and-twenty 
pounds.  There  are  no  such  distinctions  in  hell.  You 
who  can  boast  your  talents  of  gold  and  talents  of  silver, 
if  ye  are  cast  away,  shall  be  as  complete  wrecks  as  those 
who  never  had  doit  or  stiver,  but  lived  and  died  in  pri 
vation  and  poverty. 

The  Folly  of  Sinners.—  A  man  has  fallen  overboard  from 
a  ship,  and  when  he  is  drowning,  some  sailor  throws  him 
a  rope,  and  there  it  is.  Well,  he  says,  in  the  first  place, 
"  I  do  not  like  that  rope ;  I  don't  think  that  rope  was 
made  at  the  best  manufactory;  there  is  some  tar  on  it 
too,  I  do  not  like  it;  and  in  the  next  place,  I  do  not 
like  that  sailor  that  threw  the  rope  over,  I  am  sure  he 
is  not  a  kind-hearted  man,  I  do  not  like  the  look  of  him 
at  all ; "  and  then  comes  a  gurgle  and  a  groan,  and 
down  he  is  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea;  and  when  he  was 
drowned,  they  said,  that  it  served  him  right,  if  he  would 
not  lay  hold  of  the  rope,  but  would  be  making  such 
foolish  and  absurd  objections,  when  it  was  a  matter  of 
life  and  death.  Then  on  his  own  head  be  his  blood. 


*84   SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

The  Doom  of  the  Impenitent.— In  rain  did  Noah  warn 
them  that  the  waters  would  surely  come;  he  seemed  unto 
them  as  one  that  mocked,  and  they  laughed  at  him.  Even 
so,  when  I  preached  of  the  resurrection  to  you  this  morn 
ing,  some  of  you  may  have  mocked,  and  thought  that  I 
was  but  pursuing  a  wild  reverie  of  imagination.  Ah! 
but  how  different  was  their  tune,  when  the  rains  fell, 
when  "the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  were  broken 
up!"  They  doubtless  changed  their  notes,  when  the 
clouds  began  to  empty  themselves  in  fury,  when  the  very 
earth  did  crack,  and  its  bowels  were  dissolved,  and  the 
mighty  fluid  gushed  up  to  devour  them  all.  Did  they 
think  Noah  was  a  fool,  when  the  last  man  stood  on  the 
last  mountain-top,  and  cried  in  vain  for  help?  I  saw 
some  time  ago,  a  master-picture,  which  I  think  time  will 
never  erase  from  my  memory.  It  was  a  picture  of  a 
man  who  had  been  climbing  up  to  the  top  of  the  last 
mountain,  and  the  floods  were  coming  around  him.  He 
had  his  old  father  on  his  back;  his  wife  was  clasping 
him  round  his  waist,  and  he  had  one  arm  round  her;  she 
held  one  child  at  her  breast,  and  with  her  other  hand  she 
grasped  another.  In  the  picture  was  represented  one 
child  just  letting  go,  the  wife  dropping,  and  the  father 
clinging  to  a  tree  on  the  top  of  the  hill;  the  branches 
were  breaking,  and  it  was  being  torn  up  by  the  roots. 
Such  a  scene  of  agony  I  never  saw  depicted  before;  yet 
such  a  scene  was  likely  enough  to  have  been  real  when  the 
waters  entirely  covered  the  earth.  They  had  climbed  up 
to  the  top  of  the  last  hill ;  and  now  they  sank.  They  had 
climbed  up  to  the  top  of  the  last  hill;  and  now  they 
sank.  False  hopes  gave  place  to  fell  despair.  And  so 
it  will  be  with  you,  ye  careless  ones,  unless  ye  take  shelter 
in  the  ark. 


SORROWS  a*s 


SORROWS 

Sorrow  Changed  to  Song. —  There  was  a  woman  whose 
life  was  exceedingly  sorrowful.  She  was  an  Eastern 
wife,  and  her  husband  had  been  foolish  enough  to  have 
a  second  mistress  in  the  house.  The  woman  of  whom  we 
speak,  a  holy  woman,  a  woman  of  refined  and  delicate 
mind,  a  poetess,  indeed,  of  no  mean  order  —  this  poor 
woman,  having  no  children,  was  the  constant  butt  of  her 
rival,  whose  sneering  spiteful  remarks  chaffed  and  chafed 
her. 

Her  adversary,  it  is  said,  "  vexed  her  sore  to  make  her 
afraid."  Tho  her  husband  was  exceedingly  kind  to  her, 
yet  as  with  a  sword  that  cut  her  bones  did  she  go  con 
tinually.  She  was  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit,  her 
spirit  being  broken.  Still,  "  she  feared  the  Lord  ex 
ceedingly  ,"  and  she  went  up  to  God's  house,  and  it  was 
in  God's  house  that  she  received,  what  was  to  her,  per 
haps,  provided  we  take  all  the  circumstances  into  consid 
eration,  the  greatest  blow  of  her  life. 

If  it  was  from  her  rival  that  she  received  the  harshest 
word,  it  was  from  the  High  Priest  of  God  that  she  re 
ceived  this  hardest  blow.  As  she  stood  there  praying, 
using  no  vocal  sound,  but  her  lips  moving,  the  High 
Priest  —  an  easy  soul,  who  had  brought  his  own  family 
to  ruin  by  his  easiness  —little  knowing  her  grief,  told  her 
that  she  was  drunken.  A  woman  to  whom  the  thought 
of  such  sin  would  have  been  bitter  as  gall,  it  must  have 
smitten  her  as  with  the  chill  blast  of  death,  that  God's 
priest  had  said  she  was  drunken. 

But,  as  you  will  all  remember,  the  Lord  did  not  break 
the  leaf  that  was  driven  to  and  fro.  To  her  there  came 
a  comfortable  promise.  Ere  long  that  woman  stood  there 
to  sing. 


a86     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 


SOUL  WINNING 

Sowing  and  Reaping. —  Sometimes  we  lie  passive,  like  the 
ploughed  fields,  and  then  our  divine  Sower  casts  into  us 
the  living  seed;  but  soon  other  days  arrive,  when  we  are 
active,  and  yield  unto  God  the  results  of  his  grace  ex 
perienced  in  former  days.  It  ought  to  be  so.  To  you, 
beloved  workers  in  the  Mission-hall,  or  the  Sunday-school, 
there  will  be  a  time  of  sowing;  not  much  may  be  ac 
complished,  tho  a  great  deal  of  effort  may  be  put 
forth.  To  me  in  preaching  there  are  times  for  sowing, 
and  nothing  else  but  sowing;  few  seem  to  be  the  green 
blades  which  spring  up  around  me.  Perhaps  a  year 
may  intervene  before  the  worker  shall  see  any  reward  for 
his  toil :  "  The  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruits 
of  the  earth."  The  missionary  upon  his  district,  the 
Bible-woman  on  her  round,  may  see  no  manifest  effect 
produced  by  daily  teaching;  but  harvest  and  seedtime 
are  tied  together  in  a  sure  knot.  "  He  that  goeth  forth 
and  weepeth,  bearing  precious  seed,  shall  doubtless  come 
again  with  rejoicing,  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him." 
Brethren,  believe  that,  and  be  of  good  cheer.  "Your 
labor  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord." 

Won  by  His  Parents'  Love.— I  have  heard  of  a  young 
man  who  had  grown  up  and  left  the  parental  roof,  and 
through  evil  influences,  had  been  enticed  into  holding  skep 
tical  views.  His  father  and  mother  were  both  earnest 
Christians,  and  it  almost  broke  their  hearts  to  see  their 
son  so  opposed  to  the  Redeemer.  On  one  occasion  they 
induced  him  to  go  with  them  to  hear  a  celebrated  min 
ister.  He  accompanied  them  simply  to  please  them,  and 
for  no  higher  motive.  The  sermon  happened  to  be  upon 
the  glories  of  heaven.  It  was  a  very  extraordinary  ser 
mon,  and  was  calculated  to  make  every  Christian  in  the 


SOUL  WINNING  287 


audience  to  leap  for  joy.  The  young  man  was  much 
gratified  with  the  eloquence  of  the  preacher,  but  nothing 
more;  he  gave  him  credit  for  superior  oratorical  ability, 
and  was  interested  in  the  sermon,  but  felt  none  of  its 
power.  He  chanced  to  look  at  his  father  and  mother 
during  the  discourse,  and  was  surprised  to  see  them 
weeping.  He  could  not  imagine  why  they,  being  Chris 
tian  people,  should  sit  and  weep  under  a  sermon  which 
was  most  jubilant  in  its  strain.  When  he  reached  hime, 
he  said,  "Father,  we  have  had  a  capital  sermon,  but  I 
could  not  understand  what  could  make  you  sit  there  and 
cry,  and  my  mother  too  f  "  His  father  said,  "  My  dear 
son,  I  certainly  had  no  reason  to  weep  concerning  my 
self,  nor  your  mother,  but  I  could  not  help  thinking  all 
through  the  sermon  about  you,  for  alas,  I  have  no  hope 
that  you  will  be  a  partaker  i:i  the  bright  joys  which 
await  the  righteous.  It  breaks  my  heart  to  think  that 
you  will  be  shut  out  of  heaven."  His  mother  said,  "  The 
very  same  thoughts  crossed  my  mind,  and  the  more  the 
preacher  spoke  of  the  joys  of  the  saved,  the  more  I  sor 
rowed  for  my  dear  boy  that  he  should  never  know  what 
they  were."  That  touched  the  young  man's  heart,  led 
him  to  seek  his  father's  God,  and  before  long  he  was  at 
the  same  communion  table,  rejoicing  in  the  God  and  Sa 
vior  whom  his  parents  worshipped.  The  travail  comes 
before  the  bringing  forth;  the  earnest  anxiety,  the  deep 
emotion  within,  precede  our  being  made  the  instrumnts 
of  the  salvation  of  others. 

Fitting  Ourselves  to  Save  Others.— A  man  is  drowning. 
I  am  on  London  Bridge.  If  I  spring  from  the  parapet 
and  can  swim,  I  can  save  him;  but  suppose  I  cannot 
swim,  can  I  render  any  service  by  leaping  into  sudden 
and  certain  death  with  the  sinking  man?  I  am  disqual 
ified  from  helping  him  till  I  have  the  ability  to  do  so. 
There  is  a  school  over  yonder.  Well,  the  first  inquiry 


288     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

of  him  who  is  to  be  the  master  must  be,  "Do  I  know 
myself  that  which  I  profess  to  teach?"  Do  you  call 
that  inquiry  selfish?  Surely  it  is  a  most  unselfish  sel 
fishness,  grounded  upon  common  sense.  Indeed,  the  man 
who  is  not  so  selfish  as  to  ask  himself,  "Am  I  qualified 
to  act  as  a  teacher?"  would  be  guilty  of  gross  selfishness 
in  putting  himself  into  an  office  which  he  was  not  qual 
ified  to  fill.  I  will  suppose  an  illiterate  person  going 
into  the  school,  and  saying,  "  I  will  be  master  here  and 
take  the  pay,"  and  yet  he  cannot  teach  the  children  to 
read  or  write.  Would  he  not  be  very  selfish  in  not  see 
ing  to  his  own  fitness?  But  surely  it  is  not  selfishness 
that  would  make  a  man  stand  back  and  say,  "  No,  I 
must  first  go  to  school  myself,  otherwise  it  is  but  a  mockery 
of  the  children  for  me  to  attempt  to  teach  them  any 
thing."  This  is  no  selfishness,  then,  when  looked  at 
aright,  which  makes  us  see  to  our  own  salvation,  for  it  is 
the  basis  from  which  we  operate  for  the  good  of  others. 

Saved  Souls  Most  Useful. —  A  man  with  no  sensibility  or 
compassion  for  other  men's  souls,  may  accidentally  be 
the  means  of  a  conversion;  the  good  word  which  he  ut 
ters  will  not  cease  to  be  good  because  the  speaker  had 
no  right  to  declare  God's  statutes.  The  bread  and  meat 
which  were  brought  to  Elijah  were  not  less  nourishing 
because  the  ravens  brought  them,  but  the  ravens  remained 
ravens  still.  A  hard-hearted  man  may  say  a  good  thing 
which  God  will  bless,  but,  as  a  rule,  those  who  bring 
souls  to  Christ  are  those  who  first  of  all  have  felt  an 
agony  of  desire  that  souls  should  be  saved. 

The  Lost  Redeemed.— Let  me  tell  you  a  story  of  what 
once  happened  to  Mr.  Vanderkist,  a  city  missionary,  who 
toils  all  night  long  to  do  good  in  that  great  work.  There 
had  been  a  drunken  broil  in  the  street;  he  stepped  be 
tween  the  men  to  part  them,  and  said  something  to  a 
woman  who  stood  there  concerning  how  dreadful  a  thing 


SOUL  WINNING  389 


it  was  that  men  should  thus  be  intemperate.  She  walked 
with  him  a  little  way,  and  he  with  her,  and  she  began 
to  tell  him  such  a  tale  of  woe  and  sin  too,  how  she  had 
been  lured  away  from  her  parents'  home  in  Somerset 
shire,  and  had  been  brought  up  here  to  her  soul's  eternal 
hurt.  He  took  her  home  with  him,  and  taught  her  the 
fear  and  love  of  Christ;  and  what  was  the  first  thing 
she  did,  when  she  returned  to  the  paths  of  godliness,  and 
found  Christ  to  be  the  sinner's  Savior?  She  said,  "Now 
I  must  go  home  to  my  friends."  Her  friends  were  writ 
ten  to;  they  came  to  meet  her  at  the  station  at  Bristol, 
and  you  can  hardly  conceive  what  a  happy  meeting  it 
was.  The  father  and  mother  had  lost  their  daughter; 
they  had  never  heard  from  her;  and  there  she  was, 
brought  back  by  the  agency  of  this  Institution,  and  re 
stored  to  the  bosom  of  her  family. 

Christ  Rejoices  When  the  Christian  Saves  a  Soul.—  The 
Lord  Jesus  must  take  great  pleasure  in  the  attempts  of 
his  servants  to  seek  and  to  save  souls :  for  they  are  learn 
ing  to  be  shepherds  like  himself.  When  our  King,  Ed 
ward  III.,  heard  that  the  Black  Prince  was  having  a 
hard  battle  with  the  French,  he  smiled  to  think  that  his 
son  was  in  a  place  where  he  could  show  his  valor.  When 
he  was  entreated  to  send  off  reinforcements,  he  refused; 
for  he  wished  his  son  to  have  the  undivided  honors  of  the 
day.  The  Lord  Jesus,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  puts 
some  of  his  chosen  into  places  of  great  peril,  and  he  does 
not  seem  to  send  them  all  the  help  they  could  desire,  in 
order  that  they  may  prove  their  faith  and  consecration, 
and  thus  earn  their  spurs.  He  takes  a  brotherly  pleasure 
in  the  courage  and  faith  which  he  himself  has  wrought 
in  them.  All  the  valor  of  Christ's  soldiers  is  given  them 
by  himself,  and  all  that  it  achieves  is  to  be  attributed  to 
him ;  yet  he  finds  joy  in  seeing  them  exercise  their  graces. 
Like  as  a  father  delights  to  see  his  boy  take  prize  after 


ago     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

prize  at  the  University,  like  as  a  friend  delights  to  see 
his  friend  elected  to  one  honorable  position  after  an 
other,  so  does  Jesus  rejoice  in  the  honors  earned  by  his 
servants  in  the  field  of  service.  When  we  save  a  soul 
from  death,  we  may  be  sure  that  Jesus,  the  Savior,  re 
joices  in  the  deed. 

Joy  of  Soul-Winning.—  I  do  not  know  any  thing  that  can 
make  a  man  forget  his  pain  and  weariness  like  grasping 
the  hand  of  a  sinner  saved.  "  Oh,"  saith  the  saved  one, 
"  God  Almighty  bless  you !  you  nave  brought  me  to  Je 
sus."  This  nerves  us  to  new  effort.  I  speak  here  from 
experience,  for  yesterday  evening,  when  I  was  thinking 
of  this  subject,  I  was  myself  somewhat  dull  through  pain 
and  weakness,  and  as  God  would  have  it,  I  took  up  the 
Report  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  which  will  be 
issued  to  you  on  the  first  of  June,  and  as  I  glanced  over 
it,  I  saw  my  own  name.  It  seems  that  our  missionary  in 
San  Domingo  has  had  a  discouraging  year,  but  it  was 
lighted  up  with  one  most  pleasing  incident.  A  man  had 
come  down  from  the  interior  of  Hayti  to  ask  for  bap 
tism.  Finding  him  to  be  a  most  intelligent  Christian, 
well  instructed  in  the  gospel,  the  missionary  asked  how 
he  came  to  know  anything  about  it.  In  reply  he  told 
him  that  he  had  fallen  in  with  a  sermon  translated  into 
the  French  language  which  was  preached  by  Mr.  Spur- 
geon. 

0  friends,  I  was  dull  no  longer.  I  had  meat  to  eat. 
Had  an  angel  stood  in  the  study,  I  could  not  have  felt 
more  delighted  with  his  visit  than  I  did  when  I  read 
of  a  sinner  saved.  Here  was  a  sermon  translated  into 
French,  which  was  carried  far  away  to  Hayti,  I  do  not 
know  how,  and  there  was  read  by  a  Romanist,  who  found 
by  it  salvation.  God  bless  him !  You  cannot  faint  after 
such  a  success;  can  you? 


HOLY  SPIRIT  291 


HOLY  SPIRIT 

The  Holy  Spirit  Invincible.— We  have  not  to  think  of 
quantity.  As  an  illustration:  give  me  fire,  I  will  not 
bargain  for  a  furnace,  give  me  but  a  single  candle,  and 
a  city  or  a  forest  may  soon  be  in  a  blaze.  A  spark  is 
quite  sufficient  to  begin  with,  for  fire  multiplies  itself; 
so  give  us  the  truth,  a  single  voice,  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
with  it,  and  none  can  say  where  the  sacred  conflagration 
will  end.  One  Jonah  sufficed  to  subdue  all  Nineveh  by 
one  monotonous  sentence  oft  repeated,  and  despite  the 
weakness  of  our  present  instrumentality,  if  God  does  but 
bless  the  gospel,  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not 
speedily  be  felt  by  the  whole  of  London. 

Influence  of  the  Spirirt.—  Have  you  ever  heard  the  argu 
ment  used  by  a  good  old  Christian  against  an  infidel  doc 
tor?  The  doctor  said  there  was  no  soul,  and  asked,  "  Did 
you  ever  see  a  soul  ?  "  "  No,"  said  the  Christian.  "  Did 
you  ever  hear  a  soul  ?  "  "  No."  "  Did  you  ever  smell 
a  soul?"  "No."  "Did  you  ever  taste  a  soul?" 
"No."  "Did  you  ever  feel  a  soul?"  "Yes,"  said  the 
man  —"I  feel  I  have  one  within  me."  "  Well,"  said 
the  doctor,  "  there  are  four  senses  against  one ;  you  have 
only  one  on  your  side."  "  Very  well,"  said  the  Chris 
tian,  "Did  you  ever  see  a  pain?"  "No."  "Did  you 
ever  hear  a  pain  ? "  "  No."  "  Did  you  ever  smell  a 
pain?  "  "  No."  "  Did  you  ever  taste  a  pain?  "  "  No." 
"Did  you  ever  feel  a  pain?"  "Yes."  "And  that  is 
quite  enough,  I  suppose,  to  prove  there  is  a  pain?" 
"Yes."  So  the  worldling  says  there  is  no  Holy  Ghost, 
because  he  cannot  see  it.  Well,  but  we  feel  it.  You  say 
that  is  fanaticism,  and  that  we  never  felt  it.  Suppose 
you  tell  me  that  honey  is  bitter,  I  reply,  u  No,  I  am 
sure  you  cannot  have  tasted  it ;  taste  it  and  try."  So  with 


292     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

the  Holy  Ghost;  if  you  did  but  feel  his  influence  you 
would  no  longer  say  there  is  no  Holy  Spirit,  because  you 
cannot  see  it. 

The  Loving  Comforter.—  I  am  in  distress,  and  I  want  con 
solation.  Some  passer-by  hears  of  my  sorrow,  and  he 
steps  within,  sits  down,  and  essays  to  cheer  me ;  he  speaks 
soothing  words,  but  he  loves  me  not;  he  is  a  stranger; 
he  knows  me  not  at  all;  he  has  only  come  in  to  try  his 
skill.  And  what  is  the  consequence  ?  His  words  run  o'er 
me  like  oil  upon  a  slab  of  marble,  they  are  like  the  pat 
tering  rain  upon  the  rock;  they  do  not  break  my  grief; 
it  stands  unmoved  as  adamant,  because  he  has  no  love  for 
me.  But  let  some  one  who  loves  me  dear  as  his  own  life, 
come  and  plead  with  me,  then  truly  his  words  are  music ; 
they  taste  like  honey:  he  knows  the  password  of  the 
doors  of  my  heart,  and  my  ear  is  attentive  to  every  word. 
I  catch  the  intonation  of  each  syllable  as  it  falls,  for  it 
is  like  the  harmony  of  the  harps  of  heaven.  Oh!  there 
is  a  voice  in  love,  it  speaks  a  language  which  is  its  own : 
it  has  an  idiom  and  a  brogue  which  none  can  mimic ;  wis- 
•  dom  cannot  imitate  it ;  oratory  cannot  attain  unto  it ;  it  is 
love  alone  which  can  reach  the  mourning  heart;  love  is 
the  only  handkerchief  which  can  wipe  the  mourner's  tears 
away.  And  is  not  the  Holy  Ghost  a  loving  comforter? 

STRENGTH 

Husks  of  Men. —  There  is  scarce  a  man  alive  now  upon  this 
earth;  there  are  plenty  to  be  found  who  call  themselves 
men,  but  they  are  the  husks  of  men,  the  life  has  gone 
from  them,  the  precious  kernel  seems  to  have  departed. 
The  littleness  of  Christians  of  this  age  results  from  the 
littleness  of  their  consecration  to  Christ.  The  age  of 
John  Owen  was  the  day  of  great  preachers;  but  let  me 
tell  you,  that  that  was  the  age  of  great  consecration. 
Those  great  preachers  whose  names  we  remember,  were 


STRENGTH  293 


men  who  counted  nothing  their  own ;  they  were  driven 
out  from  their  benefices,  because  they  could  not  conform 
to  the  established  church,  and  they  gave  up  all  they  had 
willingly  to  the  Lord.  They  were  hunted  from  place  to 
place ;  the  disgraceful  five-mile  act  would  not  permit  them 
to  come  within  five  miles  of  any  market  town;  they  wan 
dered  here  and  there  to  preach  the  gospel  to  a  few  poor 
sinners,  being  fully  given  up  to  their  Lord.  Those  were 
foul  times;  but  they  promised  they  would  walk  the  road, 
fair  or  foul,  and  they  did  walk  it  knee  deep  in  mud ;  and 
they  would  have  walked  it  if  it  had  been  knee  deep  in 
blood  too.  They  became  great  men;  and  if  we  were, 
as  they  were,  wholty  given  up  to  God  —  if  we  could  say 
of  ourselves,  "  From  the  crown  of  my  head  to  the  sole 
of  my  foot,  there  is  not  a  drop  of  blood  that  is  not  wholly 
God's;  all  my  time,  all  my  talents,  every  thing  I  have  is 
God's  "—  if  we  could  say  that,  we  should  be  strong  like 
Samson  for  the  consecrated  must  be  strong. 
Consecration  Source  of  Strength.—  The  strongest  man  in 
all  the  world  is  a  consecrated  man?  Even  tho  he 
may  consecrate  himself  to  a  wrong  object,  yet  if  it  be  a 
thorough  consecration,  he  will  have  strength  —  strength 
for  evil,  it  may  be,  but  still  strength.  In  the  old  Roman 
wars  with  Pyrrhus,  you  remember  an  ancient  story  of 
self-devotion.  There  was  an  oracle  which  said  that  vic 
tory  would  attend  that  army  whose  leader  should  give 
himself  up  to  death.  Decius,  the  Roman  consul,  knowing 
this,  rushed  into  the  thickest  of  the  battle,  that  his  army 
might  overcome  by  his  dying.  The  prodigies  of  valor 
which  he  performed  are  proofs  of  the  power  of  conse 
cration.  The  Romans  at  that  time  seemed  to  be  every 
man  a  hero,  because  every  man  was  a  consecrated  man. 
They  went  to  battle  with  this  thought  —"I  will  conquer 
or  die;  the  name  of  Rome  is  written  on  my  heart;  for 
my  country  I  am  prepared  to  live,  or  for  that  to  shed 


204     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

my  blood."  And  no  enemies  could  ever  stand  against 
them.  If  a  Roman  fell  there  were  no  wounds  in  his 
back,  but  all  in  his  breast.  His  face,  even  in  cold  death, 
was  like  the  face  of  a  lion,  and  when  looked  upon  it  was 
of  terrible  aspect.  They  were  men  consecrated  to  their 
country;  they  were  ambitious  to  make  the  name  of  Rome 
the  noblest  word  in  human  language;  and  consequently 
the  Roman  became  a  giant.  And  to  this  day  let  a  man 
get  a  purpose  within  him,  I  care  not  what  his  purpose  is, 
and  let  his  whole  soul  be  absorbed  by  it,  and  what  will 
he  not  do  ?  You  that  are  "  every  thing  by  turns  and 
nothing  long,"  that  have  nothing  to  live  for,  soulless  car 
cases  that  walk  this  earth  and  waste  its  air,  what  can 
you  do?  Why  nothing.  But  the  man  who  knows  what 
he  is  at,  and  has  his  mark,  speeds  to  it  "like  an  arrow 
from  a  bow  shot  by  an  archer  strong."  Nought  can  turn 
him  from  his  design.  How  much  more  is  this  true  if  I 
limit  the  description  to  that  which  is  peculiar  to  the 
Christian  —  consecration  to  God !  Oh !  what  strength 
that  man  has  who  is  dedicated  to  God ! 

Strength  in  Consecration.—  I  have  seen  a  Christian  woman 
most  useful  in  a  class,  bringing  to  the  Savior  many  of 
the  girls  whom  she  has  taught;  but  on  a  sudden  a  change 
has  come,  there  have  been  no  conversions,  and  for  years 
the  class  has  dwindled  away,  and  nothing  has  come  of  it. 
If  enquiry  were  to  be  made,  it  would  be  found  that  the 
consecration  of  the  teacher  had  declined.  She  no  longer 
spoke  with  tearful  eye  and  earnest  heart,  seeking  to  lead 
those  girls  to  Christ;  and  because  her  consecration  was 
gone,  her  strength  was  gone. 

Our  Strength  in  God.—  Listen  to  a  parable :  —  A  certain 
young  man  traded,  and  in  all  things  he  prospered  for  a 
while.  In  all  his  dealings  he  was  wise  and  prudent,  and 
none  were  able  to  overreach  him.  The  cause  of  his  wis 
dom  was  that  he  had  a  father,  a  man  of  singular  knowl- 


STRENGTH  295 


edge,  of  great  experience,  of  large  wealth,  and  great  in 
fluence.  His  son  never  entered  upon  a  transaction  with 
out  consulting  his  fathr.  Whenever  he  felt  himself  at  all 
in  difficulty,  he  hastened  to  ask  counsel  of  his  father. 
Whenever  he  needed  money  to  meet  a  sudden  demand,  he 
drew  upon  his  father.  Their  love  to  each  other  was  more 
and  more  manifest  as  the  one  trusted  and  the  other 
helped.  Does  anybody  wonder  that  the  young  man  grew 
rich?  But  after  a  while  the  son  grew  cold  towards  his 
father,  and  seldom  advised  with  him.  There  was  no 
quarrel,  but  the  young  man  was  growing  independent  of 
his  father,  and  preferred  to  act  upon  his  own  judgment. 
He  failed  to  ask  and  to  receive  substantial  help,  which 
would  have  been  freely  given;  and  he  fell  into  great 
losses,  which  might  readily  have  been  avoided.  The 
young  man  became  weak  as  others;  he  was  the  prey  of 
deceivers;  he  spent  labor  and  thought  and  substance  upon 
matters  which  ended  in  failure;  he  grew  poorer  and 
poorer,  till  he  trembled  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy. 

Do  you  wonder?  Do  you  pity  him?  Do  you  see  in  him 
your  own  portrait?  If  so,  take  ample  warning  now  and 
change  it  all,  and  say  of  your  heavenly  Father:  He  is 
my  friend  and  counselor,  and  to  him  as  to  no  one  else  I 
do  continually  resort. 

Strong  When  God  Leads.— When  a  clan  of  Highlanders 
was  led  to  battle  by  their  chief  he  had  only  to  show 
them  the  enemy  and  with  one  tremendous  shout  they 
leaped  upon  them  like  lions.  It  is  so  with  the  people 
of  God.  When  God  is  with  us  then  we  are  strong,  res 
olute,  determined.  The  charge  of  the  servants  of  God 
is  as  the  rush  of  a  hurricane  against  a  bowing  wall  and 
a  tottering  fence.  In  God  is  our  confidence  of  victory. 
With  God  present  no  man's  heart  fails  him;  ^o  doubt 
enters  the  host. 


396     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

Strength  Distributing  Sweetness.— I  have  before  now 
met  with  that  popular  artist  Gustave  Dore",  and  sug 
gested  subjects  to  him.  Had  he  survived  among  us,  and 
had  another  opportunity  occurred,  I  would  have  pressed 
him  to  execute  a  statue  of  Samson  handing  out  the 
honey;  strength  distributing  sweetness;  and  it  might 
have  served  as  a  perpetual  reminder  of  what  a  Chris 
tian  should  be  —  a  Conqueror  and  a  Comforter,  slaying 
lions  and  distributing  honey. 

Strength  Through  Weakness.— A  man  is  never  lost  until 
ho  is  devoid  of  all  strength.  See  you  the  mariner  who 
has  fallen  from  the  ship  ?  As  long  as  those  brawny  arms 
of  his  can  stem  the  current,  as  long  as  he  can  buffet  the 
waves  and  hurl  them  aside  with  the  strong  heart  of  re 
sistance,  he  gives  up  nought  for  lost.  Ay,  and  should 
his  arms  become  weary,  if  he  can  float  a  little,  and  with 
one  hand  move  himself  amid  the  billows  of  the  deep,  he 
still  thinks  it  is  not  all  over  yet.  And  while  there  is 
one  particle  of  strength  remaining  his  hopes  are  too 
buoyant  to  give  himself  up  for  a  lost  man.  Suppose 
him  to  have  grasped  a  spar;  as  long  as  ever  those  hands 
of  his  can,  with  a  death-clutch,  keep  hold  of  that 
floating  piece  of  timber,  he  does  not  consider  himself 
lost.  Fond  hope  still  whispers  in  his  ear,  "  Hold  on, 
thou  art  not  lost  yet;  some  ship  may  cross  this  way, 
Providence  may  guide  its  path  hither,  and  thou 
mayest  yet  be  delivered.  Hold  on,  thou  art  not  lost 
while  a  sinew  retains  its  might,  while  there  is  any 
vital  force  in  thy  frame."  So,  soul,  thou  canst  never  say 
thou  art  lost  till  thou  feelest  in  thy  heart  an  utter  de 
parture  of  all  thy  strength.  Hast  thou  been  brought 
to  feel  that  there  is  nothing  which  of  thyself  thou  canst 
do  apart  from  the  strength  of  the  Holy  Spirit?  There 
was  a  time  when  thou  couldst  pray,  when  thou  couldst 
repent,  when  thou  couldst  believe  after  thine  own  fash- 


SYMPATHY  297 


ion  with  thine  own  supposed  strength:  is  that  time  all 
passed  over  now?  Art  thou  saying,  "I  have  no  power 
to  do  any  one  of  those  things  without  grace  from  on 
high!  I  would,  but  can  not  pray;  I  would,  but  can  not 
repent;  this  strong  heart  will  not  dissolve,  altho  I 
strive  to  melt  it ;  this  haughty  mind  will  resist  the  Savior, 
altho  I  wish  to  be  led  in  chains  of  grace  a  willing 
captive  to  my  Lord  ? "  Art  thou  brought  to  feel  that 
if  thy  salvation  depended  upon  one  motion  of  thy  soul 
in  the  right  direction  thou  must  be  lost,  for  thou  hast 
no  spiritual  strength?  Art  thou  lying  down  shorn  of 
all  thy  might,  bereft  of  all  help  and  hope  in  thyself; 
and  dost  thou  confess,  "  I  can  do  nothing  without  thee  ?  " 
Well,  then,  thou  art  one  of  those  whom  Christ  has  come 
to  save. 

SYMPATHY 

Christian  Sympathy. —  A  young  man  called  upon  you  a 
little  while  ago.  He  said,  "  Sir,  you  know  my  business. 
I  have  been  struggling  very  hard,  and  you  have  kindly 
let  me  have  some  things  on  credit.  But  through  the 
pressure  of  the  times,  I  don't  know  how  it  is,  I  seem  to 
get  very  hard  up.  I  think,  sir,  if  I  could  weather  the 
next  month,  I  might  be  able  to  get  on  well.  I  have 
every  prospect  of  having  a  trade  yet,  if  I  could  but 
have  a  little  more  credit,  if  you  could  possibly  allow  it." 
"  Young  man,"  you  have  said,  "  I  have  had  a  great  many 
bad  debts  lately.  Besides  you  do  not  bring  me  any  good 
security;  I  can  not  trust  you."  The  young  man  bowed, 
and  left  you.  You  did  not  know  how  he  bowed  in  spirit 
as  well  as  in  body.  That  young  man  had  a  poor  old 
mother  and  two  sisters  in  the  house,  and  he  had  tried 
to  estaolish  a  little  business  that  he  might  earn  bread 
and  cheese  for  them  as  well  as  for  himself.  For  the  last 
month  they  have  eaten  scarcely  anything  but  bread  and 


3g8     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

butter,  and  the  weakest  tea  has  been  their  drink,  and  he 
has  been  striving  hard;  but  some  one,  poorer  than  he 
seemed  to  be,  did  not  pay  him  the  litle  debt  that  was 
due  to  him,  and  he  could  not  pay  you.  And  if  you  had 
helped  him,  it  might  have  been  all  well  with  him;  and 
now  what  to  do  he  can  not  tell.  His  heart  is  broken, 
his  soul  is  swollen  within  him.  That  aged  mother  of 
his,  and  those  girls,  what  shall  become  of  them?  You 
did  not  know  his  agony,  or  else  you  would  have  helped 
him.  But  you  ought  to  have  known.  You  never  should 
have  dismissed  his  case  until  you  had  known  a  little 
more  about  him.  It  would  not  be  business-like,  would 
it  ?  No,  sir,  to  be  business-like  is  sometimes  to  be  nothing 
else  than  devil-like.  But  I  would  not  have  you  business 
like  when  it  is  so.  Out  on  your  business;  be  Christian- 
like. 

Superficial  Sympathy.—  I  have  heard  speak  of  a  lady  who 
was  out  in  the  snow  one  night,  and  was  so  very  cold 
that  she  cried  out,  "  Oh,  those  poor  people  that  have 
such  a  little  money,  how  little  firing  they  have,  and  how 
pinched  they  must  be!  I  will  send  a  hundred  weight  of 
coals  to  twenty  families,  at  the  least."  But  I  have 
heard  say  that,  when  she  reached  her  own  parlor,  there 
was  a  fine  fire  burning,  and  she  sat  there  with  her  feet 
on  the  fender,  and  enjoyed  an  excellent  tea,  and  she  said 
to  himself,  "Well,  it  is  not  very  cold,  after  all.  I  do 
not  think  that  I  shall  send  those  coals ;  at  any  rate,  not 
for  the  present."  The  sufferer  thinks  of  the  sufferer, 
even  as  the  poor  help  the  poor. 

The  divine  wonder  is  that  this  Lord  of  ours,  "  tho  he 
was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  he  became  poor,"  and  now 
takes  a  delight  in  succoring  the  poor.  Having  been 
tempted,  he  helps  the  tempted;  his  own  trials  make  him 
desire  to  bless  those  who  are  tried. 


SYMPATHY  299 


Sympathy  Born  of  Experience.—  We  cannot  comfort  others 
if  we  have  never  been  comforted  ourselves.  I  have  heard 
—  and  I  am  sure  that  it  is  so  —  that  there  is  no  com 
forter  for  a  widow  like  one  who  has  lost  her  husband. 
Those  who  have  had  no  children,  and  have  never  lost  a 
child,  may  talk  very  kindly,  but  they  cannot  enter  into 
a  mother's  broken  heart  as  she  bows  over  yonder  little 
coffin.  If  you  have  never  known  what  temptations 
mean,  you  make  poor  work  when  attempting  to  succor 
the  tempted.  Our  Lord  obtained  a  blessing  from  suffer 
ing  temptation;  and,  take  my  word  for  it,  every  one  of 
you  may  do  the  same. 

Brother,  the  Lord  means  to  make  of  you  a  man  that 
shall  be  used  like  Barnabas  to  be  a  "  son  of  consolation." 
He  means  to  make  a  mother  in  Israel  of  you,  my  dear 
sister,  that  when  you  meet  with  others  who  are  sorely  east 
down,  you  may  know  how  to  drop  in  a  sweet  word  by 
which  they  shall  be  comforted.  I  think  you  will  one  day 
say,  "  It  was  worth  while  to  go  through  that  sorrow  to 
be  enabled  to  administer  relief  to  that  wounded  heart." 

Sympathy. —  "  Mother,"  said  a  little  girl  once,  "  I  cannot 
make  it  out;  Mrs.  Smith  says  I  do  her  so  much  good. 
Poor  Mrs.  Smith  has  lost  her  husband,  mother,  and  she 
is  very  sad.  She  sits  and  cries,  and  I  get  up  and  lay 
my  cheek  on  her  cheek,  and  I  cry,  and  say  that  I  love 
her,  and  then  she  says  that  she  loves  me,  and  that  I  com 
fort  her." 

Just  so.  That  is  the  truest  form  of  consolation;  is  it 
not  ?  "  Weep  with  them  that  weep."  That  is  how  God, 
my  God,  will  hear  me,  feeling  with  me,  sympathizing 
with  me.  "  In  all  their  affliction  he  was  afflicted,  and  the 
angel  of  his  presence  saved  them."  So  are  we  assured, 
but  that  is  not  all :  "  I  am  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord." 


300     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 


TALENTS 

Do  What  You  Can  Do  Best.—  "  As  a  bird  that  wandereth 
from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wandereth  from  his 
place."  I  admired  one  thing  greatly  in  our  deceased 
friend,  Mr.  Worcester,  who  for  so  long  a  time  kept  the 
gate  outside.  When  I  once  asked  him  whether  he  could 
not  be  serviceable  to  the  church  as  an  elder,  he  said  that 
if  he  were  elected  to  it  he  should  decline  the  office,  be 
cause,  he  said,  "  I  can  do  my  work  as  a  gate-keeper,  but 
I  do  not  know  what  I  could  do  as  an  elder."  So  he 
resolved  to  stick  to  the  work  in  which  he  was  acknowl 
edged  to  good  service.  I  would  have  each  Christian  man 
do  the  same. 

Every  Man  in  His  Place.—  There  is  some  youth  who  is 
quite  capable  of  assisting  in  a  Ragged  School:  perhaps 
if  he  had  a  higher  genius  he  might  disdain  the  work,  and 
so  the  Ragged  School  would  be  without  its  excellent 
teacher.  There  are  litle  spheres,  and  God  will  have  little 
men  to  occupy  them.  There  are  posts  of  important  duty, 
and  men  shall  be  found  with  nerve  and  muscle  fitted  for 
the  labor.  He  has  made  a  statue  for  every  niche,  and  a 
picture  for  every  portion  of  the  gallery;  none  shall  be 
left  vacant;  but  since  some  niches  are  small,  so  shall  be 
the  statuettes  that  occupy  them.  To  some  he  gives  two 
talents,  because  two  are  enough,  and  five  would  be  too 
many. 

TESTIMONY 

Won  By  His  Wife's  Faith.— I  have  read  the  story  of  a 
man  who  was  converted  to  God  by  seeing  the  conduct  of 
his  wife  in  the  hour  of  trouble.  They  had  a  lovely  child, 
their  only  offspring.  The  father's  heart  doted  on  it  per 
petually,  and  the  mother's  soul  was  knit  up  in  the  heart 
of  the  little  one.  It  lay  sick  upon  its  bed,  and  the  par- 


TESTIMONY  301 


ents  watched  it  night  and  day.  At  last  it  died.  The 
father  had  no  God:  he  rent  his  hair,  he  rolled  upon  the 
floor  in  misery,  wallowed  upon  the  earth,  cursing  his 
being,  and  defying  God  in  the  utter  casting  down  of  his 
agony.  There  sat  his  wife,  as  fond  of  the  child  as  ever 
he  could  be;  and  though  tears  would  come,  she  gently 
said,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away : 
blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  "What,"  said  he, 
starting  to  his  feet,  "you  love  that  child?  I  thought 
that  when  that  child  died  you  would  break  your  heart. 
Here  am  I,  a  strong  man;  I  am  mad:  here  are  you,  a 
weak  woman,  and  yet  you  are  strong  and  bold;  tell  me 
what  it  is  possesses  you  ? "  Said  she,  "  Christ  is  my 
Lord,  I  trust  in  him;  surely  I  can  give  this  child  to  him 
who  gave  himself  for  me."  From  that  instant  the  man 
became  a  believer.  "There  must,"  said  he,  "be  some 
truth  and  some  power  in  the  gospel,  which  could  lead 
you  to  believe  in  such  a  manner,  under  such  a  trial." 
Tell  Your  Own  Story.—  There  is  never  a  more  interesting 
story  than  that  which  a  man  tells  about  himself.  The 
Rhyme  of  the  Ancient  Mariner  derives  much  of  its  in 
terest  because  the  man  who  told  it  was  himself  a  mariner. 
He  sat  down,  that  man  whose  finger  was  skinny,  like  the 
finger  of  death,  and  began  to  tell  that  dismal  story  of 
the  ship  at  sea  in  a  great  calm,  when  slimy  things  did 
crawl  with  legs  over  the  shiny  sea.  The  wedding  guest 
sat  still  to  listen,  for  the  old  man  was  himself  a  story. 
There  is  always  a  great  deal  of  interest  excited  by  a 
personal  narrative.  Virgil,  the  poet,  knew  this,  and, 
therefore,  he  wisely  makes  JEneas  tell  his  own  story, 
and  makes  him  begin  it  by  saying,  "  In  which  I  also  had 
a  great  part  myself."  So  if  you  would  interest  your 
friends,  tell  them  what  you  felt  yourself.  Tell  them 
how  you  were  once  a  lost  abandoned  sinner,  how  the 
Lord  met  with  you,  how  you  bowed  your  knees,  and 


3oa     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

poured  out  your  soul  before  God,  and  how  at  last  you 
leaped  with  joy,  for  you  thought  you  heard  him  say 
within  you,  "I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy 
transgressions  for  my  name's  sake."  Tell  your  friends 
a  story  of  your  own  personal  experience. 

An  Old  Saint's  Inspiring  Testimony.— I  recollect  in  my 
younger  days  hearing  a  minister,  blind  with  age,  speak 
at  the  communion  table,  and  bear  witness  to  us  young 
people,  who  had  just  joined  the  church,  that  it  was  well 
for  us  that  we  had  come  to  put  our  trust  in  a  faithful 
God;  and  as  the  good  man,  with  great  feebleness  and 
yet  with  great  earnestness,  said  to  us,  that  he  had  never 
regretted  that  he  had  given  his  heart  to  Christ  as  a  boy, 
I  felt  my  heart  leap  within  me  with  delight  that  I  had 
such  a  God  to  be  my  God.  His  testimony  was  such  as  a 
younger  man  could  not  have  borne :  he  might  have  spoken 
more  fluently,  but  the  weight  of  those  eighty  years  at 
the  back  of  it  made  the  old  man  eloquent  to  my  young 
heart.  We  who  are  growing  gray  in  our  Master's  service 
ought  not  to  be  backward  to  speak  well  of  his  name. 
Why,  my  brethren,  you  will  not  be  able  to  do  so  much 
good  in  heaven  as  you  can  on  earth,  for  they  all  know 
about  it  up  there,  but  men  here  need  our  witness  to  the 
God  whom  we  have  tried  and  proved. 

Value  of  Testimony. —  Often  has  a  new  convert  written  to 
a  worldly  friend  to  tell  him  of  his  great  change  and  of 
his  new  joy,  and  that  worldly  friend  has  put  the  letter 
aside  with  a  sneer  or  a  jest;  but  after  a  while  he  has 
thought  it  over,  and  he  has  said  to  himself,  "  There  may 
be  something  in  it.  I  am  a  stranger  to  this  joy  of  which 
my  friend  speaks,  and  I  certainly  need  all  the  joy  I  can 
get,  for  I  am  dull  enough."  Let  me  tell  you  that  all 
worldlings  are  not  such  fools  as  some  would  take  them 
for;  they  are  aware  of  an  unrest  within  their  bosoms, 
and  they  hunger  after  something  better  than  this  vain 


TESTIMONY  303 


world  can  give  them;  so  that  it  frequently  happens  that 
as  soon  as  they  leam  where  the  good  is  they  accept  it. 
Even  if  they  do  not  hunger,  I  do  not  know  any  better 
way  of  making  a  man  long  for  food  than  yourself  to 
eat. 

Bearing  Testimony.— There  was  a  spark  once  that  got 
into  the  stubble,  and  the  Angel  of  Discretion  was  there, 
and  he  said,  "  Stark,  lie  still,  lie  still,  lie  still ;  if  you 
begin  to  consume,  the  next,  and  then  the  next,  will  get 
alight,  and  perhaps  the  whole  threshing-floor  will  be  in 
a  blaze,  and  then  the  homestead,  and  then  the  village." 
But  preach  as  he  might,  the  fire  would  burn,  and  the 
Angel  of  Discretion  had  well-nigh  burned  his  wings  be 
fore  he  had  turned  to  flee.  And  so  there  be  some  in  our 
churches  who  are  very  angels  of  prudence.  "Young 
men,"  say  they,  "  don't  speak  too  soon ;  don't  attempt 
to  do  it  till  you  are  duly  qualified."  My  dear  sirs,  if 
God  has  communicated  to  any  man  the  secret  of  salva 
tion  by  grace  he  cannot  help  telling  it;  and  if  the  Lord 
has  touched  a  man's  tongue  with  a  live  coal,  he  will  burn 
as  well  as  the  coal.  If  the  new  life  has  been  given  to 
him,  it  must  find  its  way  out,  and  be  the  means  of  con 
veying  that  life  to  others. 

Experience  of  Aged  Christians.— I  recollect  in  a  time  of 
great  despondency  deriving  wonderful  comfort  from  the 
testimony  of  an  aged  minister  who  was  blind,  and  had 
been  so  for  twenty  years.  When  he  addressed  us,  he 
spoke  of  the  faithfulness  of  God,  with  the  weak  voice 
of  a  tremulous  old  man,  but  with  the  firmness  of  one 
who  knew  what  he  said,  because  he  had  tasted  and  han 
dled  it.  T  thanked  God  for  what  he  had  said.  It  was 
not  much  in  itself.  If  I  had  read  it  in  a  book,  it  would 
not  have  struck  me;  but  as  it  came  from  him,  from  the 
very  man  who  knew  it  and  understood  it,  it  came  with 
force  and  with  unction.  So  you  experienced  Christians, 


304     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

if  any  others  are  silent,  you  must  not  be.  You  must  tell 
the  young  ones  of  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  you. 
Why,  some  of  you  good  old  Christian  people  are  apt  to 
get  talking  about  the  difficulties,  troubles,  and  afflictions 
you  have  met  with  more  than  about  the  succors,  the  de 
liverances,  and  the  joys  you  have  proved;  not  unlike 
those  persons  in  "Pilgrim's  Progress,"  who  told  poor 
Pilgrim  about  the  lions,  and  giants,  and  dragons,  and 
the  sloughs,  and  hills,  and  all  that  could  terrify  and 
dishearten  him.  They  might  have  mentioned  all  this, 
but  they  should  also  have  told  of  Mr.  Greatheart,  and 
they  should  not  have  forgotten  to  speak  of  the  eternal 
arm  that  sustains  Christian  in  his  pilgrimage.  Tell  the 
troubles,  that  were  wise;  but  tell  the  strength  of  God 
that  makes  you  sufficient,  that  is  wiser  still.  Empty 
yourselves.  If  you  have  got  experience,  empty  your 
selves  upon  the  earth. 

TRIALS 

Comfort  in  Trial. —  I  went  some  time  ago  into  the  house 
of  our  brother  Stephenson;  a  good  soldier  of  the  cross 
was  he:  he  fell  asleep  in  Jesus;  and  when  I  saw  his 
weeping  sons  and  daughters,  I  felt,  "  I  have  easy  work 
here."  I  said  to  them,  "Why,  what  a  mercy  it  is  that 
your  father  is  gone,  for  he  has  lingered  long  in  pain, 
and  you  know  how  ready  he  was  to  enter  into  rest." 
That  was  very  different  from  what  happens  sometimes. 
Only  a  little  while  ago  a  sister  came  to  me  weeping  as 
if  she  would  break  her  heart.  "  Ah,  sir,"  said  she,  "  my 
brother  is  dead,  and  he  died  without  hope."  It  was  a  sad 
case,  but  then  she  had  a  God  to  repair  to  even  under 
that  sharp  trial.  But,  when  death  comes  into  your 
house,  you  have  no  God !  I  knelt  down  and  prayed  with 
those  poor  weeping  girls  this  morning,  and,  tho  their 
father  was  but  just  dead,  I  marked  that  the  voice  of 


TRIALS  305 


prayer  had  evidently  a  soothing  charm  about  it,  and 
tho  they  wept,  yet  it  seemed  to  sooth  and  pacify  them. 
But  some  of  you  do  not  pray,  and,  therefore,  this 
comfort  cannot  be  yours. 

Saved  as  by  Fire.—  <•'  A  young  lady,  who  belonged  to  a 
church  in  the  city  of  New  York,  married  a  young  man 
who  was  not  a  Christian.  He  was  a  merchant,  engaged 
in  a  lucrative  business,  and  the  golden  stream  of  wealth 
flowed  in  upon  him  till  he  had  amassed  a  large  fortune. 
He  accordingly  retired  from  business,  and  went  into  the 
country.  He  purchased  a  splendid  residence;  fine  trees 
waved  their  luxuriant  foliage  around  it;  here  was  a 
lake  filled  with  fish,  and  there  a  garden  full  of  rare 
shrubbery  and  flowers.  Their  house  was  fashionably 
and  expensively  furnished;  and  they  seemed  to  possess 
all  of  earth  that  mortal  could  desire.  Thus  prospered, 
and  plied  with  an  interchange  of  civilities  among  her 
gay  and  fashionable  neighbors,  the  piety  of  the  lady  de 
clined,  and  her  heart  became  wedded  to  the  world.  And 
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  her  three  children,  as 
they  grew  up,  imbibed  her  spirit  and  copied  her  exam 
ple.  '  A  severe  disease/  it  is  said,  '  demands  a  severe 
remedy ;'  and  that  God  soon  applied.  One  morning 
intelligence  came  that  her  little  son  had  fallen  into  the 
fish-lake,  and  was  drowned.  The  mother's  heart  was 
pierced  with  the  affliction,  and  she  wept  and  murmured 
against  the  providence  of  God.  Soon  afterwards,  her 
only  daughter,  a  blooming  girl  of  sixteen,  was  taken 
sick  of  a  fever  and  died.  It  seemed  then  as  if  the 
mother's  heart  would  have  broken.  But  this  new  stroke 
of  the  rod  of  a  chastening  Father  seemed  but  to  increase 
her  displeasure  against  his  will.  The  only  remaining 
child,  her  eldest  son,  who  had  come  home  from  college 
to  attend  his  sister's  funeral,  went  into  the  fields  soon 
afterwards,  for  the  purpose  of  hunting.  In  getting  over 


306     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

a  fence,  he  put  his  gun  over  first  to  assist  himself  in 
springing  to  the  ground,  when  it  accidentally  discharged 
itself  and  killed  htm!  What  then  were  that  mother's 
feelings?  In  the  extravagance  of  her  grief,  she  fell 
down,  tore  her  hair,  and  raved  like  a  maniac  against  the 
providence  of  God.  The  father,  whose  grief  was  already 
almost  insupportable,  when  he  looked  upon  the  shocking 
spectacle,  and  heard  her  frenzied  ravings,  could  endure 
his  misery  no  longer.  The  iron  entered  into  his  soul 
and  he  fell  a  speedy  victim  to  his  accumulated  afflictions. 
From  the  wife  and  mother,  her  husband  and  all  her  chil 
dren  were  now  taken  away.  Reason  returned,  and  she 
was  led  to  reflection.  She  saw  her  dreadful  backslidings, 
her  pride,  her  rebellion;  and  she  wept  with  the  tears  of 
a  deep  repentance.  Peace  was  restored  to  her  soul. 
Then  could  she  lift  up  her  hands  to  heaven,  exclaiming, 
'  I  thank  thee,  0  Father !  —  the  Lord  hath  given,  the 
Lord  hath  taken  away,  and  blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord/  " 

Crowing  Great  Through  Trial.—  When  a  shipwright  builds 
a  vessel,  does  he  build  it  to  keep  it  upon  the  stocks"? 
Nay,  he  builds  it  for  the  sea  and  the  storm.  When  he 
was  making  it  he  thought  of  tempests  and  hurricanes: 
if  he  did  not,  he  was  a  poor  shipbuilder.  When  God 
made  thee  a  believer  he  meant  to  try  thee;  and  when  he 
gave  thee  promises,  and  bade  thee  trust  them,  he  gave 
such  promises  as  are  suitable  for  times  of  tempest  and 
tossing.  Dost  thou  think  God  makes  shams  like  some 
that  have  made  belts  for  swimming,  which  were  good  to 
exhibit  in  a  shop,  but  of  no  use  in  the  sea?  We  have 
all  heard  of  swords  which  were  useless  in  war;  and 
even  of  shoes  which  were  made  to  sell,  but  were  never 
meant  to  walk  in.  God's  shoes  are  of  iron  and  brass, 
and  you  can  walk  to  heaven  in  them  without  their  ever 
wearing  out:  and  his  life-belts,  you  may  swim  a  thou- 


TRIALS  307 


sand  Atlantics  upon  them,  and  there  will  be  no  fear  of 
your  sinking.  His  word  of  promise  is  meant  to  be 
tried  and  proved.  0  man,  I  beseech  you  do  not  treat 
God's  promises  as  if  they  were  curiosities  for  a  museum, 
but  use  them  as  every  day  sources  of  comfort.  Trust 
the  Lord  whenever  your  time  of  need  comes  on. 
Rest  Through  Conflict.—  There  will  be  no  climbing  the  hill 
of  the  Lord  without  effort;  no  going  to  glory  without 
the  violence  of  faith.  I  believe  that  the  ascent  to  heaven 
is  still,  as  Bunyan  described  it  —  a  staircase,  every  step 
of  which  will  have  to  be  fought  for.  He  heard  sweet 
singers  on  the  roof  of  the  palace,  singing, 

Come  in!    come  in! 

Eternal  glory  thou  shalt  win." 

Many  had  a  mind  to  enter  the  palace  and  win  that 
eternal  glory;  but  then  at  the  doorway  stood  a  band  of 
warlike  men,  with  drawn  swords,  to  wound  and  kill  every 
man  that  ventured  to  enter.  Therefore  many  who  would 
have  liked  to  have  walked  on  the  top  of  the  palace  did 
not  care  for  so  dangerous  an  enterprise;  they  desired 
the  end,  but  not  the  way  to  it.  At  last  there  came  one 
with  a  determined  countenance,  and  he  said  to  the  writer 
with  the  inkhorn  by  his  side,  "  Set  down  my  name,  sir" ; 
and  when  his  name  was  duly  recorded,  he  drew  his  sword 
and  rushed  upon  the  armed  men  with  all  his  might.  It 
was  a  fierce  conflict,  but  he  meant  to  conquer  or  die,  and 
he  did  conquer;  he  cut  a  lane  through  his  enemies,  and 
by  and  by  he,  too,  was  heard  singing  with  the  rest 

"Come  in!   come  in! 
Eternal  glory  thou  shalt  win." 

By  conflict  throughout  a  whole  life  we  come  to  our  rest; 
and  there  is  no  other  way.  You  cannot  go  round  to  a 


308     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

back-door,  and  enter  into  heaven  by  stealth.     You  must 
fight  if  you  would  reign. 

Strong  Through  Struggle.— A  soldier  is  trained  by  bat 
tles,  and  a  mariner  by  storms.  What  can  a  man  do 
when  he  has  everything  to  his  hand?  Everything  is  pos 
sible  to  him,  but  so  it  is  to  every  simpleton.  He  is  truly 
a  man  who  has  nothing  to  assist  him,  and  yet  is  aided 
by  the  opposition  which  confronts  him.  To  sail  against 
wind  and  tide  would  be  more  notable  than  to  drift 
with  gale  and  current.  Is  he  not  a  true  man  who  can 
turn  to  account  the  worst  possible  circumstances  so  as 
to  produce  the  best  possible  results'?  He  has  an  appor- 
tunity  for  distinguishing  himself  who  is  placed  amid 
temptations  and  perils.  In  your  life,  good  works  are 
provided  for,—  "  God  hath  before  prepared  that  we 
should  walk  in  them." 

TRUST 

Work  and  Trust.— That  was  sound  philosophy  of  Ma 
homet's  when  the  man  said,  "  I  have  turned  my  camel 
loose,  and  trusted  in  providence."  "  No,"  answered  he, 
"  tie  your  camel  up  and  then  trust  in  providence."  Do 
the  best  you  can  and  trust  in  God.  God  never  meant 
that  faith  in  him  should  be  synonymous  with  sloth. 
Why,  for  the  matter  of  that,  if  it  is  all  God's  work, 
and  that  is  to  be  the  only  consideration,  there  is  no  need 
for  David  to  have  a  sling.  Nay,  there  is  not  any  need 
for  David  at  all.  He  may  go  back,  lie  on  his  back  in 
the  middle  of  the  field,  and  say,  "  God  will  do  his  work : 
he  does  not  want  me."  That  is  how  fatalists  would 
talk,  but  not  how  believers  in  God  would  act.  They 
say,  "  God  wills  it,  therefore  I  am  going  to  do  it "  — 
not  "  God  does  it,  and  therefore  there  is  nothing  for  me 
to  do."  Nay,  "Because  God  works  by  me,  therefore  I 
will  work  by  his  good  hand  upon  me.  He  is  putting 


TRUST  309 


strength  into  his  feeble  servant,  and  making  use  of  me 
as  his  instrument,  good  for  nothing  tho  I  am  apart 
from  him.  Now  will  I  run  to  the  battle  with  alacrity, 
and  T  will  use  my  sling  with  the  best  skill  I  have,  taking 
quiet,  calm,  deliberate  aim  at  that  monster's  brow,  since 
I  believe  that  God  will  guide  the  stone  and  accomplish 
his  own  end." 

The  Wisdom  of  Trust  in  God.—  The  child  playing  on  the 
deck  does  not  understand  the  tremendous  engine  whose 
beat  is  the  throbbing  heart  of  the  stately  Atlantic  liner, 
and  yet  all  is  safe;  for  the  engineer,  the  captain  and 
the  pilot  are  in  their  places,  and  well  know  what  is  being 
done.  Let  not  the  child  trouble  itself  about  things  too 
great  for  it.  Leave  you  the  discovery  of  doubtful  causes 
to  him  whose  understanding  is  infinite;  and  as  for  your 
self,  be  you  still,  and  know  that  Jehovah  is  God.  Unbe 
lief  misinterprets  the  ways  of  God;  hasty  judgment 
jumps  at  wrong  conclusions  about  them;  but  the  Lord 
knows  his  own  thoughts.  We  are  doubtful  where  we 
ought  to  be  sure,  and  we  are  sure  where  we  have  no 
ground  for  certainty:  thus  we  are  always  in  the  wrong. 
How  should  it  be  otherwise  with  us,  since  vain  men  would 
be  wise,  and  yet  he  is  born  like  a  wild  ass's  colt?  We 
are  hard  to  tame  and  to  teach ;  but  as  for  the  Lord,  "  his 
way  is  perfect." 

"  His  thoughts  are  high,  his  love  is  wise, 

His  wounds  a   cure  intend; 
And  though  he  does  not  always  smile, 
He  loves  unto  the  end." 

Trust  the  Key  to  Life's  Problem.—  The  world  is  a  bleak 
house,  a  chill  and  empty  corridor  without  God;  and  men 
are  orphans,  and  life  is  hopeless  and  death  is  starless 
night,  if  Jesus  is  not  known  and  loved.  He  who  trusts 
his  soul  with  Jesus  has  found  the  key  of  the  great  secret, 


3io     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

the  clue  of  the  maze.  Henceforth  he  shall  see,  in  all 
that  smiles  or  rages  around  him  in  our  changeful  weather, 
pledges  of  the  love  of  the  Father,  tokens  of  the  grace  of 
the  son,  and  witnesses  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Trust  in  God.—  Whatever  trials  the  believer  has,  he  has  a 
God  to  fly  to.  "  Look,"  said  a  poor  woman  to  a  lady 
who  called  to  see  her,  "Look,  ma'am,  I'll  show  you  all 
I'm  worth.  Do  you  see  that  cupboard,  ma'am?  Look 
in."  The  lady  looked  in,  and  saw  nothing.  "  Do  you 
see  this  cupboard?"  said  the  woman.  "Yes,"  said  the 
lady,  "but  there  is  nothing  in  it  but  a  dry  crust." 
"  Well,"  continued  the  woman,  "  do  you  see  this  chest  ?  " 
"  Yes,  I  see  it ;  but  it  is  empty,"  was  the  reply.  "  Well," 
said  she,  "  that  is  all  I  am  worth,  ma'am ;  but  I  have 
not  a  doubt  or  fear  with  regard  to  my  temporal  affairs. 
My  God  is  so  good  that  I  can  still  live  without  doubts 
and  fears."  She  knew  what  it  was  to  break  through  a 
troop  and  leap  over  a  wall. 

Trust  and  Service. —  God  never  leaves  true  trust  without 
work  to  do.  It  is  not  a  presentation  sword  to  be  worn 
only  on  high  days  and  holidays,  neither  is  it  like  the  old 
armor  in  the  Tower  of  London,  hung  up  to  be  looked  at ; 
no,  true  trust  is  for  e very-day  wear  and  use,  and  be 
tween  here  and  heaven  it  will  be  tested  in  every  conceiv 
able  way.  That  sword  will  snap  if  it  be  not  a  true 
Jerusalem  blade,  and  that  armor  will  be  pierced  if  it  be 
not  of  proof,  able  to  endure  the  battle-axe  of  fierce 
temptation. 

WEAKNESS 

The  Appeal  of  Weakness. —  As  a  certain  town  was  being 
sacked,  one  of  the  rough  soldiery  is  said  to  have  spared 
a  little  child,  because  it  said,  "Please,  sir,  don't  kill  me, 
I  am  so  little."  The  rough  warrior  felt  the  cogency  of 
the  plea.  You  may  yourselves  just  plead  thus  with 


WEALTH  3" 


God.  "0  God,  do  not  destroy  me!  I  deserve  it,  but 
oh,  I  am  so  little!  Turn  thy  power  upon  some  great 
thing,  and  let  thy  bowels  move  with  compassion  towards 
me!" 

WEALTH 

Seeking  Heavenly  Riches.—  The  Roman  Emperor  fitted 
out  a  great  expedition  and  sent  it  to  conquer  Britain. 
The  valiant  legionaries  leaped  ashore,  and  each  man 
gathered  a  handful  of  shells  and  went  back  to  his  bark 
again  —  that  was  all.  Some  of  you  are  equally  foolish. 
You  are  fitted  by  God  for  great  endeavors  and  lofty  en 
terprises,  and  you  are  gathering  shells:  your  gold  and 
your  silver,  your  houses  and  your  lands  —  they  are  mere 
empty  shells  —  and  heaven  and  everlasting  life  you  let 
go.  Like  Nero,  you  send  to  Alexandria  for  sand  for 
your  amusements,  and  send  not  for  wheat  for  your  starv 
ing  souls.  0  fools  and  slow  of  heart,  when  shall  God, 
who  gave  you  souls,  give  those  souls  wisdom  that  you  may 
seek  after  the  true  treasure,  the  real  pearl,  the  heavenly 
riches'?  "Well,"  cries  one,  "how  is  heaven  to  be  had1?" 
It  is  to  be  had  only  by  a  personal  seeking  after  it.  I 
have  read  of  one  who,  when  drowning,  saw  the  rainbow 
in  the  heavens.  Picture  him  as  he  sinks;  he  looks  up, 
and  there  if  he  sees  the  many-colored  bow,  he  may  think 
to  himself,  "  There  is  God's  covenant-sign  that  the  world 
shall  never  be  drowned,  and  yet,  here  I  am  drowning  in 
this  river." 

Drowned  by  Riches.— I  have  heard  of  one,  the  steward 
ess  of  an  American  vessel,  who  when  the  ship  was  sink 
ing,  saw  heaps  of  gold  coin  scattered  upon  the  cabin 
floor  by  those  who  had  thrown  it  there  in  the  confusion 
of  their  escape:  she  gathered  up  large  quantities  of  it, 
wrapped  it  round  her  waist,  and  leaped  into  the  water; 
she  sank  like  a  millstone,  as  tho  she  had  studiously 


3ia     SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATIVE  ANECDOTES 

prepared  herself  for  destruction.  I  fear  that  many  of 
you  traders  are  diligently  collecting  guarantees  for  your 
surer  ruin,  planning  to  bury  yourselves  beneath  your 
glittering  hoards.  Be  wise  in  time.  My  voice,  nay,  my 
heart  pleads  with  you  for  your  soul's  sake  and  for 
Christ's  sake,  be  not  like  Ahitophel,  who  set  his  house 
in  order  and  hanged  himself.  Take  sure  bond  for  endur 
ing  happiness,  invest  in  indisputable  securities,  have  done 
with  infinite  risks,  and  be  assured  for  life  everlasting. 
Debased  by  Wealth.—  Strange  to  say,  we  have  known 
many  Christians  who  have  forgoten  much  of  their  love 
to  Christ  when  they  have  risen  in  the  world.  "  Ah ! " 
said  a  woman,  who  had  been  wont  to  do  much  for  Christ 
in  poverty,  and  who  had  had  a  great  sum  left  her,  "  I 
cannot  do  as  much  as  I  used  to  do."  "  But  how  is 
that?"  said  one.  Said  she,  "When  I  had  a  shilling 
purse  I  had  a  guinea  heart,  but  now  I  have  a  guinea 
purse  I  have  only  a  shilling  heart."  It  is  a  sad  tempta 
tion  to  some  men  to  get  rich.  They  were  content  to  go 
to  the  meeting-house  and  mix  with  the  ignoble  congre 
gation,  while  they  had  but  little;  they  have  grown  rich; 
there  is  a  Turky  carpet  in  the  drawing-room;  they  have 
arrangements  now  too  splendid  to  permit  them  to  invite 
the  poor  of  the  flock,  as  they  once  did,  and  Christ  Jesus 
is  not  so  fashionable  as  to  allow  them  to  introduce  any 
religious  topic  when  they  meet  with  their  new  friends. 
Besides  this,  they  say  they  are  now  obliged  to  pay  this 
visit  and  that  visit,  and  they  must  spend  so  much  time 
upon  attire,  and  in  maintaining  their  station  and  re 
spectability,  they  cannot  find  time  to  pray  as  they  did. 
The  house  of  God  has  to  be  neglected  for  the  party,  and 
Christ  has  less  of  their  heart  than  ever  he  had.  "Is 
this  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend  ?  "  And  hast  thou  risen 
so  high  that  thou  art  ashamed  of  Christ?  and  art  thou 
grown  so  rich,  that  Christ  in  his  poverty  is  despised? 


WEALTH  313 


Alas !  poor  wealth !  alas !  base  wealth  !  alas !  vile  wealth ! 
'Twere  well  for  thee  if  it  should  be  all  swept  away,  if 
a  descent  to  poverty  should  be  a  restoration  to  the  ardency 
of  thine  affection. 

The  Idolotry  of  Money. —  One  can  easily  overlook  the  fault 
of  making  too  much  of  children,  and  wife,  and  friends, 
altho  very  grievous  in  the  sight  of  God;  but  alas; 
there  are  some  that  are  too  sordid  to  love  flesh  and  blood ; 
they  love  dirt,  mere  dirty  earth,  yellow  gold.  It  is  that 
on  which  they  set  their  hearts.  Their  purse,  they  tell 
us,  is  dross;  but  when  we  come  to  take  aught  from  it, 
we  find  they  do  not  think  it  is  so.  "  Oh,"  said  a  man 
once,  "  if  you  want  a  subscription  from  me,  Sir,  you 
must  get  at  my  heart,  and  then  you  will  get  at  my  purse." 
"  Yes,"  said  I,  "  I  have  no  doubt  I  shall,  for  I  believe 
that  is  where  your  purse  lies,  and  I  shall  not  be  very  far 
off  from  it." 


BV  4225  .S63  1906 

SMC 

Spurgeon,  C.  H.  (Charles 

Haddon),  1834-1892. 
Spurgeon' s  Illustrative 

anecdotes  / 
AWV-7293  (sk) 


